


CHARTER            

Adopted by a Vote of the People

May 17, 1994

Amended by a Vote of the People

September 19, 1995

November 7, 1995

September 17, 1996

November 4, 1997

May 19, 1998

May 18, 1999

November 7, 2000

November 6, 2001

May 16, 2006

May 20, 2008

May 15, 2012

September 17, 2013

November 7, 2017

WEST LINN CHARTER

CHAPTER I - NAME AND BOUNDARIES

    1.    Title of Charter.

    2.    Name of City.

    3.    Boundaries & Annexations.

CHAPTER II - POWERS

    4.    Powers of the City.

    5.    Construction of the Charter.

    6.    Distribution of Powers.

CHAPTER III - FORM OF GOVERNMENT

    7.    Council.

    8.    Councilors.

    9.    Mayor.

    10.    Terms of Office.

    11.    Salaries.

    12.    Qualifications.

CHAPTER IV - COUNCIL

    13.    Meetings.

    14.    Quorum.

    15.    Record of Proceedings.

    16.    Proceedings to be Public.

    17.    Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

    18.    President of the Council.

    19.    Vote Required.

    20.    Communication with City Departments.

    21.    Appointment and Evaluation of City Manager.

    21A.    No Interference with Personnel or Public Contracting.

CHAPTER V - POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS

    22.    Mayor.

    23.    City Manager.

    23A.    City Attorney.

    24.    Municipal Judge.

CHAPTER VI - ELECTIONS

    25.    Regular Elections.

    26.    State Law.

    27.    Tie Votes.

    28.    Oath of Office.

    29.    Candidacy and Nominations.

CHAPTER VII - VACANCIES IN OFFICE

    30.    Vacancies: Occurrence.

    31.    Vacancies: Filling.

CHAPTER VIII - ORDINANCES

    32.    Enacting Clause.

    33.    Mode of Enactment.

    34.    When Ordinance Takes Effect.

CHAPTER IX - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

    35.    Condemnation.

    36.    Procedure.

    37.    Special Assessments.

CHAPTER X - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

    38.    Debt Limit.

    39.    Garbage Burner Restriction.

    40.    Existing Ordinances Continued.

    41.    Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions.

    42.    Time of Effect of Charter.

    43.    Severability.

    44.    Water Rates.

    45.    Utility Advisory Board.

CHAPTER XI - USE AND DISPOSITION OF CITY OWNED REAL ESTATE

    46.    Park and Open Space 

1994 WEST LINN CHARTER

As Adopted by a Vote of the People

May 17, 1994

And Amended by a Vote of the People

September 19, 1995

November 7, 1995

September 17, 1996

November 4, 1997

May 19, 1998

May 18, 1999

November 7, 2000

November 6, 2001

May 16, 2006

May 20, 2008

May 15, 2012

September 17, 2013

November 7, 2017

* * * *

PREAMBLE

We, the people of West Linn, Oregon, in order to avail ourselves of self-determination in municipal affairs to the fullest extent now or hereafter possible under the constitutions and laws of the United States and State of Oregon, through this Charter confer upon the City the following powers, subject to the following restrictions, prescribe for it the following procedures and governmental structure, and repeal all previous Charter provisions of the City.


Chapter I NAME AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1. Title of Charter.

This Charter may be referred to as the 1994 West Linn Charter.


Section 2. Name of City.

The City of West Linn, Oregon, continues under this Charter to be a municipal corporation with the name of the City of West Linn.


Section 3. Boundaries & Annexations.

Unless mandated by state law, the City of West Linn shall not annex any territory, by delayed annexation or otherwise, without the approval of a majority vote among the City’s electorate.

[Deleted 09-17-13; NOTE: This pertained to voter approval for annexation of land outside the Metropolitan Service District Urban Growth Boundary.] (Amended 5-19-98 [effective 6-18-98 – Ordinance 1419])

At least two copies of this Charter and an accurate, up-to-date description of City boundaries shall be kept at City Hall. The copies and descriptions shall be available for public inspection at any time during regular office hours of the City Hall.


Chapter II POWERS


Section 4. Powers of the City.

The City shall have all powers which the Constitution, statutes and common law of the United States and of this State now or hereafter expressly or implied grant or allow the City, as fully as though this Charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5. Construction of the Charter.

In this Charter the mention of a particular power shall not be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the City would have if the particular power were not mentioned. The Charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the City may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to the State laws and to the municipal home rule provisions of the State Constitution.


Section 6. Distribution of Powers.

Except as this Charter prescribes otherwise and as the Oregon Constitution reserves municipal legislative power to the voters of the City, all powers of the City are vested in the Council. 


Chapter III FORM OF GOVERNMENT


Section 7. Council.

The Council shall be composed of a Mayor and four Councilors nominated and elected from the City at large. (Amended 05-16-06)


Section 8. Councilors.

(a)    For the 2002 general election and subsequent general elections in even numbered years, the ballot shall include a single list of candidates for council seats. Electors may vote for up to the same number of candidates as there are seats open. The candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to fill open seats for expired terms. (Amended 11-07-00)

(b)    At the general election in 2008 and every even-numbered year thereafter, two Councilors shall be elected. (Amended 05-20-08)

(c)    At the general election in 2006, the ballot shall include a single list of candidates for the four Councilor seats. The Councilor candidates receiving the largest and second-largest number of votes in the 2006 elections shall be elected as Councilors for four-year terms. The Councilor candidates receiving the third- and fourth-largest number of votes in the 2006 election shall be elected to two-year terms. Electors may vote for up to four Council candidates in the 2006 election. At each general election in even-numbered years after 2006, the ballot shall include a single list of candidates for the two Councilor seats that will become vacant due to term expiration. In general elections after 2006, the Councilor candidates receiving the largest and second-largest number of votes shall be elected for four-year terms, and electors may vote for up to two Council candidates. (Repealed 11-04-97; amended 11-07-00; amended 05-16-06)

(d)    [Deleted 11-07-00; NOTE: This pertained to official position numbers.]

(e)    [Deleted 05-16-06; NOTE: This pertained to Council liaisons to City departments.]

(f)    [Deleted 09-17-13; NOTE: This pertained to Council legal advisors.]


Section 9. Mayor.

(a)    [Repealed 11-04-97; NOTE: This pertained to primary election requirement.]

(b)    Mayors shall be elected for four-year terms beginning at the 2008 general election. (Amended 05-20-08)


Section 10. Terms of Office.

The term of office of an elective officer who is elected at a general election begins at the first Council meeting of the year immediately after the election, unless otherwise specified, and continues until the successor to the office assumes the office. (Amended 11-04-97)


Section 11. Salaries.

The compensation for the services of each City officer, employee, Council member and Mayor shall be the amount fixed by the Council. As of January 1, 2009, this amount shall not exceed $4,000 annually for each Councilor and $6,400 annually for the Mayor. This maximum amount shall be adjusted for inflation annually based upon the Consumer Price Index for the Portland Metropolitan Area*. (Amended 05-20-08)

*    Code reviser’s note: The Consumer Price Index for the Portland Metropolitan Area was discontinued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The City has adopted Ord. 1690 adopting an updated consumer price index. For purposes of the salary adjustments identified in this section, the Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI-W for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for Western Cities – B/C will be applied in place of the Consumer Price Index for the Portland Metropolitan Area.


Section 12. Qualifications.

(a)    A candidate for City office shall be a qualified elector under the State Constitution and shall have resided in the City during the twelve months immediately before being elected or appointed to the office. “City” means the area inside the City limits at the time of the election or appointment. Elected City officers, subsequent to their election or appointment, shall continue to be residents of the City during their entire term of office.

(b)    No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one elective City office.

(c)    An elected officer may be employed in a City position that is substantially volunteer in nature. Whether the position is so may be decided by the Municipal Court or in some other manner, whichever the Council prescribes.

(d)    Except as subsection (c) of this section provides to the contrary, the Council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members.

(e)    The qualifications of appointed officers of the City are as the Council prescribes or authorizes.


Chapter IV COUNCIL


Section 13. Meetings.

The Council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month in the City at a time and at a place which it designates. It shall adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. The Mayor upon the Mayor’s own motion may, or, at the request of two members of the Council, shall by giving notice thereof to all members of the Council then in the City, call a special meeting for the Council. Public notice shall be given as required by State law. Special meetings of the Council may also be held at any time by common consent of all members of the Council. 


Section 14. Quorum.

A majority of members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in a manner provided by ordinance.


Section 15. Record of Proceedings.

The Council shall cause a record of its proceedings to be kept. Upon the request of any of its members, the ayes and nays upon any question before it shall be taken and entered in the record.


Section 16. Proceedings to be Public.

No action by the Council shall have legal effect unless the motion for the action and vote by which it is disposed of take place at proceedings open to the public.


Section 17. Mayor’s Functions at Council Meetings.

The Mayor shall preside over Council deliberations and shall have a vote on all questions before the Council. The Mayor shall preserve order, enforce the rules of the Council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the Council.


Section 18. President of the Council.

At the first meeting of each year, the Council shall elect a President from its membership. In the Mayor’s absence from a Council meeting, the President shall preside over it. Whenever the Mayor is unable to perform the functions of the office, the President shall act as Mayor.


Section 19. Vote Required.

Except as this Charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the Council members present at a Council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the Council.


Section 20. Communication with City Departments.

The Council shall adopt rules governing communications between departments of the City and individual Council members.


Section 21. Appointment and Evaluation of City Manager.

(a)    The Council shall appoint a City Manager for a term specified by contract and may remove the City Manager at its discretion.

(b)    The Council shall provide a mechanism for public input at least annually into the evaluation of the City Manager’s performance and shall consider such public input in its evaluation of the performance and tenure of the City Manager.


Section 21A. No Interference with Personnel or Public Contracting.

No City Council member may directly or indirectly, by suggestion, or otherwise, attempt to interfere, influence, or coerce the City Manager in the award of a public contract or the hiring, discipline, or termination of any personnel. This shall not prevent a City Council member from providing input to the City Manager relating to City business or the performance of an employee or department. (Added 09-17-13; Amended 11-07-17)


Chapter V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 22. Mayor.

The Mayor shall:

(a)    Sign all records of proceedings approved by the Council.

(b)    Have no veto power.

(c)    Sign all ordinances passed by the Council. Failure of the Mayor or the President of the Council to sign an ordinance shall not invalidate it.

(d)    Endorse the bond after the Council approves a bond of a City officer or a bond for license, contract or proposal.

(e)    [Deleted 05-16-06; NOTE: This pertained to Council liaisons to City departments.]

(f)    Appoint, with the approval of the Council, the boards, commissions and committees provided by the rules of the Council. Members of the Planning Commission and Budget Committee shall have a minimum of six months residency in the City prior to appointment, unless otherwise provided by State law, and shall meet attendance requirements as set by ordinance.


Section 23. City Manager.

(a)    Qualifications. The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council without regard to political considerations and solely with reference to the City Manager’s executive and administrative qualifications. Before taking office, the City Manager shall give a bond in such amount and with surety as may be approved by the Council. The premiums on such bond shall be paid by the City.

(b)    Residency. It is the desire of the people of West Linn, but not a requirement, that the City Manager live in the City during the term of his or her employment.

(c)    Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be as follows:

(1)    The City Manager shall devote his or her entire working time to the discharge of his or her official duties, attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by the Council or the Mayor, keep the Council advised at all times of the affairs and needs of the City, make reports annually, or more frequently if requested by the Council, of all the affairs and departments of the City.

(2)    The City Manager shall see that all ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City are observed.

(3)    The City Manager shall designate a custodian of records and such other officers and employees as required, and shall appoint and may remove appointive City officers and employees except as this Charter otherwise provides, and shall have general supervision and control over them and their work with power to transfer an employee from one department to another. The City Manager shall supervise the departments to the end of obtaining the utmost efficiency in each of them. The City Manager shall have no control, however, over the strictly judicial activities of the Municipal Judge.

(4)    The City Manager shall ensure that all expenditures of public funds, including the purchase of goods and services, are made in accordance with City policies, State budget and public contract law, and generally accepted financial management practices. (Amended 9-19-95)

(5)    The City Manager shall be responsible for preparing and submitting to the Budget Committee the annual budget estimates and such reports as that body requests.

(6)    The City Manager shall supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by the City and shall have a general supervision over all City property.


Section 23A. City Attorney.

The office of city attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the City. The city attorney shall be appointed and removed by a majority of all incumbent members of the Council. (Added 09-17-13)


Section 24. Municipal Judge.

(a)    The Municipal Judge shall be elected for a term of four years and shall be a judicial officer of the City. The Municipal Judge holding office at the time of adoption of this Charter shall hold his or her office for the balance of the term for which he or she was elected or appointed and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Municipal Judge shall be a member of good standing of the Oregon State Bar during his or her entire term of office. Disbarment shall be a basis for removal from office by the Council. Should the office be vacant:

(1)    If less than one year remains in the term of the person who held that vacant office, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the Council members. The appointee shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term.

(2)     If one or more years remain in the term of the person who held that vacant office, the vacancy shall be filled at the next available May or November election. The person elected shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term. A majority of the Council members shall fill the vacancy by appointment for an interim period until a special election may be held to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. (Amended 09-17-13)

(b)    The Municipal Court Judge shall hold at a place and time that the Council may specify, a court known as the Municipal Court for the City of West Linn, Clackamas County, Oregon.

(c)    Except as this Charter or City ordinance prescribes to the contrary, procedures of the court shall conform to the general laws of this State governing municipal courts, justices of the peace and justice courts.

(d)    All areas within the City and, to the extent provided by State law, area outside the City, are within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court.

(e)     The Municipal Court has original jurisdiction over every offense that an ordinance of the City makes punishable. The Court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties that such ordinances prescribe. The powers of the Municipal Judge shall include, but are not limited to:

(1)    Rendering judgments and, for enforcing them, imposing sanctions on persons and property within the Court’s territorial jurisdiction;

(2)    Ordering the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the City;

(3)    Committing to jail or admitting to bail anyone accused of such an offense;

(4)    Issuing and compelling obedience to subpoenas;

(5)    Compelling witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve in the trial of matters before the Court;

(6)    Penalizing contempt of court;

(7)    Issuing process necessary to effectuate judgments and orders of the Court;

(8)    Issuing search warrants;

(9)    Performing other judicial and quasi-judicial functions prescribed by ordinance.

(f)    The Municipal Judge may appoint Municipal Judges pro tem who shall meet the same qualifications as the Municipal Judge except that they are not required to reside within the City limits. (Amended 05-20-08)


Chapter VI ELECTIONS


Section 25. Regular Elections.

Regular City elections shall be held at the same times and places as biennial general elections. (Amended 11-04-97)


Section 26. State Law.

Except as this Charter, or a City ordinance prescribes to the contrary, a City election shall conform to State law applicable to the election.


Section 27. Tie Votes.

In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the tie shall be broken by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the Council. (Amended 11-04-97)


Section 28. Oath of Office.

Before entering upon the duties of the office, each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that the officer will support the constitutions and laws of the United States and of Oregon and that the officer will faithfully perform the duties of the office.


Section 29. Candidacy and Nominations.

The Council shall provide by ordinance the mode for nominating elective officers, provided any qualified person may be nominated by filing a petition signed by 25 legal voters of the City, or by filing with the City a declaration of his or her candidacy on forms provided by the City. A filing fee may be provided by ordinance for candidates filing by means other than petition as provided above.


Chapter VII VACANCIES IN OFFICE


Section 30. Vacancies: Occurrence.

The office of a member of the Council becomes vacant:

(a)    Upon the incumbent’s:

(1)    Death;

(2)    Adjudicated incompetence; or 

(3)    Recall from the office; or

(b)    Upon declaration by the Council of the vacancy in case of the incumbent’s:

(1)    Failure, following election or appointment to the office, to qualify 	for the office within ten days after the time for the term of office to begin;

(2)    Absence from the City for 30 days without the Council’s consent or from all meetings of the Council within a 60-day period;

(3)    Ceasing to reside in the City;

(4)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under State law;

(5)    Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty; or

(6)    Resignation from the office.


Section 31. Vacancies: Filling.

(a)    If less than one year remains in the term of the person who held that vacant office, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the remaining Council members. The appointee shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term.

(b)    If one or more years remain in the term of the person who held that vacant office, the vacancy shall be filled at the next available May or November election. The person elected shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term. A majority of the remaining Council members shall fill the vacancy by appointment for an interim period until a special election may be held to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. (Amended 09-17-13)

(c)    During a Council member’s disability to serve on the Council or during a member’s absence from the City, a majority of the remaining Council members may by appointment fill the vacancy pro tem.


Chapter VIII ORDINANCES


Section 32. Enacting Clause.

The enacting clause of all ordinances hereinafter enacted shall be “The City of West Linn ordains as follows:”


Section 33. Mode of Enactment.

(a)    Except as paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section provide to the contrary, every ordinance of the Council shall, before being put upon its final passage, be read fully and distinctly in open Council meeting on two different days.

(b)    Except as paragraph (c) of this section provides to the contrary, an ordinance may be enacted at a single meeting of the Council by unanimous vote of the Council members present, upon being read first in full and then by title.

(c)    Any of the readings may be by title only if no Council member present at the meeting requests to have the ordinance read in full or if a copy of the ordinance is provided for each Council member and three copies are provided for public inspection at the City offices not later than one week before the first reading of the ordinance, and if notice of their availability is given forthwith upon the filing, by written notice posted at City Hall and two other public places in the City or by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. An ordinance enacted after first being read by title alone may have no legal effect if it differs substantially from its terms as it was thus filed prior to such reading unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open Council meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by the Council.

(d)    Upon the final vote on an ordinance, the ayes and nays of the members shall be taken and entered in the record of proceedings.

(e)    Upon the enactment of an ordinance the custodian of records shall sign it with the date of its passage and the endorser’s name and title of office and thereafter the Mayor, or President of the Council acting pursuant to Section 18 of this Charter, shall sign it with the date of its passage and the endorser’s name and title of office. Failure of the Mayor or the President of the Council to sign it shall not invalidate it.


Section 34. When Ordinance Takes Effect.

An ordinance enacted by the Council shall take effect on the 30th day after its enactment. When the Council deems it advisable, however, an ordinance may provide a later date for it to take effect, and in case of an emergency, then it shall include in the ordinance a statement of explanation regarding the basis for the declaration of emergency.


Chapter IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 35. Condemnation.

Any necessity of taking property for the City by condemnation shall be determined by the Council and declared by a resolution of the Council describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted.


Section 36. Procedure.

The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable general laws of the State. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a sidewalk or except an improvement unanimously declared by the Council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months upon a remonstrance thereto by the owners of two-thirds of the land to be specifically assessed therefor. In this section “owner” shall mean a record holder of legal title or, where land is being purchased under a land sale contract recorded or verified to the custodian of records in writing by the record holder of legal title to the land, the purchaser shall be deemed the “owner.”


Section 37. Special Assessments.

The procedure for levying, collection and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general ordinance.


Chapter X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 38. Debt Limit.

Except by consent of the voters, the City’s voluntary floating indebtedness shall not exceed debt limits imposed by State law. For purposes of calculating the limitation, however, the legally authorized debt of the City in existence at the time this Charter takes effect shall not be considered. All City officials and employees who create or officially approve any indebtedness in excess of this limitation shall be jointly and severally liable for excess.


Section 39. Garbage Burner Restriction.

No municipal or commercial garbage burning facilities within two miles of schools in West Linn shall discharge cancer causing agents, lead or mercury. The City is authorized to take any legal action necessary to enforce this prohibition.


Section 40. Existing Ordinances Continued.

All ordinances of the City consistent with this Charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.


Section 41. Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions.

All Charter provisions of the City enacted prior to the time that this Charter takes effect are hereby repealed.


Section 42. Time of Effect of Charter.

This Charter shall take effect 30 days after its approval by the voters of the City of West Linn.


Section 43. Severability.

The terms of this Charter are severable. If a part of the Charter is held invalid, that invalidity does not affect another part of the Charter, except as logical relation between the two parts requires.


Section 44. Voter Approval of Utility Rates.

No “utility rate increase” may exceed 5% in any calendar year without first receiving voter approval. The City Council may increase utility rates by a percentage of no more than 5% in any calendar year after having considered a recommendation from the Utility Advisory Board for the percentage increase, if one is received. For the purposes of this section a “utility rate increase” is the cost increase paid to the City by a user of the sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water systems above the rate paid on June 18, 1999, excluding the component of a sewer rate increase that is a pass through of an increase in charges paid by the City for sewage treatment. The utility rate for each system shall be considered separately. The provisions of this section shall be implemented by ordinance of the Council. (Amended 5-18-99 [effective 7-1-99 – Ordinance 1436])


Section 45. Utility Advisory Board.

A Utility Advisory Board (UAB) is hereby established. The Utility Advisory Board shall make recommendations to the City Council concerning rates for water. These recommendations shall pertain to those legislative matters to be decided by the City Council concerning or affecting rates, such as master facility plans and service levels as they relate to rates. The Utility Advisory Board may also make recommendations regarding such other City-owned utilities as the City Council from time to time may determine. Appointment, terms of office, vacancies and removal, meetings and other organizational matters for the Utility Advisory Board shall be provided for by ordinance of the City Council. (Amended 9-17-96)


Chapter XI USE AND DISPOSITION OF CITY OWNED REAL ESTATE


Section 46. Park and Open Space.

(a)    The City shall not engage in the lease, sale, exchange or nonauthorized use of City owned park or open space without first receiving voter approval for such lease, sale, exchange or nonauthorized use. Such approval shall consist of a majority of votes cast at a regularly scheduled election in favor of a specific proposal for a lease, sale, exchange or nonauthorized use of City owned park or open space.

Each proposal must be voted on separately; however, multiple proposals may be placed on the ballot on the same election day. Each proposal shall include only a single property, except for proposals which include an exchange contractually linking two or more properties.

(b)    For the purposes of this section the term “nonauthorized use” shall have the following meanings: (1) A nonauthorized use for a City owned park shall be the siting or construction of facilities that are not directly required for the park’s use. Only facilities directly necessary for the park’s use shall be considered authorized. Uses that shall be specifically considered to be nonauthorized in connection with parks are: water reservoirs, water tanks, telecommunication towers, residential housing, City offices, commercial buildings, parking facilities (excepting that parking needed for the use of the park) and roads (except as needed for park access). (2) A nonauthorized use for a City owned open space shall be the siting or construction of facilities that are not directly required for the maintenance of the open space or use of said open space as open space. Only facilities directly necessary for the use of open space shall be considered authorized. Uses that shall be specifically considered to be nonauthorized in connection with open space are: water reservoirs, water tanks, telecommunication towers, residential housing, City offices, or commercial buildings. (3) The nonauthorized use designation shall be understood to exempt temporary constructions authorized by the West Linn Parks Department for picnics, fairs, sports events, parades and community and neighborhood celebrations. (4) Uses that are in existence as of the effective date of this section shall not be considered nonauthorized uses.

(c)    For the purposes of the above section the term “open space” shall be defined as City-owned real estate identified in documents adopted or accepted by the City Council or authorized City official as “open space,” “green space,” “wetland,” “drainageway,” (excluding city owned roadside drainage swales), “wildlife habitat” and “stream corridor.” Property with the above designations that is not owned by the City shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

(d)    This section shall apply to all City-owned park or open space as of the adoption of this section, as well as all park and open space coming into the City’s ownership after the adoption of this section. Within 60 days of City acquisition of real property the City Council shall determine the appropriate designation of the property for the purposes of this Charter section. Within 90 days of adoption of this section the City Council will adopt existing property into the appropriate designation. The City will create and maintain an inventory of City-owned parks and open spaces, including, but not limited to, appropriate designations, location and size. 

(e)    The intent of this Charter section is that City-owned park and open space shall be preserved for recreational use and environmental preservation and enhancement and not used for other purposes or sold or exchanged without the approval of the registered voters of the City of West Linn.

(f)    This section shall take effect 15 calendar days after the voter approval of this section.

(g)    City-owned property designated ‘park’ or ‘open space’ pursuant to this Chapter XI, Section 46, and specifically to (d) above, shall not have such designation removed by the City without first receiving voter approval. Such approval shall consist of a majority of votes cast at a regularly scheduled election in favor of a specific proposal to remove such designation. Each proposal shall be limited to a single property, and shall be voted on separately; however, multiple proposals may be placed on the ballot for the same election day.

The express intent of this section is to preclude the possibility that the protections afforded City-owned property designated ‘park’ or ‘open space’ might have such protection removed by the redesignation of such property, without voter approval, and thereby potentially allow the lease, sale, exchange or nonauthorized use of such property without voter approval, and as a consequence, acting to circumvent the intended protections of this chapter. (Amended 05-15-12; amended 11-06-01 [effective 11-21-01])


Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

CODE ADOPTION

1.010    Adoption.

1.015    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.020    Contents.

1.025    Reference Applies to All Amendments.

1.030    Title, Chapter, and Section Headings.

1.035    Reference to Specific Ordinances.

1.040    Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations.

1.045    Effective Date.

1.050    Severability.

GENERAL PROVISIONS

1.100    Definitions.

1.105    Title of Office.

1.110    Interpretation of Language.

1.115    Grammatical Interpretation.

1.118    Designation of Powers and Duties.

1.120    Acts by Agents.

1.125    Prohibited Acts Include Causing and Permitting.

1.130    Computation of Time.

1.135    Construction.

1.140    Repeal Shall Not Revive Any Ordinances.

GENERAL PENALTY

1.200    Adoption of State Criminal Laws and Procedures.

1.205    Penalty Designated.

1.210    Violation Deemed Separate Offense.

1.215    Cumulative Remedies.

1.220    Designation – General Powers and Duties of City Officials.

1.225    Right of Entry/Warrant.

1.230    Warnings.

1.235    Citation.

1.240    Service – Service by Mail and Failure to Receive Notice – Default.

1.245    Personal Appearance for a Continuing Violation.

1.250    Failure to Appear on a Violation Citation.

1.255    Violation Penalties.

1.260    Violation Trial.

1.265    Misdemeanor Penalties and Procedures.

STOP WORK AUTHORITY

1.300    Repealed.

1.310    Authority to Issue Stop Work Orders.

1.320    Scope of Stop Work Orders.

1.330    Appeal.

1.340    Appeal Standards.

1.350    Noncompliance.

ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS PROCESS

1.400    Title.

1.405    Applicability and Scope.

1.410    Procedures for Initiation of Administrative Appeal. 

1.415    Scheduling of Appeal Hearing.

1.420    Hearing Procedures.

1.425    Appearance by Parties. 

1.430    Frivolous Appeals. 


CODE ADOPTION


1.010 Adoption.

There is hereby adopted the “West Linn Municipal Code” as published by the City of West Linn. 

[Ordinance No. 1368, enacted 11-28-1994.]


1.015 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “West Linn Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “West Linn Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “West Linn Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “West Linn Municipal Code,” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code.


1.020 Contents.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of West Linn, Oregon.


1.025 Reference Applies to All Amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “West Linn Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of West Linn, Oregon, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.


1.030 Title, Chapter, and Section Headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.


1.035 Reference to Specific Ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code.


1.040 Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.


1.045 Effective Date.

This code shall become effective 12:00 a.m. on January 1, 1995.


1.050 Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect.


GENERAL PROVISIONS


1.100 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City of West Linn, Oregon, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

Business Day. A calendar day, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and City recognized State and Federal holidays. 

City. The City of West Linn, Oregon, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of West Linn, and such territory outside of the City of West Linn, over which the City of West Linn has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

City Engineer. The City Engineer of West Linn, Oregon, or his or her designee.

City Manager/City Official. The administrative head of the City’s government appointed by the City Council, or any City department head, City police officer, City code enforcement officer, City employee, or agent that the City Manager has designated to be responsible for any duty or act required in the code.

City Recorder. The person holding the position of City Recorder, or his or her designee.

Code includes the West Linn Municipal Code, the West Linn Community Development Code, and all permits and approvals issued by the City of West Linn.

Council. The city council of the City of West Linn, Oregon. “All its members” or “all Council members” means the total number of Council members holding office.

County. The County of Clackamas.

Day. A calendar day, unless otherwise specified.

Hearings Officer. City Manager or, at City Manager’s discretion, the Municipal Court Judge, Municipal Court Judge Pro Tem, or an outside party not affiliated with the City that is hired or selected by the City Manager to conduct an appeals proceeding.

Law. Applicable Federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Oregon, the ordinances of the City of West Linn, and, when appropriate, all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

May. Permissive.

Month. A calendar month.

Must and shall. Mandatory.

Oath. Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

Owner. Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, or contract purchaser of the whole or a part of such building or land.

Person. Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

Personal property. Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

Preceding and following. Next before and next after, respectively.

Property. Includes real and personal property.

Real property. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

State. The State of Oregon.

Street. Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property as designated in any law of this State.

Tenant and occupant. Applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Written. Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

Year. A calendar year.

[Section 1.100 amended by Ordinance No. 1407, enacted 10-13-1997; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14]


1.105 Title of Office.

Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City of West Linn.


1.110 Interpretation of Language.

All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.


1.115 Grammatical Interpretation.

The following grammatical rules apply in the ordinances and code of the City of West Linn, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

(1)    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

(2)    Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

(3)    Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.


1.118 Designation of Powers and Duties.

(1)    For purposes of this section, a “subordinate” of the City Manager includes a department, division, title, office, or position over which the City Manager exercises supervision or control. 

(2)    Where an ordinance, code section, or resolution specifies that a particular subordinate of the City Manager shall have certain powers or duties, the City Manager shall nevertheless have the authority to transfer or assign any of those powers and duties to any other subordinate, or to exercise any of those powers and duties himself or herself. The transfer or assignment may be in any manner that the City Manager deems appropriate, for example, by designating an individual, officer, job title, department, division, department head, or division head or by allowing other appropriate persons to make the transfer or assignment. The City Manager shall have the authority to change those designations from time to time as he or she deems proper. Any designee or subordinate of the City Manager may further designate to the extent allowed by the City Manager. 

(3)    This section applies except to the extent it is inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council, the context clearly requires otherwise, or it conflicts with State or Federal law. The principle that the expression of one thing is the exclusion of another will not alone generally be sufficient to prevent the application of subsection (2) of this section. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.120 Acts by Agents.

When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.


1.125 Prohibited Acts Include Causing and Permitting.

Whenever in the ordinances of the City of West Linn, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission.


1.130 Computation of Time.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a City-recognized State or Federal holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.135 Construction.

The provisions of the ordinances and code of the City of West Linn and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.


1.140 Repeal Shall Not Revive Any Ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.


GENERAL PENALTY


1.200 Adoption of State Criminal Laws and Procedures.

(1)    All criminal procedures, provisions and requirements applicable to violations and misdemeanors, including but not limited to Oregon Evidence Code (ORS Chapters 40 and 41), ORS Chapter 153 violations, defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification contained in ORS Chapters 131 through and including 167, as well as Chapters 471 through 480 are hereby adopted in full and made applicable to the Municipal Court. 

(2)    All misdemeanor and violation offenses and penalties described in ORS Chapters 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166 and 167, as well as offenses described in the Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapters 33, 137, 153, 471, 475, 476, and 480, are hereby adopted by reference. When cited as a City ordinance violation, violation of an ORS section adopted by reference is an offense against this City and shall be punishable to the same extent as provided in the code. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein prohibits or restricts the City police or City Attorney from electing to pursue a charge and prosecute defendants with State law offenses in the name of the State of Oregon pursuant to ORS 221.339.

(3)    Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, definitions appearing in the general definitional and other particular sections of chapters adopted by subsections (1) and (2) of this section are applicable throughout this chapter. Where appropriate, references to “State” and “State statute” shall be deemed to also include “City” and “City ordinances.”

(4)    The City police, City Attorney, Assistant City Attorney, and Municipal Court, including the Municipal Court Judge, Judges Pro Tem, and court staff, shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities provided under Oregon Revised Statutes, applicable to investigation, prosecution, administration, and adjudication of violation and criminal offenses within the City.

(5)    The statutes, codes and procedures adopted above are expressly made applicable within the City limits of the City of West Linn as well as outside the City limits when concerning offenses occurring on City-owned or controlled property located outside the City limits.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.205 Penalty Designated.

(1)    Unclassified Violation. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of any code or ordinance of the City, where a specific penalty is not specified in the code or ordinance for the violation, shall be guilty of a Class B violation. 

(2)    Unclassified Misdemeanor. An offense described in the code that is designated as a misdemeanor, but does not specify the classification of the misdemeanor, is an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment, not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine or imprisonment.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


1.210 Violation Deemed Separate Offense.

Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the City of West Linn is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he or she is punishable accordingly.


1.215 Cumulative Remedies.

The rights, remedies, and penalties provided in the code are cumulative, are not mutually exclusive, and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the City under any other provision of law.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


1.220 Designation – General Powers and Duties of City Officials.

The following are designated City officials with authority to enforce code provisions, permits, and approvals without further order: all City police officers, community service officers, City Public Works Director, Chief Financial Officer, Community Development Director, Parks Director, Building Official, and any employee with an approved job description that includes code compliance or enforcement. City officials are authorized to enforce any and all of the provisions of the code and have all law enforcement authority granted by charter, ordinance and general law.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


1.225 Right of Entry/Warrant.

When it is necessary to inspect a building or premises to enforce the provisions of this code, or the City official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to, in violation of this code or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the City official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; however, if the building or premises is occupied the City official must present his or her credentials to the occupant and request entry. If the building or premises is unoccupied, the City official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person in charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the City official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including but not limited to taking action to obtain an administrative search warrant.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


1.230 Warnings.

A City official may issue a warning notice for any non-criminal violation of the code, provided the code does not prohibit a warning. Warning notices generally provide a brief description of the violation, the name of the City department to contact regarding the abatement of the violation, the name of the person issuing the warning notice, the date the warning was issued, and a statement that failure to correct the alleged violation or to contact the named department contact within a specific time frame may result in enforcement proceedings. The warning notice shall be served upon the person or entity accused of the violation and a copy placed in the enforcement file. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a warning notice be given to any defendant prior to issuing a citation or taking any other enforcement or abatement action.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


1.235 Citation.

City officials are empowered to investigate and enforce all violations of City ordinances. For criminal offenses created by City ordinance, any City police officer may make an arrest consistent with the criminal laws of the State of Oregon or may issue and serve a citation in lieu of arrest as authorized by State law. For violation offenses created by City ordinance or Charter, any City official may issue and serve a citation which shall be in the form of a uniform citation form adopted by the Oregon Supreme Court. A City official is expressly authorized by law to issue a citation to a person for a violation created by City ordinance if the City official personally witnesses the violation or has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a City ordinance offense. As authorized by State law, the City elects to only allow City officials to initiate violation proceedings for City Charter and City ordinance offenses.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


1.240 Service – Service by Mail and Failure to Receive Notice – Default.

(1)    Service on individuals may be made by a City official by any of the following means:

(a)    Service may be made by mailing the summons and complaint by restricted or unrestricted certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. For purposes of computing any time period prescribed by this code, service by mail shall be complete three days after such mailing if the address to which it was mailed is within the State, and seven days after mailing if the address to which it is mailed is outside the State.

(b)    No default shall be entered against any responsible party served by mail under this section who has not either received or rejected the registered or certified letter containing a copy of the summons and complaint, unless otherwise authorized by the Municipal Judge based upon service procedures of the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

(c)    Service may be made by delivering the summons and complaint directly to the person to be served.

(d)    Substituted service may be made by delivering a copy of the summons and complaint at the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served, to any person over 14 years of age residing in the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served. Where substituted service is used, the City official, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which substituted service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code, substituted service shall be complete upon mailing.

(e)    If the person to be served maintains an office for the conduct of business, office service may be made by leaving a true copy of the summons and complaint at such office during normal working hours with the person who is apparently in charge. Where office service is used, the City official, as soon as reasonably possible, shall cause to be mailed a true copy of the summons and complaint to the responsible party at the responsible party’s dwelling house or usual place of abode or the responsible party’s place of business or such other place under the circumstances that is most reasonably calculated to apprise the responsible party of the existence and dependency of the action, together with a statement of the date, time, and place at which office service was made. For the purpose of computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this ordinance, office service shall be complete upon such mailing.

(2)    Service on particular responsible parties; minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the State, other public bodies, general partnerships and other entities, shall be on the persons named in the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.245 Personal Appearance for a Continuing Violation.

Notwithstanding the appearance options generally available for violation offenses under State law, when the code offense alleged involves a continuing violation, a personal appearance on the citation shall be required. The violation citation itself or this code may specify offenses or classes of offenses which require a personal appearance.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.250 Failure to Appear on a Violation Citation. 

Failure to appear on a violation citation may result in a default judgment, criminal prosecution for failure to appear pursuant to State law, a court order to show cause for contempt, as well as issuance of an arrest warrant.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.255 Violation Penalties.

(1)    Violation offenses in the code shall be classified pursuant to the State violation classifications as Class A, B, C, or D violations and penalized accordingly. 

(2)    In addition to a fine, the Municipal Court may impose additional punishment or remedial measure (e.g., restitution) appropriate for the violation offense.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.260 Violation Trial.

(1)    The trial of any violation offense shall be by the court without a jury, unless otherwise required by law. 

(2)    The City shall have the burden of proving the violation offense by a preponderance of the evidence and the defendant may not be required to be a witness in the trial of such violation offense. 

(3)    At any trial involving a violation offense, the City Attorney shall not appear unless the defendant is represented by an attorney, or unless the City Attorney is granted leave of the court to appear. Further, at any such violation trial, defense counsel shall not be provided at public expense, unless otherwise required by law. 

(4)    Consistent with State law, in any trial of a violation offense, whether created by ordinance or statute, in which the City Attorney is prohibited from appearing, the City police officer or City official who issued the citation for the offense is specifically authorized by law to present evidence, examine and cross-examine witnesses and make arguments relating to: 

(a)    The application of statutes and rules to the facts in the case; 

(b)    The literal meaning of the statutes or rules at issue in the case; 

(c)    The admissibility of evidence; and 

(d)    Proper procedures to be used in the trial. 

(5)    Except as expressly provided above, only a person who is currently licensed to practice law in the State of Oregon by the Oregon State Bar is permitted to represent another person or entity in the West Linn Municipal Court.

(6)    A person who commits a violation offense by violating designated provisions of the code shall not suffer any disability or legal disadvantage based upon conviction of crime.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.265 Misdemeanor Penalties and Procedures.

(1)    Misdemeanor offenses in the code shall be classified pursuant to the State misdemeanor classifications as Class A, B, or C misdemeanors and penalized accordingly. Unclassified misdemeanors shall be penalized in accordance with Section 1.205(2).

(2)    In addition to a fine and incarceration, the Municipal Court may impose any additional punishment, probation, remedial measure (e.g., restitution) that is appropriate for the offense.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


STOP WORK AUTHORITY


1.300 Definitions

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.310 Authority to Issue Stop Work Orders.

When necessary to stop a violation of or to obtain compliance with any code provision, a City official may issue stop work orders requiring that all work relating to the violation, except work directly related to elimination of the violation, be immediately and completely stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall include:

(1)    The date of the order;

(2)    Permit number, where applicable;

(3)    Site address, legal description or project location;

(4)    A description of all violations; and

(5)    The conditions, if any, under which the work may resume.


1.320 Scope of Stop Work Orders.

(1)    A stop work order issued under Section 1.310 shall be effective when posted in a conspicuous location at the site of the work. A copy of the stop work order shall be mailed by certified mail or hand delivered to the owner of the property and to any other person in violation of any code provision. The stop work order shall be effective until:

(a)    The necessary permit is obtained;

(b)    The City official issues a written approval for work to continue based on a finding that the violation has been cured; or

(c)    The stop work order is withdrawn on appeal.

Except as provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity covered by the stop work order while the stop work order is in effect.

(2)    With the written approval of the City official, any person may undertake work that is necessary to avoid a threat or hazard to persons or property that would result if work is left unfinished.

(3)    If an appeal is filed with the City Manager pursuant to Section 8.045 for a decision made by the Building Official, or with the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. for a decision made by all other City officials, the work may continue if a bond is provided in a sufficient amount to pay for the removal of any work and the return of the property to its previous condition and the City official determines that continuation of the work will not result in irreparable harm. If the stop work order is upheld pursuant to the administrative appeals process, all work performed under this subsection shall be removed by appellant within 15 days of the final decision by the Hearings Officer, except as otherwise permitted in writing by the Hearings Officer.

(4)    When an emergency condition exists, a City official may issue a stop work order orally. An emergency condition exists at any time when continuing the work would have an irreversible effect. A written notice confirming the oral stop work order must then be issued, posted and mailed within 24 hours.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.330 Appeal.

The owner of the property where the work was performed and any other person affected by a stop work order may appeal the stop work order at any time while the order is still in effect by filing a written appeal with the City Manager pursuant to Section 8.045 for a decision made by the Building Official, or with the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. for a decision made by all other City officials. The City Manager shall decide the appeal within two business days of receiving the written appeal by issuing a written decision and providing copies of the decision to the appellant, the property owner if different, and the City official who issued the stop work order. 

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.340 Appeal Standards.

In deciding an appeal, the issues to be considered by the City Manager or the Hearings Officer are:

(1)    Whether work was performed;

(2)    Whether a City permit or approval was required for that work;

(3)    Whether the required permit or approval was issued; and

(4)    Whether the stop work order violated any constitutional, statutory, code, or common law requirements.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.350 Noncompliance.

(1)    Failure to comply with a stop work order is a Class B violation. Work performed as authorized under Section 1.320 is not a failure to comply with a stop work order.

(2)    It is a Class C violation to intentionally remove, obscure, mutilate or otherwise damage a posted stop work order while the order remains in effect.

(3)    Any work performed in violation of this chapter is a nuisance that may be abated as provided in Sections 5.400 through 5.527.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14. Formerly 1.360]

[Subchapter “Stop Work Authority” added by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002.]


ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS PROCESS


1.400 Title.

Sections 1.400 to 1.430 shall be known, and may be cited, as the “Administrative Appeals Process.”

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.405 Applicability and Scope.

Any person aggrieved by the decision of a City official may appeal such action to a Hearing Officer through the following procedures if the West Linn Municipal Code chapter or section granting the City official authority to make the decision expressly authorizes use of this appeals process. The administrative appeals process can only be utilized for administrative decisions made without a hearing. Land use decisions subject to Community Development Code shall not be subject to the administrative appeals process.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.410 Procedures for Initiation of Administrative Appeal.

(1)    When the West Linn Municipal Code authorizes an appeal, specific appeal procedures, timeframes, fees and other requirements, the specific provisions of the West Linn Municipal Code section authorizing the appeal shall control over the general provisions of the administrative appeals process. When the specific code sections are silent, the provisions in these sections shall govern and provide additional standards for the appeal process.

(2)    The general procedures for initiation of an appeal are as follows:

(a)    Filing Deadline. A person appealing a decision of a City official shall file a written notice of appeal with the City Recorder within 10 days from the date of mailing of the notice of final decision or the date of an alternative means of service pursuant to Section 1.240.

(b)    Notice of Appeal Contents. The written notice of appeal shall include:

(i)    The name and address of the appellant;

(ii)    A statement of the authority or jurisdiction for the appeal including specific code sections authorizing the appeal;

(iii)    A statement of the appellant’s standing or right to be heard; 

(iv)    The nature of the decision being appealed; 

(v)    A copy of the decision being appealed;

(vi)    A short and plain narrative statement including the reason(s) the original decision is alleged to be incorrect, with reference to the particular sections of the applicable code sections; and 

(vii)    The result the appellant desires on appeal.

(3)    Appeal Fee. The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeals fee to facilitate the appeal in the amount set by resolution of the Council.

(4)    Jurisdictional Defect. Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including, but not limited to, the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing of the notice of appeal, and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal. All requirements shall be fully met prior to the appeal deadline.

(5)    Stay. Unless otherwise specifically provided for in the code, the action of the City official shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section. A stay shall not remain in effect for more than 30 days unless the City Manager orders a longer stay.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.415 Scheduling of Appeal Hearing.

(1)    The City Recorder shall forward the appeal materials to the Hearings Officer as soon as possible after the appeal is received, and not more than five business days after receipt of the appeal.

(2)    The Hearings Officer shall determine whether the jurisdictional requirements are met. 

(a)    If the Hearings Officer finds that the appeal requirements are met, the Hearings Officer shall put the decision in writing and notify the appellant that the appeal is being dismissed. The final decision made by the City official that was the basis for the attempted appeal shall be the final decision of the City.

(b)    If the Hearings Officer finds that the appeal requirements are not met, or does not respond within 10 days, the City Recorder shall coordinate with the Hearings Officer and set a hearing date not more than 30 days after the appeal has been filed. However, nothing shall prevent the Hearings Officer from later determining at a later date that there is no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(3)    The City Recorder shall notify the parties in writing of the date and time set for the hearing. The notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, unless the parties agree to a shorter amount of time. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.420 Hearing Procedures.

The Hearings Officer shall provide the parties with reasonable notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard. The procedures of this section may be varied to best afford the parties procedural due process. At a minimum, the Hearings Officer shall:

(1)    Review all written testimony submitted to the City Recorder for entry into the record. All written testimony must be submitted no less than five business days before the hearing, unless otherwise allowed by the Hearings Officer due to an explanation of why the testimony could not be provided earlier.

(2)    Review bias challenges made by the parties prior to the hearing. All bias challenges must be submitted in writing prior to the hearing, and the challenge must be supported by competent substantial evidence of actual bias.

(3)    Announce the matter to be heard at the beginning of the hearing and explain the relevant issue(s), the applicable procedures, and the burden of proof.

(4)    Place on the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning any relevant and material fact in issue at the hearing that was made to the Hearings Officer outside the official proceedings while the appeal was pending. The parties shall be notified of the substance of the communication and the right to rebut the communication. The parties are prohibited from engaging in ex parte communications with the Hearings Officer.

(5)    Make a determination regarding any bias challenges.

(6)    Take testimony of witnesses. Testimony may be taken upon oath or affirmation of witnesses; evidence provided under oath will be given more weight than unsworn evidence.

(7)    Admit any relevant evidence that is the type of evidence that reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any law or rule that might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil action in courts of competent jurisdiction. Evidence of past transactions and occurrences shall not be excluded solely on the basis of having occurred in the past, and it may be relied upon by the Council in making its recommendation. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

(8)    Ensure that the record developed at the hearing shows a full and fair inquiry into the relevant and material facts for consideration of the issues properly before the Hearings Officer.

(9)    Require a written or electronic record to be made that contains all motions, rulings and testimony.

(10)    Issue a final decision in writing, which will be the final decision of the City, unless informal disposition of the appeal occurs by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.425 Appearance by Parties.

Parties shall be entitled to appear personally or by legal counsel. When appearing by counsel, the appellant must provide reasonable notice to the City Recorder and copy the City Attorney.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


1.430 Frivolous Appeals.

If the appellant loses on appeal, and the Hearings Officer finds that the appeal was entirely without merit, the appellant will be held financially responsible for the full cost of the appeal proceeding to the City, including, but not limited to, the cost of hiring an independent hearing officer, if required.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


Chapter 2 GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

MUNICIPAL SEAL

2.000    Seal Designated.

CITIZEN ADVISORY GROUPS

2.005    General Authority.

2.010    Types of Citizen Advisory Groups.

2.015    Compliance with State Law Required.

2.020    Relationship to City Council.

2.025    Citizen Advisory Group Duties and Responsibilities.

2.030    Appointment.

2.035    Membership.

2.040    Terms of Office; Vacancies.

2.045    Meetings; Rules of Procedure; Attendance.

2.050    Public Meeting Law.

2.055    Quorum; Vote; Lack of Quorum.

2.060    Officers.

2.065    Staff Liaison.

2.070    Removal.

2.075    Citizen Advisory Groups.

2.080    Planning Commission.

2.085    Citizens’ Budget Committee.

2.090    Historic Review Board.

2.095    Utility Advisory Board.

2.096    Library Advisory Board.

2.099    Local Contract Review Board.

2.100    Neighborhood Associations.

2.200    Percent for Art Program Establishment.

2.205    Purpose.

2.210    Definitions.

2.215    Dedication of 1.5% to Public Art.

2.220    Public Art Trust Fund.

2.225    Siting of Art.

2.230    Program Guidelines.

2.235    Ownership.

ELECTIONS

2.300    Authorization to Submit Explanatory Statements Relating to Municipal Legislation Referred or Initiated by Petition.

WEST LINN PERSONNEL SYSTEM

2.400    Purpose and Objectives.

2.410    Personnel System Administration.

2.420    Responsibilities of City Manager in Administration of Personnel System.

2.430    Adoption of Personnel Rules.

2.440    Pay and Compensation Plans.

2.450    Equal Employment Opportunity.

2.460    Engaging Necessary Services.

2.470    Applicability.

COURT OF RECORD

2.500    Court of Record.

TRIAL BY JURY

2.600    Right to Trial by Jury.

2.605    Number of Jurors.

2.610    Term of Court.

2.615    Jury List.

2.620    Jury Panels.

2.625    Selection of Trial Jury.

2.630    Alternate Jurors.

2.635    Conduct of Trials.

2.640    Verdict.

2.645    Payment of Jurors.

2.650    Powers of the Municipal Judge.

FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS PROHIBITED IN CITY BUILDINGS

2.660    Purpose.

2.665    Definitions.

2.670    Firearms and Dangerous Weapons Prohibited.

2.675    Administrative Search.

EMERGENCY PLANNING

2.700    Title.

2.710    Conditions of Emergency.

2.720    Declaration of Emergency.

2.730    Adoption of Emergency Operations Plan.

2.740    Responsibilities of City Manager.

2.750    Violation.

DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY

2.800    Property in Police Department Possession – Disposition.

2.805    Manager Authority – Disposition by Sale – Notice.

2.810    Conduct of Sale – Disposition of Funds.

2.815    Transfer of Property to City.

2.820    Destruction of Contraband.

2.825    Claim by Owner After Sale.

INVENTORY OF CONTENTS OF ARRESTED PERSONS AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES

2.830    Purpose.

2.832    Definitions.

2.834    Inventories of Impounded Vehicles.

2.836    Inventories of Persons in Police Custody.

MUNICIPAL LIEN SEARCH

2.850    Municipal Lien Search Fee Established.

SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY SALES

2.875    Declaration of Surplus Real Property.

2.880    Notice and Public Hearing Prior to Sale.

2.885    Repealed.

2.890    Repealed.

2.895    Repealed.

2.900    Repealed.

REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF INTEREST

2.901    Acquisition of Real Property.

2.902    Transfer of an Interest Other Than Fee Title.

2.903    Procedure for Acquisition and Transfers of Interests in Real Property.

2.904    Release of Property Rights on Private Property.

ANNEXATIONS

2.915    Annexation Purpose Statement.

2.920    Step 1: Land Use Decision.

2.930    Step 2: Policy Decision.

2.935    Election Costs.

2.940    Submission of Annexation Reports.

2.950    Repealed.

2.955    Repealed.

2.960    Repealed.

LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE

2.975    Purpose.

2.980    Definitions.

2.985    Applicability.

2.990    Procedure.

2.995    Limitations.


MUNICIPAL SEAL


2.000 Seal Designated.

The following seal is declared to be the impression of the official municipal or common seal of West Linn and the seal making the same is declared to be the official municipal or common seal of said City of West Linn, Oregon.
[IMAGE]


[Amended by Ordinance No. 1618, adopted 01-27-2014.]


CITIZEN ADVISORY GROUPS


2.005 General Authority.

The City Council may create citizen advisory groups to aid the Council in the conduct of public affairs. The City Council may also create ad hoc citizen committees to accomplish a specific task or project. All citizen advisory groups shall be governed by this chapter, except that if application of a provision conflicts with an applicable State statute, the State statute shall prevail. The specific enabling provisions for each citizen advisory group are contained in Section 2.075.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.010 Types of Citizen Advisory Groups.

“Citizen advisory groups” include ad hoc committees, advisory boards, commissions, and other committees.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.015 Compliance with State Law Required.

All citizen advisory groups, and any subcommittees, shall comply with the State of Oregon Public Records Law, Public Meetings Law, Code of Ethics, laws regarding conflicts of interest, and any other applicable State laws. Each citizen advisory group shall be responsible for ensuring that its subcommittee complies with these laws.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.020 Relationship to City Council.

(1)    Council Authority. The City Council is the elected legislative and policy-making body of the City. Unless governed by a specific State mandate, citizen advisory groups are appointed pursuant to the Council’s authority and shall have only those powers and functions expressly delegated by the Council. With the exception of certain delegated quasi-judicial actions, most advisory commissions and boards do not make final decisions but instead make recommendations, act in an advisory capacity to the Council, and help the Council implement the Council goals. The City Council is the final decision maker on all city policies and the use of City resources. 

(2)    Council as Final Decision Maker. No citizen advisory group shall have the authority to expend City funds, or to obligate the City for payment of any sum of money, except as expressly delegated or authorized by prior approval of the City Council. Proposals by boards and commissions for endorsement or sponsorship of events, activities or programs must receive approval by City Council as provided by resolution.

(3)    Council members may attend meetings of any citizen advisory group. Council members may not chair a citizen advisory group. A councilor may not speak on behalf of the City Council at a citizen advisory group meeting unless authorized to do so by the Council. Council members may not vote at any meeting of any citizen advisory group.

(4)    Council Liaison. Each year the Mayor may appoint a liaison from the Council to each citizen advisory group. The purpose of the Council liaison is to provide a direct line of communication between the citizen advisory group and the City Council. The Council liaison and the chair of the affected citizen advisory group shall have joint obligation to keep the Council and the citizen advisory group informed of relevant City or citizen advisory group information. The Council liaison to each citizen advisory group may change annually.

(5)    Additional Duties and Projects. In addition to the duties and responsibilities established for citizen advisory groups in Section 2.025, the City Council may from time to time assign other duties or projects as the Council deems appropriate.

(6)    A member of any citizen advisory group may testify before the Council only as an individual citizen, not on behalf of the citizen advisory group, unless the member has been designated as a spokesman for the citizen advisory group on the applicable issue or topic.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1654, adopted 10-17-2016; amended by Ordinance No. 1673, adopted 03-19-2018.]


2.025 Citizen Advisory Group Duties and Responsibilities.

(1)    Powers and Duties. Citizen advisory groups shall have the powers and duties assigned to them by the City Charter, ordinances or resolutions of this City, and general laws of this State.

(2)    Responsibilities. Citizen advisory groups shall have special projects in the subject matter area of the citizen advisory group to which they were appointed. The City Council shall provide direction, and when possible, a work plan for the citizen advisory group to work on during the year.

(3)    Council Goals. Citizen advisory groups are encouraged to establish annual goals and action items that reflect any specific duties, projects, or goals the Council has assigned or established. Citizen advisory groups are expected to suggest, support and advance Council goals and are encouraged to look for ways within the scope of the group’s responsibilities to do so.

(4)    Annual Report. The City Council shall receive an annual report from each citizen advisory group. The purpose of such reports will be to:

(a)    Note accomplishments; 

(b)    Address concerns;

(c)    Discuss issues related to the duties and activities of the citizen advisory group; and

(d)    Evaluate progress made on any associated Council goals.

(5)    Subcommittees. A citizen advisory group may request that the City Council establish a subcommittee. Prior to voting to request the Council to approve creation of a subcommittee, the citizen advisory group shall first request and consider a report from staff regarding the costs and time involved in staffing the subcommittee. Any request to form subcommittees shall be submitted to the City Council in writing and shall contain:

(a)    An explanation of the function of and need for the subcommittee;

(b)    The number and any qualifications of its members;

(c)    The staff analysis of the cost and time involved in staffing the subcommittee; and

(d)    If the subcommittee is an ad hoc subcommittee, a deadline for completion of the ad hoc subcommittee’s responsibilities.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.030 Appointment.

(1)    Appointments. The Mayor, with consent of the City Council, shall appoint persons to positions for full and partial terms on citizen advisory groups by motion. Appointees shall meet the qualifications for the citizen advisory group, if any. The Council may interview or screen applicants for positions, as it deems appropriate. 

(2)    Appointment for Partial Term. If a position becomes vacant before the expiration of the term, the appointee shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term. 

(3)    When making or approving appointments, the Mayor and Council may consider special expertise of applicants and the geographic diversity of the membership of citizen advisory groups. To ensure opportunities for citizen participation, a citizen shall not be appointed to more than two citizen advisory groups.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.035 Membership.

All citizen advisory groups shall consist of seven members each, except for the Citizens’ Budget Committee, which shall consist of five members. All members shall be residents of the City and shall be selected based on their qualifications, unless otherwise provided in Sections 2.080 to 2.096. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1687, adopted 09-10-2018.]


2.040 Terms of Office; Vacancies. 

(1)    Terms. All citizen advisory group members shall serve a four-year term. All regular terms shall commence with appointment and shall expire on December 31st of the fourth year.

(2)    Staggering of Terms. Initial terms for a newly created citizen advisory group shall be staggered in the resolution of appointment so that a majority of the positions do not become vacant in the same year and so that an equal or approximately equal number of positions become vacant each year.

(3)    Vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term pursuant to Section 2.030(2).

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.045 Meetings; Rules of Procedure; Attendance.

(1)    Meetings. Citizen advisory groups shall meet as needed to accomplish the duties assigned to the group, the Council goals and other business needs of the City.

(2)    Rules of Procedure. A citizen advisory group shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the Council Rules, West Linn Municipal Code, City Charter, and State law.

(3)    Recommendations. All recommendations to the Council shall be in writing. The staff liaison shall prepare a memorandum to the Council, signed by the citizen advisory group chair, stating the citizen advisory group’s recommendation.

(4)    Final Decisions. All final decisions by the Historic Review Board and Planning Commission shall be in writing, signed by the chair.

(5)    Attendance. A member should provide at least 48 hours’ notice to both the chair of the citizen advisory group and the staff liaison regarding any planned absence from a scheduled meeting of the citizen advisory board. In the event an unexpected emergency will cause a member to be absent from the meeting, the member must, if possible, notify the chair or the staff liaison within a reasonable time in advance of the meeting to prevent an unexcused absence. Unexcused absences are grounds for removal pursuant to Section 2.070. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1654, adopted 10-17-2016.]


2.050 Public Meeting Law.

(1)    All meetings of citizen advisory groups are subject to strict compliance with the public meeting laws of the State of Oregon. 

(2)    Meetings shall be open to the public. If business from a meeting is being continued to a meeting date that is not at a regularly scheduled time, the citizen advisory group can notice the meeting by announcing the date and time for the continuation of the meeting. The chairperson upon a motion may, or at the request of a quorum shall, by giving notice to members, call a previously unannounced special meeting for a time not earlier than 24 hours after the notice is given.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.055 Quorum; Vote; Lack of Quorum.

(1)    Quorum. A meeting quorum shall exist when four or more members of the body are present, except for the Citizens’ Budget Committee. Members do not have to be physically present at the meeting if another means of attendance (e.g., telephone, Internet) has been established by the membership and public meetings law requirements are met. 

(2)    Vote. Except as otherwise expressly provided by the City Code or other applicable law or regulation, the concurrence of a majority of members present and eligible to vote shall be necessary to pass any motion or decide any question. A member is not eligible to vote if the member has recused him/herself, or if the member has declared a conflict of interest or bias.

(3)    Lack of Quorum. If the members in attendance do not constitute a quorum, all topics advertised are automatically added to the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting. If a quorum is not possible due to conflicts of interest, bias, or recusal, the matter shall be forwarded to the Council without any further action by the citizen advisory group.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.060 Officers.

(1)    Each citizen advisory group shall elect a chair and a vice chair from its membership as soon as practicable each calendar year. Council members may not chair a citizen advisory group. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent appointment of co-chairs that share responsibilities of the chair, as the citizen advisory group deems appropriate. No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms as either chair or co-chair.

(2)    The chair shall:

(a)    Preside at all meetings.

(b)    Be responsible for maintaining communication with the Council liaison and City staff assigned to the committee.

(c)    Ensure that minutes are produced for each meeting if staff is not in attendance.

(3)     The vice chair shall exercise the duties of the chair in the chair’s absence.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1654, adopted 10-17-2016.]


2.065 Staff Liaison.

The City Manager shall provide staff assistance to citizen advisory groups when appropriate, feasible, and within budgetary limitations. The City Manager shall determine which department or staff person shall serve as liaison to each citizen advisory group. The staff liaison provides professional guidance, continuity, insight into City policy, and coordinates with the chair to set the agenda, which is approved by the chair prior to the posting of the agenda, and adopted by the citizen advisory group at the meeting. Staff shall sit with the citizen advisory group and participate in all citizen advisory group discussion, but staff shall not vote on matters. Staff will ensure that minutes are produced for each meeting that staff attends. The staff liaison supports the group as a whole and shall not do work at the request of individual members.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1654, adopted 10-17-2016.]


2.070 Removal.

(1)    Removal by Council. Members of all citizen advisory groups shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Council, with or without cause, may by majority vote of the City Council at a regular meeting, remove any citizen advisory group member prior to the expiration of the member’s term. Written notice of removal to the affected member shall be provided. Removal shall be handled with respect and courtesy. If a member resigns or is removed, the Mayor shall appoint a replacement for the remainder of the term in accordance with Section 2.030(2). 

Notwithstanding the above procedure, removal of a Planning Commissioner for misconduct or nonperformance of duty shall be governed by the procedures in ORS 227.030. 

(a)    “Misconduct” includes failure to declare a potential conflict of interest, conflict of interest, bias, or failure to comply with the West Linn Municipal Code, including Section 2.015, or any other West Linn policies or rules. 

(b)    “Non-performance of duty” occurs if a member has unexcused absences from three meetings within a calendar year.

(2)    Removal Upon Recommendation of Citizen Advisory Group. A citizen advisory group may recommend removal of one of its members to the City Council for misconduct or nonperformance of duty in accordance with subsection (1) of this section. The City Council shall act on a recommendation for removal of a member for misconduct or nonperformance at the next convenient opportunity.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.075 Citizen Advisory Groups.

Establishment. The following citizen advisory groups are established in accordance with the provisions of Sections 2.005 to 2.099:     

(1)    Citizens’ Budget Committee;

(2)    Economic Development Committee;

(3)    Historic Review Board;

(4)    Library Board;

(5)    Parks and Recreation Board;

(6)    Planning Commission;

(7)    Sustainability Advisory Board;

(8)    Transportation Advisory Board;

(9)    Utility Advisory Board;

(10)    Public Safety Advisory Board; and

(11)    Arts and Culture Commission.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1654, adopted 10-17-2016; amended by Ordinance No. 1673, adopted 03-19-2018.]


2.080 Planning Commission.

(1)    Appointments to the Planning Commission. In selecting individuals for membership on the Planning Commission, the City Council shall give preference to those individuals who possess a particular competence in the field of municipal planning by way of their profession, trade, or prior or present governmental service. No more than two voting members shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation, that is engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of occupation, business, trade or profession.

(2)    Lack of Quorum Because of Unfilled Vacancies. Should the Planning Commission be unable to function with a quorum of members due to unfilled vacancies, the City Council shall fulfill the duties of the Commission until a quorum of members is restored.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.085 Citizens’ Budget Committee.

Appointments to the Citizens’ Budget Committee shall be in accordance with ORS 294.414.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.090 Historic Review Board.

Each member appointed to the Historic Review Board shall have a demonstrated interest, knowledge or competence in historic preservation and, to the extent possible, in one of the following fields: archaeology, architecture, building construction, history, landscape architecture, law, local history, real estate or urban planning. If possible, at least one member shall be an architect experienced in historic preservation. The majority of the members shall reside within the City of West Linn.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.095 Utility Advisory Board.

A Utility Advisory Board is established pursuant to Chapter X, Section 45 of the City Charter to make recommendations to the City Council concerning rates for water and other duties assigned by the Council.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.096 Library Advisory Board.

Membership on the Library Advisory Board shall provide for fair representation of all served library patrons, including Board membership from outside City limits.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1687, adopted 09-10-2018.]


2.099 Local Contract Review Board.

(1)    Policy. All public contracts shall be based upon competitive bids except as expressly provided by State law, this chapter, or the rules adopted by the Local Contract Review Board.

(2)    Contract Review Board. The City Council is designated as the Local Contract Review Board for the City of West Linn. The Council shall have all of the duties and authority of a contract review board and contracting agency under Oregon State law. The Board shall adopt rules relating to the public bidding process and public contracts.

(3)    Authority to Obligate the City. The City Council shall approve all public contracts and personal services contracts except as otherwise provided in subsection (4) of this section.

(4)    Delegation of Authority to Obligate City. The City Manager may enter into a public contract or personal services contract in accordance with the local public contracting rules.

(5)    Limitation on Expenditures. The delegated authority to obligate the City shall be subject to the following limitations:

(a)    The expenditure shall be for a single complete item or contract; and

(b)    The item or contract shall not be a component of a project except in the case of a project which involves a personal services contract and a public contract. In this situation, the personal services contract portion shall be considered a single complete project and the public contract portion shall be considered a single complete project.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1637, adopted 12-08-2014.]


2.100 Neighborhood Associations.

(1)    Purpose. The purpose of these sections is to establish a means for formally recognizing neighborhood associations and to provide for neighborhood associations communication with the City. This is an additional form of communication, and is not intended to inhibit other citizens or groups from communicating with the City.

(2)    Neighborhood Association. A “neighborhood association” means any group of people organized within a geographical area for the purpose of acting on issues affecting neighborhood and community livability. A recognized neighborhood association is one that satisfies the standards of subsection (4) of this section.

(3)    Neighborhood District. A neighborhood district incorporates a group of neighborhood associations within established boundaries. Neighborhood districts may be formed by the City to enhance communication between neighborhood associations and the City, but shall not preclude a neighborhood association from meeting its responsibilities under subsection (4) of this section. Neighborhood district boundaries shall be logical, contiguous and follow identifiable physical features such as streets, property ownership boundaries, topographic features, boundaries of political jurisdiction, or City rights-of-way, and shall be mutually agreeable to the affected associations.

(4)    Standards. In order to be recognized by the City, neighborhood associations must satisfy the standards listed herein. The City Council is authorized to determine when an association has met these standards:



(a)    Membership. The membership of a neighborhood association shall not be limited by race, creed, color, sex, age, heritage, national origin or income. Any resident, business owner or owner’s representative, nonprofit organization’s representative or property owner who resides, owns property or maintains a business within the recognized boundary of a neighborhood association shall be entitled to membership and to vote.

(b)    Boundaries. The boundaries of a neighborhood association shall be drawn by the association membership. These boundaries must be mutually exclusive of other formally recognized associations and must remain within or coincide with the boundaries of a single neighborhood district, if one exists. The City Council is authorized to make adjustments to boundaries if necessary to avoid creation of an area that is excluded from neighborhood association representation.

(c)    Bylaws. In order to be considered for recognition by the City, a neighborhood association must first adopt written bylaws that provide for the following:

(i)    That the officers be elected on a regular schedule, at least bi-annually;

(ii)    That meetings be conducted in conformance with public meetings law when the association meets to act in an advisory capacity to the City. Advisory capacity exists when the City requests or the association on its own accord seeks to act in an advisory capacity to the City; that written minutes as required by open meetings law also be required to show minority opinions and a list of all those voting, and that copies of approved minutes and sign-in lists be available to the City for public review;

(iii)    That a current map of the association boundaries and a current list of the association officers and their addresses be provided to the City annually;

(iv)    That a minimum of one general neighborhood association meeting be held each calendar year, and the time, place and purpose be well publicized throughout the neighborhood prior to the meeting;

(v)    That the association provide for representatives to its neighborhood district if one exists;

(vi)    That the City be informed of any updates or amendments to the neighborhood association’s bylaws; and

(vii)    That procedures are developed describing the number of members required for a quorum, how votes are taken and recorded, and the action necessary to file an appeal.

(5)    Responsibility of City. The City shall provide recognized neighborhood associations with the following:

(a)    Timely notification of meetings of the Council, and the Planning Commission, and upon request, any Council advisory board or commission whose decisions may affect the neighborhood;

(b)    General information regarding City services and activities.

(6)    Appeals.

(a)    Formally recognized neighborhood associations may appeal land use decisions made by the Planning Director or Planning Commission to the appropriate bodies without cost if the Planning Director finds:

(i)    Community Development Code Appeal Procedures, Sections 99.140 and 99.240 through 99.300, are followed;

(ii)    The association submits a copy of the membership minutes and vote taken supporting the appeal;

(iii)    The neighborhood association appeal is related to the property within the association’s recognized boundaries.

(b)    In addition, an association may appeal without cost on behalf of an individual or group with standing who is not represented by a recognized association if subsections (6)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section are met and the neighborhood association finds the issue(s) are of City-wide concern related to the West Linn Comprehensive Plan or the West Linn Community Development Code.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1371, adopted 03-27-95; amended by Ordinance No. 1375 adopted 08-10-95; amended by Ordinance No. 1398 adopted 08-26-96; amended by Ordinance No. 1427

adopted 12-14-98; amended by Ordinance No. 1465 adopted 01-17- 01; amended by Ordinance No. 1467 adopted 02-14-01; amended by Ordinance No. 1490, adopted 12-04-02; amended by Ordinance No. 1491, adopted 12-18- 02; amended by Ordinance No. 1495, adopted 06-04-03; amended by Ordinance No. 1497, adopted 08-20-03; amended by Ordinance No. 1504, adopted 05-05-04; amended by Ordinance No. 1524, adopted 09-12-05; amended by Ordinance No. 1531, adopted 01-23-06; amended by Ordinance No. 1533, adopted 02-27-06; amended by Ordinance No. 1537, adopted 04-24- 06.]


2.200 Percent for Art Program Establishment.

West Linn Code 2.200 shall be known as the “Percent for Art Program” of the City of West Linn. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543 adopted January 22, 2007.]


2.205 Purpose.

The City of West Linn desires to expand the experience of its citizenry through public art of the highest quality in concept and execution. Public art contributes directly to the quality of life in the City of West Linn because citizens view and interact with it daily in public spaces. Public art instills concern for beauty and good design in the public and private sectors by setting high aesthetic standards. Public art reflects and communicates the history, character and values of the community and thereby creates a sense of place. The public art process involves citizens and artists by inviting them to participate in important decisions about the design of their environment. The City therefore declares its policy to include works of art in projects of the City by establishing a Percent for Art program. [Added by Ordinance No. 1543 adopted January 22, 2007.]


2.210 Definitions.

Capital Improvement Program (CIP) means the City’s program for advance planning of capital improvements.

City project means any capital project in an amount over $25,000 paid for in whole or in part by the City of West Linn to purchase, construct, rehabilitate or remodel any building, structure, decorative or commemorative structure, park, parking facility, street, public utility construction, or sidewalk, or any portion thereof within the limits of the City of West Linn. “City project” does not include emergency work, minor alterations, ordinary maintenance or repair necessary to preserve a facility.

De-accessioning means relinquishing title to a work of public art.

Eligible funds means a source of funds for projects from which art is not precluded as an object of expenditure.

Participating department means the department that is subject to this chapter by its sponsorship of a City project.

Percent for Art means the program established by this chapter to set aside a percentage of the total cost of City projects for public art.

Public art means all forms of original works of art accessible to the public and/or public employees including:

a.    Painting of all media, including both portable and permanently fixed works, such as murals;

b.    Sculpture which may be in the round, bas-relief, high-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic and others, in any material or combination of materials;

c.    Other visual media including, but not limited to, prints, drawings, stained glass, calligraphy, glass works, mosaics, photography, film, clay, fiber/textiles, wood, metals, plastics or other materials or combination of materials, or crafts or artifacts.

d.    Works of a wide range of materials, disciplines and media which are of specific duration, including performance events, and which are documented for public accessibility after the life of the piece has ended.

e.    Art works that possess functional as well as aesthetic qualities.

f.    Works reflecting the region’s cultural heritage, including events or installations serving an educational role to the community.

Public Art Trust Fund means a City fund or account into which all moneys derived pursuant to this Chapter shall be deposited. Monetary contributions for public art shall also be deposited into the Public Art Trust Fund. Funds within the Public Art Trust Fund shall be solely be utilized for the purposes outlined in this chapter.

Total cost means the entire amount of the City’s contribution toward the price for construction of a project. “Total cost” does not include costs for administration, fees and permits, building demolition, relocation of tenants, contingency funds, environmental testing, environmental remediation, non-construction contingency or indirect costs, such as interest during construction, advertising, public outreach and engagement, land acquisition and legal fees. “Total cost” also does not include private development revenue, federal and state grants that preclude public art as an object for expenditure, local improvement district revenue, utility and other City funds which are restricted by ordinance to preclude public art as an object for expenditure and revenue from any other funding source subject to legal restrictions, or generally accepted accounting standards restrictions, which preclude public art as an object for expenditure, including but not limited to statutory system development charges, state gas tax revenues and “business type activities.” These include the SDC, Street, Water and Environmental Services Funds. Any bond proceeds included within total cost must be spent in compliance with the bond’s purposes.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543 adopted January 22, 2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1702, adopted May 18, 2020.]


2.215 Dedication of 1.5% to Public Art.

Any City official or employee who authorizes or appropriates expenditures on behalf of a participating department for a City project shall, to the degree that the funds are eligible, include within the budget for the project a monetary contribution for public art equal to one and one-half percent of the total cost of the project.

(1)    Restricted Funds. If funding for a particular City project is subject to legal restrictions that preclude public art as an object for expenditure, the portion of the City project that is funded with the restricted funds shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

(2)    Phased Projects. As a general rule, where a City project will be constructed in phases, the one and one-half percent dedication shall be applied to the estimated total cost of each phase of the project at the time that funds for the phase are appropriated and encumbered. Nothing in this section prevents the Council from deciding to set aside all or part of the entire dedication from the funds of a particular phase, however, as the Council deems appropriate. In determining when to set aside the funds for a phased project, the City shall encourage an overall public art plan for phased work to ensure that art is not located on a piecemeal basis. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543 adopted January 22, 2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1702, adopted May 18, 2020.]


2.220 Public Art Trust Fund.

There is hereby created a special City fund or account called the Public Art Trust Fund into which the monetary contributions for public art shall be deposited.

(1)    One and one-half percent of the total cost of City projects shall be dedicated to public art. Such funds shall be deposited into the Public Art Trust Fund by the City Official or employee acting on behalf of the participating department at the time that budgeted funds are encumbered for construction of the project. The Percent for Art Program is intended to expand the experience of public art, so the allocation of funding is intended to maximize the use of monetary contributions. With this as a guide:

a.    At least one percent of the total cost of City projects shall be earmarked and used for costs associated with the acquisition of public art including, but not limited to, the design, purchase and siting of public art.

b.    Up to one-half percent of the total cost of City projects shall be used for costs associated with administration of the public art program, including, but not limited to, costs of selection, conservation and maintenance of the collection, community education, de-accessioning and registration of public art.

c.    The maximum of one-half percent of the total cost of City projects may be exceeded for costs associated with administration if the City determines that administrative costs for a specific project are higher than typical projects due to anticipated levels of community participation.

d.    Any unused project funds shall remain in the Public Art Trust Fund.

(2)    Monetary contributions shall be deposited in separate accounts within the Public Art Trust Fund if separate accounting is deemed appropriate by the City Manager or is required by law. If separate accounts are created for acquisition and administration, amounts carried over from year to year shall be reviewed each five years to determine if an imbalance exists. If excessive funds exist in the administration account at the time of review, the City shall determine whether to reallocate a portion of the funds to the acquisition account to expand the experience of public art.

(3)    Monetary contributions made other than through the Percent for Art program shall be deposited in the Public Art Trust Fund and may be dedicated to or earmarked for a specific program or work of art, subject to acceptance by the City Council.

(4)    Disbursements from the Public Art Trust Fund shall be made only after authorization of the City Council and shall be made according to this chapter and any guidelines adopted hereunder.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543, adopted 01-22-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1702, adopted May 18, 2020.]


2.225 Siting of Art.

(1)    Public art selected pursuant to this chapter may be sited in, on or about any City project or other property owned, leased or rented by or to the City of West Linn in accordance with any restrictions placed on siting by the participating department. Public art may be attached or detached within or about such property, and may be either temporary or permanent.

(2)    The participating department shall consider the siting of public art as part of the design and engineering phase of any City project. If costs are incurred by the participating department to comply with this subsection prior to transfer of the one and one-half percent for the project to the Public Art Trust Fund, the department may deduct such costs from the applicable portion of the one and one-half percent at the time such funds are transferred.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543, adopted 01-22-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1702, adopted May 18, 2020.]


2.230 Program Guidelines.

The City Council shall adopt guidelines for administration of the Percent for Art program. Such guidelines will take into account the recommendations provided by the City of West Linn’s Arts and Culture Commission (as established in Section 2.075) and may:

(1)    Provide for an annual plan for public art based upon the CIP.

(2)    Provide for the appointment of representatives to third-party selection committees as necessary. Selection committees may include representatives of the participating department, project architects or engineers, artists, and/or other community members as appropriate.

(3)    Provide for a method or methods of selecting and contracting with artists for the design, execution and siting of public art.

(4)    Determine the dedication and disbursement process for the Public Art Trust Fund.

(5)    Clarify the responsibility for maintenance of public art, including any extraordinary operations or maintenance costs associated with public art, prior to selection.

(6)    Facilitate the preservation of art objects, ethnic and cultural arts and crafts, and artifacts.

(7)    Provide a process to de-accession art.

(8)    Set forth any other matter appropriate to the administration of this chapter.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543 adopted 01-22-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1702, adopted May 18, 2020.]


2.235 Ownership.

All public art acquired pursuant to this chapter shall be acquired in the name of the City of West Linn, and title shall vest in the City of West Linn.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1543, adopted 01-22-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1702, adopted May 18, 2020.]


ELECTIONS


2.300 Authorization to Submit Explanatory Statements Relating to Municipal Legislation Referred or Initiated by Petition.

When directed by the West Linn City Council, the City Manager is authorized to prepare explanatory statement(s) for the Clackamas County Voters’ Pamphlet for matters relating to municipal legislation referred or initiated by petition.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1552, adopted 09-24-2007.]


WEST LINN PERSONNEL SYSTEM


2.400 Purpose and Objectives.

The purpose of the personnel system of the City of West Linn is to provide for the establishment and maintenance of an equitable and uniform system of personnel administration for the City and to achieve the following objectives: 

(1)    To establish, develop and maintain a program of personnel and administration based on principles of merit, fitness and modern methods governing the recruitment, appointment, tenure, promotion, transfer, termination and discipline of its employees and officers in order to make a career in the City service attractive and to encourage employees to give their best service to the City; 

(2)    To promote high morale among City employees by providing good working conditions, consideration for their general welfare, encouragement for self-development, opportunity for advancement and basis for understanding the terms and conditions of City employment; 

(3)    To promote, increase and facilitate economy, productivity and efficiency in service to the City; 

(4)    To establish and maintain uniform plans of position classification and pay based upon the relative duties, responsibilities and interrelationships of positions in the City service; and 

(5)    To establish a merit system of personnel administration.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.410 Personnel System Administration.

The administration of the personnel system shall be the responsibility of the City Manager. The City Manager may designate another person as the personnel officer and delegate to that person the responsibility of personnel administration. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.420 Responsibilities of City Manager in Administration of Personnel System.

The City Manager or his or her designee shall: 

(1)    Administer all provisions of the personnel system; 

(2)    Prepare and recommend personnel policies and amendments thereto; 

(3)    Apply and carry out the requirements of applicable state and federal employment laws and regulations; 

(4)    Foster and develop programs for improvement of employee efficiency, including training and safety; 

(5)    Act as the City’s chief representative in collective bargaining negotiations with the City’s employee bargaining units and administer those employment agreements; 

(6)    When appropriate, enter into employment agreements with employees who are not members of a collective bargaining unit; 

(7)    Develop and maintain a position classification system which shall group all positions in the City service into classes based upon duties, authority and responsibilities and allocate positions to the appropriate class and recommend revisions in the classification system; 

(8)    Develop and recommend compensation plans; and 

(9)    Adopt and amend personnel rules.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.430 Adoption of Personnel Rules.

The City Manager shall develop and adopt such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the personnel system. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.440 Pay and Compensation Plans.

The City Manager shall recommend to the City Council adoption of compensation plans. The compensation plan shall include for each classification of positions a minimum and maximum rate of pay and such intermediate rates as are considered necessary and equitable. The pay range assigned to each classification shall be such as to reflect the difference in the duties and responsibilities between it and other classifications, and shall take into consideration wages paid for comparable work, the City’s financial condition, unusual issues with recruitment or retention and other conditions of employment. Administration of the adopted pay plan shall be the responsibility of the City Manager. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.450 Equal Employment Opportunity.

All persons shall be entitled to equal employment opportunities within the City service, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, age, or mental or physical disability except where a particular position requires a valid occupational qualification, marital status, sexual orientation, political affiliation, national origin, union affiliation or all other mandated State and Federal protected status.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.460 Engaging Necessary Services.

The City Manager may obtain, on behalf of the City, necessary services from persons or agencies competent in personnel management.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


2.470 Applicability.

The West Linn Municipal Code shall not apply to elected officials and members of boards and commissions, volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to service without pay, the City Manager and the Municipal Judge unless otherwise provided by personnel rules adopted by the City Council. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571, adopted 07-14-2008]


COURT OF RECORD


2.500 Court of Record.

The West Linn Municipal Court is hereby declared a court of record, effective January 1, 2009. A prosecution commenced in the West Linn Municipal Court before December 31, 2008, shall be deemed a prosecution in a court not of record notwithstanding that part of the prosecution may occur in the West Linn Municipal Court after the effective date of this declaration.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1583, adopted 11-24- 2008]


TRIAL BY JURY


2.600 Right to Trial by Jury.

Every person charged with any offense defined and made punishable by the City Charter, or any ordinance of the City, shall have the right to trial by jury upon giving written notice to the Municipal Judge within six days after entry of his or her plea. The Municipal Judge may, at his or her discretion, accept a request for a trial by jury at any time before the time set for trial.


2.605 Number of Jurors.

The jury shall consist of six persons duly sworn to try the cause for which they are called; the jurors shall be selected as hereinafter provided.


2.610 Term of Court.

The terms of Municipal Court shall be for a period of one year, beginning on January 1st of each year following the passage of the ordinance codified in Sections 2.600 to 2.650.


2.615 Jury List.

(1)    Upon the passage of the ordinance codified in Sections 2.600 to 2.650 and commencing on January 2, 1974, the City Manager shall prepare a preliminary jury list, by lot, of not less than 150 nor more than 500 names of persons selected from the latest tax roll and registration books used in the last City election. The Manager, in preparing the preliminary jury list, shall place thereon only those names of persons who are known or believed to be possessed of the qualifications described in ORS 10.030 and not entitled to exemption as provided by ORS 10.040.

(2)    If for any reason the making of a jury is omitted and neglected on the second day of January, it may be done on the first Monday of any month following to serve until the close of the year, and until another list is made.


2.620 Jury Panels.

The jury panel for each term shall be selected on the first day of each term of court and the City Manager shall select 100 names of persons, by lot, from the preliminary jury list, to serve as a jury panel until the next panel is selected. No person shall be required to serve more than one term during any three-year period. A jury panel shall be selected on January 2, 1974, upon the passage of the ordinance codified in Sections 2.600 to 2.650 and thereafter on January 2nd of each and every year; provided, however, that if the preliminary jury list is not selected on the second day of January of any year, the jury panel may be selected on the first Monday of any following month. The jury panel shall be selected by the City Manager in the presence of the Municipal Judge. No challenge shall be made or allowed to the panel and substantial compliance with the ordinance codified in Sections 2.600 to 2.650 for selecting the panel shall be sufficient.


2.625 Selection of Trial Jury.

At least 10 days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, prior to the trial date, the defendant or his or her attorney and the City Attorney shall appear before the Municipal Judge for the selection of the trial jury. The time and place of said selection shall be designated by the court and the judge thereof shall notify the defendant or his or her attorney and the City Attorney of said time and place. The judge shall then select, by lot, six names of persons from the jury panel. When it appears to the Municipal Judge that any of the persons whose names are drawn is dead or resides out of the City, the ballot shall be destroyed. If it appears to the Municipal Judge, or he or she has good reason to believe, that a person whose name is drawn is temporarily absent from the City, or is ill, or is so engaged as to be unable to attend at the time of trial without great inconvenience, the ballot shall be laid aside, the name not placed on the jury list for the trial for which the jury is being selected, but such ballot shall be returned to the jury box after the drawing of the trial jury is completed. The defendant or his or her attorney may then challenge by peremptory challenge three of the prospective jurors. The order of challenge shall be that the defendant, or his or her attorney may challenge one then the City Attorney may challenge one, and so alternating until the peremptory challenges are exhausted. Additional names shall be selected, by lot, to replace those jurors challenged. When six jurors have been selected, they shall be notified to appear at trial at the appointed time and place and shall constitute the trial jury.


2.630 Alternate Jurors.

The defendant or his or her attorney and the City Attorney may agree by stipulation to the drawing of additional names from the jury panel to serve as alternate trial jurors to be summoned should summons not be served upon any of those persons selected as a part of the trial jury pursuant to Section 2.625.


2.635 Conduct of Trials.

Trials shall be conducted as trials in justice court and the rules of evidence shall be the sane as in State courts and shall include applicable statutes of the State regarding the introduction or admission of evidence.


2.640 Verdict.

Six of the six jurors sworn to try the cause must concur to render a verdict.


2.645 Payment of Jurors.

Those jurors notified and who appear at trial shall receive compensation from the City in the amount of $5.00 for each day of attendance upon the Municipal Court.


2.650 Powers of the Municipal Judge.

The Municipal Judge shall have all inherent statutory powers and duties of a justice of the peace within the jurisdictional limits of the City. The Chief of Police shall assist the judge in the serving of subpoenas, notices of jury duty, and such other orders of the court necessary for the proper conduct thereof. The Municipal Judge may hold any prospective juror who disregards the notice of jury duty in contempt of court and may punish said juror as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this code.


FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS PROHIBITED IN CITY BUILDINGS


2.660 Purpose.

The purpose of the following provisions is to ensure the safety of the public and City personnel. ORS 166.170 expressly vests the power to regulate firearms to the State’s Legislature; therefore, nothing in these sections shall be construed as an attempt to regulate firearms in contradiction with State or Federal law. The Council intends Sections 2.660 to 2.675 to supplement and be uniformly interpreted with the laws and regulations of the United States and the State, to avoid infringing on a citizen’s Constitutional right to bear arms for purposes limited to self-defense.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1628, adopted 08-11-2014.]


2.665 Definitions.

As used in Sections 2.660 to 2.675, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words mean:

(1)    Dangerous Weapon. Any weapon, device, instrument, material or substance which under the circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used or threatened to be used, is readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury and includes but is not limited to:

(a)    Any dirk, dagger, ice pick, slingshot, metal knuckles or any similar instrument, a knife other than an ordinary pocketknife, the use of which could inflict injury upon a person or property;

(b)    Mace, tear gas, pepper mace or any similar deleterious agent;

(c)    An electric stun gun or any similar instrument;

(d)    An tear gas weapon; or

(e)    A club, bat, baton, billy club, bludgeon, knobkerrie, nunchaku, nightstick, truncheon or any similar instrument, the use of which could inflict injury upon a person or property.

(2)    Firearm. A pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, miniature weapon or other mechanism which projects a missile or shot by force of gunpowder or any other explosive, or by spring or by compressed air.

(3)    Peace Officer. A member of the Oregon State Police, marshal service, reserve officer, or as otherwise defined by ORS 133.005(3).

(4)    City Building. Any City-owned or controlled building, including but not limited to the public library, Police Department building, public works building, adult community center, City Hall, the portion of any other buildings occupied by a department of the City of West Linn, and the grounds adjacent to each building.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1628, adopted 08-11-2014.]


2.670 Firearms and Dangerous Weapons Prohibited.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, whether concealed or unconcealed, a loaded or unloaded firearm or dangerous weapon of any kind in a City building.

(2)    Subsection (1) of this section does not apply to or affect:

(a)    A West Linn police officer, sheriff, peace officer, or a corrections officer while acting within the scope of employment.

(b)    A person summoned by a West Linn police officer or peace officer to assist in making an arrest or preserving the peace, while the summoned person is engaged in assisting the officer.

(c)    An active or reserve member of the military forces of Oregon or the United States, when engaged in the performance of duty.

(d)    A person who is licensed under ORS 166.291 and 166.292 to carry a concealed handgun.

(e)    A person who is authorized by the City of West Linn to possess a firearm or dangerous weapon in City Hall or a public building.

(f)    An employee of the United States Department of Agriculture, acting within the scope of employment, who possesses a firearm in the course of the lawful taking of wildlife.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1628, adopted 08-11-2014.]


2.675 Administrative Search.

(1)    Any person entering a City building may be subject to an administrative search which may include metal detectors and consent searches.

(2)    The West Linn Police Department, security guard, or any other peace officer shall enforce the prohibition on firearms and dangerous weapons, in ORS 166.370, and the provisions of Section 2.670 by every lawful means, including but not limited to:

(a)    Lawful searches of an individual’s person;

(b)    Lawful searches of carried items;

(c)    Examination of any lawfully carried firearm, pursuant to ORS 166.380; and

(d)    Seizure of any proscribed item.

(3)    Refusal of a person to submit to an administrative search shall require the immediate removal of the person from the City building. Refusal to leave when requested by law enforcement or city personnel shall be considered trespass.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1628, adopted 08-11-2014.]


EMERGENCY PLANNING


2.700 Title.

Sections 2.700 to 2.750 shall be known as the “emergency planning provisions” and may be so cited and pleaded and is referred to herein.


2.710 Conditions of Emergency.

The conditions required for the declaration of a state of emergency within the City of West Linn are as follows:

(1)    “Emergency” includes any man-made or natural event or circumstances causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material as defined in ORS 466.605, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight, infestation, crisis influx of migrants unmanageable by the county, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage and war.


2.720 Declaration of Emergency.

A declaration of a state of emergency within the City of West Linn may be issued by the Mayor (or the Council President when the Mayor is absent or otherwise unable to perform the functions of Mayor as provided in the City Charter); or the City Manager or designee if the nature of the emergency requires that immediate action be taken and it is not reasonably practicable for the Mayor to issue the declaration of emergency prior to the time immediate action must be taken. Any declaration of emergency by the City Manager or designee shall be subject to review and revision by the Mayor. All declarations of emergency shall be subject to review and revision by the City Council. A state of emergency shall be terminated by the City Council when the emergency situation ceases to exist.


2.730 Adoption of Emergency Operations Plan.

The City Council may by resolution establish an emergency operations plan with procedures to prepare for and carry out any activity to prevent, minimize, respond to, or recover from an emergency. The emergency operations plan may authorize City officials and employees to take action as needed to deal with the emergency, including but not limited to:

(1)    Redirect City funds for emergency use and suspend standard City procurement procedures;

(2)    Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places;

(3)    Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place;

(4)    Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate the same on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances;

(5)    Evacuate persons;

(6)    Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages;

(7)    Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids;

(8)    Prohibit the sale, carrying, or possession of any weapons or explosives of any kind on public streets, public places, or any outdoor place;

(9)    Curtail or suspend commercial activity;

(10)    Turn off water, gas, or electricity;

(11)    Order such other measures as are necessary for the protection of life or property, or for the recovery from the emergency.


2.740 Responsibilities of City Manager.

The City Manager shall carry out the emergency duties or functions as prescribed by the resolution establishing procedures to deal with an emergency and may delegate all or part of that authority.


2.750 Violation.

Any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity that violates any provision of Sections 2.700 to 2.750 or any plan or order authorized by Sections 2.700 to 2.750 shall be subject, on conviction, to a fine of not more than $500.00 per offense. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offence for penalty purposes.

[Sections 2.700 through 2.745 “Emergency Planning” repealed by Ordinance No. 1459, adopted 8-28-2000; The West Linn Municipal Code is amended by adding Sections 2.700 through 2.750 by Ordinance No. 1459, adopted 8-28-2000.]


DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY


2.800 Property in Police Department Possession – Disposition.

Whenever the Chief of Police of the City has any property, including money, but excluding vehicles subject to ORS 819.100 to 819.260, in his or her possession, the ownership of which is unknown, and which is unclaimed for a period of three months (90 days) after the property came into the possession of the Police Department, the Chief of Police shall, unless the disposition of such property is otherwise specifically provided for by law, report the fact to the City Manager and request authority to dispose of it as provided in Sections 2.800 to 2.825.


2.805 Manager Authority – Disposition by Sale – Notice.

The City Manager shall act upon the request of the Chief of Police within 30 days after the request for a public sale and if the City Manager approves the request, the City Manager shall cause to be posted written or printed notice of sale in three public places within the city at least 10 days before the sale. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least 10 days prior to the date of sale or transfer. The notice shall describe the property, excluding money, and shall state the time and place of public sale at which the property may be purchased by the highest bidder. Until the date of the sale, the property, excluding money, may be claimed at the office of the Chief of Police. If ownership is proved, the Chief of Police shall turn the property over to the owner, and cancel the sale insofar as the claimed property is concerned.


2.810 Conduct of Sale – Disposition of Funds.

The Chief of Police shall cause the sale to be conducted and shall deposit the proceeds thereof, together with any other money included in the notice, in the City treasury to the credit of the City general fund.


2.815 Transfer of Property to City.

In lieu of a sale of the property under the foregoing provisions of Sections 2.800 to 2.825, the Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Manager, may transfer any portion of the unclaimed property to the City for use by the City or other governmental agencies, or by destruction after the same notice as set forth in Section 2.805.


2.820 Destruction of Contraband.

The Chief of Police shall cause contraband or illegal drugs, and/or substances to be destroyed at the direction of the court after such property has been provided to the courts as evidence and is no longer required by the procedure at the courts. Any unclaimed or found contraband, illegal drugs, and/or substances shall be destroyed at the direction of the Chief of Police and certification of destruction shall be placed in the case file jacket relating to such found or unclaimed property.


2.825 Claim by Owner After Sale.

(1)    If the property is sold as provided herein, and if within six months after the sale, the owner of the property, including money, files with the City Manager a claim for the property, and proves his or her right to the same, the City Manager shall direct that the money or the amount received for the property, less expenses of the sale, shall be paid to the owner from the City treasury. The City Manager shall not approve any claims filed more than six months after the sale.

(2)    If the property is transferred to the City or other governmental agency, in lieu of sale, it may be claimed by the lawful owner thereof at any time within six months from the transfer to the City, or other governmental agency. The Chief of Police and the City Manager, in disposing of property in the manner provided herein, shall not be liable to the owner thereof.


INVENTORY OF CONTENTS OF ARRESTED PERSONS AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES


2.830 Purpose.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1596, adopted 07-26-2010; Section 2.830 added by Ord. 1388 enacted 05-28-1996.]


2.832 Definitions.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1596, adopted 07-26-2010; Section 2.832 added by Ord. 1388 enacted 05-28-1996.]


2.834 Inventories of Impounded Vehicles.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1596, adopted 07-26-2010; Section 2.834 added by Ord. 1388 enacted 05-28-1996.]


2.836 Inventories of Persons in Police Custody.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1596, adopted 07-26-2010; Section 2.836 added by Ord. 1388 enacted 05-28-1996.]


MUNICIPAL LIEN SEARCH


2.850 Municipal Lien Search Fee Established.

The purpose of the municipal lien search fee is to recover personnel, material and equipment costs associated with providing information and searching for municipal liens on real property. The City shall charge a uniform fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for each property for which a municipal lien search is conducted by the City upon the request of a private individual, title company or other source, and said fee shall be paid in advance.

[Section 2.850 amended by Ord. 1488 adopted 08-08-2002.]


SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY SALES


2.875 Declaration of Surplus Real Property.

(1)    The City Manager may present a list of one or more real properties to the City Council for a declaration of surplus at any regular or special Council meeting. The City Manager’s list shall include the following details for each property:

(a)    A description of the property to be sold;

(b)    The City’s current and past uses for the property;

(c)    The zoning designation for the property; and

(d)    The reasons the City Manager is proposing it is necessary or convenient to sell the property.

(2)    The Council may declare any, all, or none of the properties surplus by a majority vote.

(3)    The Council may choose to allow public testimony in accordance with its Council rules.

(4)    After a property is declared surplus, the City Manager may undertake any reasonable methods for pricing, advertising, marketing, and selling the property. Appropriate methods include, but are not limited to:

(a)    Listing the property in newspapers;

(b)    Listing with a real estate agency; and

(c)    Accepting requests for proposals.

(5)    All City owned park or open space that the Council designates as surplus shall comply with all City Charter requirements for the use and disposition of such property prior to any lease, sale, or exchange.

[Repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1611, adopted 11-19-2012.]


2.880 Notice and Public Hearing Prior to Sale.

(1)    Any real property declared surplus by the Council may be sold following notice and a public hearing. The notice of a public hearing for the sale of real property shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one week before the public hearing. The notice shall state:

(a)    The time and place of the public hearing;

(b)    A description of the property or interest to be sold;

(c)    The proposed uses for the property; and

(d)    The reasons why the Council considers it necessary or convenient to sell the property.

(2)    The Council shall publish a notice of the proposed sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and shall hold a public hearing before selling the property.

(3)    The general terms, nature of the proposed sale, and any evidence of the market value of the property shall be disclosed by the Council at the public hearing.

[Repealed and replaced by Ordinance No. 1611, adopted 11-19-2012.]


2.885 Disposal of Standard Undeveloped Property and Developed Property.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1611, adopted 11-19-2012.]


2.890 Initial Offering by Sealed Bids.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1611, adopted 11-19-2012.]


2.895 Disposal of Special-Case Property.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1611, adopted 11-19-2012.]


2.900 Broker Selection.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1611, adopted 11-19-2012.]


REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF INTEREST


2.901 Acquisition of Real Property.

Dedications of property resulting from development applications and development conditions of approval for rights-of-way and public tracts shall not be considered acquisitions of property by the City for purposes of this section and may be approved by the City Manager or designee. Other land donations and other acquisitions of an interest in real property not delegated above shall be approved by the City Council.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1475, adopted 08-22-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1546, adopted 02-12-2007.]


2.902 Transfer of an Interest Other Than Fee Title.

The transfer of an interest in real property by the City is not a sale of surplus real property if the City retains title to the property. The City Manager may transfer a temporary easement or other temporary interest in real property less than fee title if the City Manager determines that the transfer is in the public interest and the temporary easement will not extend beyond 30 days. Any temporary easement in excess of 30 days or permanent transfer of an interest other than fee title of City real property requires City Council approval.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1475, adopted 08-22-2001.]


2.903 Procedure for Acquisition and Transfers of Interests in Real Property.

The City Council may approve the acquisition or transfer of real property under Sections 2.901 and 2.902 by motion or resolution.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1475, adopted 08-22-2001.]


2.904 Release of Property Rights on Private Property.

As properties are redeveloped, public utility easements must frequently be modified to facilitate new plats. For release or modification of public utility easements associated with development, the City Manager may, upon agreement by franchise utilities, release or modify property rights held by the City or by the public at large on private properties upon assurance that newly designated and granted easements as required are provided in the course of the development.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1546, adopted 02-12- 2007.]


ANNEXATIONS

[Section 2.910 added by Ordinance No. 1419, enacted 09-09-1998; repealed by Ordinance No. 1508, enacted 10-06-2004.]


2.915 Annexation Purpose Statement.

(1)    The purpose of Sections 2.915 to 2.940 is to establish a two-step process for annexation applications. The first step is a land use decision. The second step is a policy decision by the City Council to determine if the annexation should be approved. The Step 1 and Step 2 decisions can occur at the same meeting. An annexation to the City shall not be effective unless it is approved by the City Council at its discretion and by Metro pursuant to its authority regarding annexations within its boundaries.

(2)    The procedures and standards established in this chapter are required for review of proposed annexations in order to:

(a)    Provide adequate public notice, information and sufficient time for public review before annexation hearings and elections;

(b)    Maximize citizen involvement in the annexation review process; and

(c)    Provide information to the public concerning the physical, environmental, financial and related social effects of annexation.

[Section 2.915 added by Ordinance No. 1508, enacted 10-06-2004; amended by Ordinance No. 1554, adopted 10-08-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1651, adopted 10-10-2016.]


2.920 Step 1: Land Use Decision.

When an annexation application has been properly initiated pursuant to ORS 222.111, 222.125, 222.170, or 222.840, Step 1 shall include review of the land use aspect of the petition pursuant to Community Development Code Chapter 81. If the application receives Council approval through the Step 1 process, the Council shall proceed to Step 2. A determination that the application meets the land use requirements does not obligate the City to approve the annexation application.

[Section 2.920 added by Ordinance No. 1419, enacted 09-09-1998; repealed by Ordinance No. 1508, enacted 10-06-2004; new Section 2.920 added by Ordinance No. 1508, enacted 10-06-2004; amended by Ordinance No. 1554, adopted 10-08-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1651, adopted 10-10-2016.]


2.930 Step 2: Policy Decision.

(1)    Step 2 of the annexation process is a policy decision and shall follow the steps in the subsections below.

(2)    If the annexation is approved in the Step 1 process, the Planning Director shall prepare a report which includes the following information:

(a)    General information on the property or properties, including but not limited to location, size, access to infrastructure, recommended zone, protected resource areas and infrastructure status;

(b)    Impact on the school district, including but not limited to impacted schools, taxes, and anticipated number of additional students;

(c)    Cost to City of infrastructure that is not funded by SDCs; and

(d)    Tax implications for the City.

As part of the Step 1 process, the applicant shall provide to the Planning Director the information required above at the applicant’s cost.

(3)    Following delivery of the report and consideration of the report by the City Council at a public meeting, the Council may, in its discretion, decide to set a public hearing for the annexation request, delay a public hearing on the requested annexation or pass a resolution placing the annexation request on a ballot for an advisory vote, at any election. At the public meeting, any person may appear and be heard on the questions of whether the annexation should proceed and whether the request should be placed on the ballot for an advisory vote.

(4)    If City Council decides to proceed to a public hearing on the requested annexation without an advisory vote, a public hearing will be scheduled. Notice of the Step 2 public hearing shall be published in accordance with State law and the Metro Code.

(5)    The City Council may approve an annexation request if it finds that the annexation is in the best interest of the City based on the report prepared by the Planning Director; testimony and evidence presented at the public hearing; and any other information, evidence, or analysis the City or the Council deems relevant to the application.

(6)    The City Council may deny an annexation acting in its legislative capacity even after it has approved the annexation application through the Step 1 process. A decision to deny an annexation in Step 2 shall be specifically stated in the record and noted as a legislative act separate and apart from the land use decision in Step 1.

[Section 2.930 added by Ordinance No. 1442, adopted 09-27-1999; repealed by Ordinance No. 1508, enacted 10-06-2004; new Section 2.930 added by Ordinance No. 1508, enacted 10-06-2004; amended by Ordinance No. 1554, adopted 10-08-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1651, adopted 10-10-2016.]


2.935 Election Costs.

The applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in processing the application, including the City’s anticipated election costs. In the event that other City items are included in the same election, the applicant shall be responsible only for a pro-rata portion of any shared costs. If the election is concurrent with the primary or general election of an even-numbered year, the applicant is not responsible for any election costs.

[Section 2.935 amended by Ordinance No. 1442 adopted 09-27-1999; formerly identified as “RESERVED” repealed by Ordinance No. 1508 enacted 10-06-2004; new Section 2.935 added by Ordinance No. 1508 enacted 10-06-2004; amended by Ordinance No. 1528 adopted 11-28-2005; amended by Ordinance No. 1554, adopted 10-08-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1651, adopted 10-10-2016.]


2.940 Submission of Annexation Reports.

The City shall report all changes in the boundaries of the City as required by State law and the Metro Code. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1651, adopted 10-10-2016.]


2.950 Annexation Applications, Process.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014.]


2.955 Zoning Designations.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014.]


2.960 Submission of Annexation Reports.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1625, adopted 06-16-2014.]


LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE


2.975 Purpose.

Low-income assistance authorized by Sections 2.975 to 2.995 may be used for complying with certain City ordinances only. Low-income assistance is limited to qualified low-income residents of the City of West Linn who own and occupy their own homes, for whom compliance with certain City ordinances would pose a financial hardship.

Sections 2.975 to 2.995 also establish eligibility requirements and application procedures for low-income assistance.


2.980 Definitions.

Low-income assistance. Assistance in payment, to be in the form of a discount on a project bill, for work performed by the City or by a contractor for the purpose of complying with requirements of certain City ordinances and the municipal code on behalf of qualified low-income residents of the City.

Low-income resident. Any person(s) residing in the City of West Linn who owns and occupies their own home and who meets the qualifications specified in the low-income assistance application.


2.985 Applicability.

Low-income assistance may be authorized for the following purposes only:

(1)    To connect to sewer service for an owner-occupied residence where connection to sewer is necessary pursuant to requirements in Sections 4.000 to 4.060.

(2)    To repair sidewalks in the public right-of-way adjacent to or fronting property owned and occupied by the applicant pursuant to the requirements set forth in Sections 3.350 to 3.395.

(3)    To maintain, remove or replace trees, whether upon property owned and occupied by the applicant or within the public right-of-way adjacent to such property, pursuant to the requirements set forth in Section 5.465.

(4)    To abate nuisances originating on property owned and occupied by the applicant if the cost of abating such nuisance is greater than $500.00, pursuant to the requirements set forth in Sections 5.400 to 5.527.


2.990 Procedure.

(1)    Applications for low-income assistance shall be provided by the City. Applicants shall file applications with the City Manager.

(2)    Applications shall be reviewed by the Finance Director and the City Manager in order to determine whether applicants have met all qualification requirements to receive low-income assistance. If all qualification requirements have not been met, the low-income assistance application shall be denied and returned to the applicant. The City Manager shall keep a copy of all low-income assistance applications submitted.

(3)    Low-income assistance may only be authorized by the City Manager.

(4)    Low-income assistance shall be given on a need basis. Before work begins on projects, each property owner shall receive an estimate of project costs. Each project shall be completed as required by Section 2.985, the cost of which shall then be billed to the property owner. If the property owner has qualified for low-income assistance, the City may reduce the bill for services by an amount of up to $500.00 of the total cost.

(5)    Where a project is carried out by the City and the property owner refuses or is unable to pay the remainder of the bill for such a project, a lien shall be placed on the property and recorded in the City’s lien docket. The lien shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Such interest shall commence at the date of entry of the lien in the City’s lien docket.


2.995 Limitations.

(1)    Low-income assistance shall not exceed $500.00 per household per calendar year.


Chapter 3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

3.000    Council Authority – Petition by Owners.

3.005    Report of Engineer.

3.010    Action on Engineer’s Report.

3.015    Resolution and Notice of Hearing.

3.020    Hearing and Action on Improvement.

3.025    Advertisement and Contract.

3.030    Preliminary Assessment.

3.035    Final Assessment.

3.040    Method of Assessment.

3.045    Alternative Methods of Financing.

3.050    Remedies.

3.055    Lien Records and Foreclosure Proceedings.

3.060    Errors in Assessment Calculations.

3.065    Deficit Assessment.

3.070    Rebates.

3.075    Abandonment of Proceedings.

3.080    Curative Provisions.

3.085    Reassessment.

3.090    Bancroft Bonding Act.

3.095    Mailing of Notices.

3.100    Segregation of Assessments – Fees.

3.105    Deferral of Special Assessments for Local Improvements.

ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

3.150    Definitions.

3.155    Application.

3.160    Report.

3.165    Public Hearing.

3.170    Notice.

3.175    Advance Financing Resolutions and Agreements.

3.180    Notice of Adoption of Resolution.

3.182    Approval of Cost Amount.

3.185    Advance Financed Reimbursement.

3.190    Payment to Developer.

3.195    Recording.

3.200    Public Improvements.

3.205    Multiple Public Improvements.

3.210    Other Fees and Charges.

WORK IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS

3.250    City Approval Required.

3.255    Fees, Deposits, Financial Guarantees, and Administrative Requirements.

3.260    Standards.

3.265    Street Sections and Construction Details.

3.270    Engineer’s Approval in Phases.

3.275    Contractor – Appointment of Project Superintendent.

3.280    Contractor – Submission of Plans.

3.285    Traffic Control Plans and Open Trenches.

3.290    Unauthorized Work in the Right-of-Way.

PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS (STREET/UTILITY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS)

3.300    Public Works Standards.

SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE

3.350    Definition of “Sidewalk.”

3.355    Repair of Sidewalks.

3.360    Liability for Sidewalk Injuries.

3.365    Standards and Specifications.

3.370    Submission of Plans.

3.375    Supervision of Work.

3.380    Notice to Construct, Alter, or Repair Sidewalk.

3.385    City May Construct, Alter, or Repair Sidewalk.

3.390    Assessment for Sidewalk Work Done by City.

3.395    Sidewalk Construction Requested by the Property Owner.


SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS


3.000 Council Authority – Petition by Owners.

(1)    Whenever the council deems it expedient to construct, alter, repair, improve, widen or extend any street, alley, sidewalk, parking, curbing or any part thereof, or to construct, alter or install street lights, or to construct, improve, or repair any sanitary or storm sewer or water line or any part thereof, or to acquire, establish, construct or reconstruct any off street motor vehicle parking facilities; or to construct, reconstruct or repair any flood control facility, or to construct, reconstruct, repair, or equip a park, playground or neighborhood recreation facility, or any local improvement for which an assessment may be made on the property specially benefitted, for which it is anticipated that special assessments will be levied, it shall by motion direct the city engineer or engineer retained by the city to make an investigation of such project and to submit a written report, containing the information hereinafter specified.

(2)    Whenever the owners of at least 60 percent of the front footage of the abutting property in any area consisting of at least 300 feet of road, or the owners of at least 60 percent of the property to be especially benefitted desire to form themselves into an improvement district for the purpose of accomplishing any of the objectives listed in subsection (1) of this section, they may by written petition request the council to direct the city engineer to submit a report as specified in subsection (1) of this section. The council, if satisfied the petition is signed by the owners of at least 60 percent of the front footage of the abutting property or 60 percent of the property to be especially benefitted within the district specified in the petition, may pass the requested motion. The petition referred to herein must be filed with the city manager not less than ten days prior to any regular meeting of the council.


3.005 Report of Engineer.

The city engineer or the engineer retained by the city shall file the report with the city manager within the time specified by the council. At the discretion of the council the time for filing the report may be extended. The report shall contain the following:

(1)    A map or plat showing the general nature, location, and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be included in the proposed improvement district;

(2)    Estimated cost of the work to be done, including any legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto; provided, however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the engineer may adopt the estimates of such agency;

(3)    An analysis of the extent to which the proposed improvement benefits the entire city and a recommendation as to the method of determining the project costs that will be borne by the entire city;

(4)    The description and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefitted by the improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof and, when readily available, the names of the contract purchasers thereof;

(5)    A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed.


3.010 Action on Engineer’s Report.

After the engineer’s report has been filed with the city manager, the council may thereafter by motion approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the engineer to supply additional or different information for such improvement, or it may abandon the improvement.


3.015 Resolution and Notice of Hearing.

After approving the engineer’s report as submitted or modified, the council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to make such improvement, provide the manner and method of carrying out the improvement and shall direct the city manager to give notice of such improvement by posting at the city hall and at two places within the benefitted area, and by mailing copies of such notice to the owners to be assessed for the costs of such improvement. The notice shall be mailed and posted, at least ten days prior to the public hearing on the proposed improvement. Said notice shall contain the following:

(1)    A statement describing the proposed improvements, the area to be served, and the intention of the council to make such an improvement;

(2)    The place and times at which the engineer’s report on the proposed improvement may be examined;

(3)    The date, time, and place of the public hearing on the proposed improvement;

(4)    The procedure for presenting objections and remonstrances;

(5)    The estimated total cost of that portion of the project to be financed by assessments to benefitted properties.


3.020 Hearing and Action on Improvement.

If, prior to or during the hearing, written objections are received from owners representing two thirds of the area to be assessed, the improvement proceedings shall be abandoned and shall not be subject to a further hearing for at least six months, unless the improvement is a sidewalk or an improvement unanimously declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency. The council, after receiving objections from owners representing not more than two thirds of the area to be assessed may adopt or amend the engineer’s report and, as amended, adopt the same by resolution. Having by resolution created a local improvement district of the area to be benefitted by the proposed improvement, the council shall direct, in said resolution or by subsequent action, the city engineer or an engineer retained by the city to prepare detailed plans, specifications, and cost estimates for the proposed improvement.


3.025 Advertisement and Contract.

(1)    The council shall review the final plans, specifications and cost estimate and, finding same to be consistent with the preliminary plans and cost estimates adopted in the engineer’s report, shall by resolution adopt the final plans and specifications, and direct city personnel to construct the proposed improvements or direct the city manager to advertise for bids on the project according to the final plans and specifications. The city shall provide for the bonding of all contractors for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof in case of default shall be enforced by action in the name of the city.

(2)    If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the lowest responsible bid is fifteen percent in excess of the engineer’s estimate, it shall provide for holding a hearing of objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid, and it shall direct the city manager to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice shall state the purpose, date, time, and place of said hearing. After the hearing the council shall determine whether said bid shall be accepted or rejected.


3.030 Preliminary Assessment.

After the council by resolution has created a local improvement district, the council shall direct the city manager to determine the proposed cost to each property benefitted by the improvement. If assessment is to be made prior to construction of the improvement said cost determination shall be based upon the estimates contained in the engineer’s report and said determination of proposed individual and specific property assessments shall be known as the preliminary preassessment roll. If assessment is to be made following construction of the improvement said determination shall be based upon actual construction costs and related costs and said determination of proposed individual and specific property assessment shall be known as the preliminary assessment roll. Notice of such proposed assessment shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed, which notice shall state the amounts of assessment proposed on that property and shall fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the City Manager. Such date shall be at least 14 days from the date of the mailing or personal delivery of the notices. Any objection filed with the City Manager must state the grounds of the objection.


3.035 Final Assessment.

(1)    The Council shall consider all objections to the preliminary assessment roll which are timely filed with the City Manager, and after such consideration the Council shall, by resolution levy, or amend and levy the proposed assessments presented by the City Manager, said assessments to be then known as either final assessment roll or final preassessment roll. Promptly after passage of the resolution levying the final assessments, the City Manager shall send by registered or certified mail a notice of final assessment to all owners of property being assessed.

(2)    The notice of final assessment shall contain the following:

(a)    A brief description of the improvement;

(b)    The procedure for cash payment or for applying for financing;

(c)    The final assessment levied on property owned by the recipient.


3.040 Method of Assessment.

The Council in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement may:

(1)    Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

(2)    Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefitted;

(3)    Authorize payment by the City of all, or any part of, the cost of any such improvement, when in the opinion of the Council the topographical or physical conditions, or unusual or excessive public travel, or other character of the work involved warrants only a partial payment or no payment by the benefitted property of the costs of the improvement.


3.045 Alternative Methods of Financing.

Nothing contained in Sections 3.000 to 3.105 shall preclude the Council from using any other available means of financing improvements, including Federal or State grants in aid, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or any other legal means of finance. In the event that such other means of financing improvements are used, the Council may, in its discretion levy special assessments according to the benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the costs of the improvement according to the procedures provided in Sections 3.000 to 3.105.


3.050 Remedies.

Subject to the curative provisions of Section 3.080 and the rights of the City to reassess as provided in Section 3.085, proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed not earlier than 30 days nor later than 60 days after the filing of written objections as provided herein. A property owner who has filed written objections with the City Manager prior to the consideration by the City Council of objections to the preliminary assessments, may have the right to apply for a writ of review based upon the City Council exercising its functions erroneously or arbitrarily or exceeding its jurisdiction to the injury of some substantial right of such owner if the facts supporting such claim have been specifically set forth in the written objections. A property owner who has filed written objection with the City Manager prior to the consideration by the City Council of objections to the preliminary assessments, may commence a suit for equitable relief based upon a total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the City; and if notice of the improvement has not been sent to the owner and if the owner did not have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the consideration by the City Council of objections to the preliminary assessments, then the owner may file written objections alleging lack of jurisdiction with the City Manager within 30 days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement. No provision of this section shall be construed so as to lengthen any period of redemption or so as to affect the running of any statute of limitations. Any proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the City Council to remedy or cure the alleged errors or defects.


3.055 Lien Records and Foreclosure Proceedings.

After passage of the final assessment resolution by the Council, the City Manager shall enter in the docket of City liens a statement of the amounts assessed upon each particular lot, parcel of land or portion thereof, together with a description of the improvement, the name of the owners and the date of the assessment resolution. Upon entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels of land or portions thereof, which have been assessed for such improvement. All assessment liens of the City shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as the laws of the State of Oregon permit. Interest shall be charged at the rate per annum set by resolution of the Council and subject to any legal requirements, until paid on all amounts not paid within 30 days from the date of the assessment resolution; and, after expiration of 30 days from the date of such assessment resolution of the City, provided the owner has not applied for Bancroft or other City-approved financing, the City may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the manner provided by the general law of the State of Oregon; provided, however, that the City may, at its option, enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale, which bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under the laws of the State of Oregon to redeem such property.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


3.060 Errors in Assessment Calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the City Manager, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the City Manager shall find there has been an error in fact, he or she shall recommend to the Council an amendment to the assessment resolution to correct such error, and upon enactment of such amendment, the City Manager shall make the necessary correction in the docket of City liens and send a correct notice of assessment by registered or certified mail.


3.065 Deficit Assessment.

In the event that an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained, and if it is found the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the Council may, by motion, declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The Council shall set a time for a hearing of objections to such deficit assessment and shall direct the City Manager to publish one notice at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. After such hearing the Council shall make a just and equitable deficit assessment by resolution, which shall be entered in the docket of City liens as provided by Sections 3.000 to 3.105, and notices of the deficit assessment shall be posted and mailed and the collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with applicable sections of Sections 3.000 to 3.105.


3.070 Rebates.

If, upon the completion of the improvement project, it is found the assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the costs of such improvements, then the Council must ascertain and declare the same by resolution, and when so declared, the excess amounts must be entered on the lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. In the event any assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same, or his or her legal representative, shall be entitled to the repayment of such rebate credit, or the portion thereof which exceeds the amount unpaid on the original assessment.


3.075 Abandonment of Proceedings.

The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements made under Sections 3.000 to 3.105 at any time prior to the final completion of such improvements; and if liens have been assessed upon any property under such procedure, they shall be canceled, and any payments made on such assessments shall be refunded to the person paying the same, his or her assigns or legal representatives.


3.080 Curative Provisions.

No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by reason of a failure of the engineer’s report to contain all of the information required by Section 3.005, or by reason of a failure to have all of the information required to be in the improvement resolution, the assessment resolution, the lien docket or notices required to be published and mailed, nor by the failure to list the name of, or mail notice to, the owner of any property as required by Sections 3.000 to 3.100, or by reason of any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein specified, unless it appears to the council that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining; and the council shall have the power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings.


3.085 Reassessment.

When any assessment, deficit or reassessment for any improvement which has been made by the City has been, or shall be, set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of this State, or any Federal court having jurisdiction thereof, or when the Council is in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment, or reassessment, or any part thereof, then the Council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by the laws of the State.


3.090 Bancroft Bonding Act.

The provisions of ORS 223.205 through 223.295, commonly known as the Bancroft Bonding Act, are adopted and made a part hereof by reference.


3.095 Mailing of Notices.

A notice shall be deemed mailed when it is sent to the owner’s address shown in the County Assessor’s records, to the owner’s last address known to the City, or to the owner at “West Linn, Oregon.”


3.100 Segregation of Assessments –  Fees.

Whenever an application has been made under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act as adopted in Section 3.090 and the application has been accepted and the payment of the assessment has been in fact financed by such procedure, the lien of such assessment may be segregated upon the following terms and conditions:

(1)    The property for which the segregation is to be made shall have been assessed as a unit and entered accordingly in the docket of liens.

(2)    There shall be no delinquent installments of principal or interest on the assessment of the entire parcel.

(3)    Written application shall be made to the City in such form as may be required, and such applications shall be accompanied by the fees established as provided in this section. The written application must be submitted by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of a parcel of real property that was formed from the partition or other division of the larger tract of real property against which the assessment was originally levied. No apportionment shall be granted unless the applicant filed a true copy of the deed, mortgage, or instrument creating the new parcel or parcels.

(4)    Apportionment of the assessment shall be made by the City Manager and approved by resolution of the City Council. In accomplishing apportionment, the installments remaining unpaid shall be prorated among the smaller parcels so that each parcel shall be charged with the percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment.

(5)    In order to help defray the costs of investigation, preparing legal descriptions, calculating an equitable division of the assessment and making lien docket entries, the City Council may by resolution establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fees to be paid with any application filed under this section. Such fees shall not be refundable if the application is disapproved or the applicant withdraws his or her application.


3.105 Deferral of Special Assessments for Local Improvements.

Certain persons may be eligible for deferral of special assessments for local improvements pursuant to ORS 311.702 through 311.735. The City will use the provisions of ORS 311.702 through 311.735 to process any request for deferral of special assessments for local improvements.

[Section 3.105 added by Ordinance No. 1441 approved August 23, 1999.]


ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


3.150 Definitions.

The following terms are definitions for the purposes of Sections 3.150 to 3.210 and mean as follows:

Advance Financing. Payment by a developer for installation of one or more public improvements installed pursuant to Sections 3.150 to 3.210 which intervening property owners may utilize upon reimbursing a proportional share of the cost of such public improvement to the developer.

Advance Financing Agreement. The agreement between a developer and the City which is authorized by the City Council and executed by the City Manager, providing for the installation of and payment for advance financed public improvements.

Advance Financing Reimbursement. The payment made by an intervening property owner to the City for utilization of an advance financed public improvement.

Advance Financing Resolution. A resolution adopted by the City Council which designates a public improvement as an advance financed public improvement and which contains provisions for an advanced financing agreement between the developer and the City.

Developer. The City, another municipal corporation, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, or any other entity, without limitation, who bears the expense of construction, purchase or installation of an advance financed public improvement.

Development. The real property owned by the developer.

Intervening property. The real property contiguous to or served by an advance financed public improvement but not including the development or public rights-of-way.

Owner. The fee holder of record of the legal title to an intervening property or the purchaser under a recorded land sales contract.

Public improvement. Any construction, reconstruction or upgrading of a water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer line, public street (including bicycle lanes) or sidewalk or undergrounding of public utilities.

Utilize. To apply for a building permit which will use or increase the use of an advance financed public improvement, to connect to an advance financed public improvement, or to otherwise increase the use of an advance financed public improvement. “Increase the use” means:

(1)    For sanitary sewer or storm sewer lines: to make a physical change requiring a building or development permit on the intervening property which increases the volume discharged into the line.

(2)    For water lines: to make a physical change requiring a building or development permit on the intervening property which increases the amount of water used.

(3)    For public streets: to make a physical change requiring a building or development permit on the intervening property which increases the trips on the street or creates a new entrance onto the street.

[Section 3.150 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.155 Application.

(1)    An application shall be required from a developer for city council approval of advance financing of public improvements. The application must be submitted before installation of the advance financed public improvement and no later than submission of the plans for the public improvement to be installed. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and notice pursuant to sections 3.150 to 3.210.

(2)    The application shall include the following:

(a)    A description of the location, type, size and cost of the public improvement to be advance financed.

(b)    A map showing intervening properties, both front footage total area computation of intervening properties, the development, and a list of intervening property owners with current mailing addresses.

(c)    The estimated date of completed installation.

(d)    The estimated cost of the public improvement.

(e)    The estimated reimbursement amount from each intervening property.

(f)    An acknowledgment by the developer that the application will be automatically withdrawn if the public improvements are tendered to and accepted by the city before the advance financing resolution is adopted and the advance financing agreement is entered into.

[Section 3.155 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.160 Report.

Upon receiving the application, the city manager shall review the advance financing proposal and submit a report to the city council for its review and discussion at a public hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled no more than 90 days from the date a completed application with all required information is received. The hearing shall not be held and the application shall be deemed withdrawn if the public improvements are tendered to and accepted by the city before the hearing.

The report shall include a map showing the location and area of intervening properties and of the development. The report shall also include the city engineer’s analysis of whether the estimated cost of the public improvements is reasonable, and the estimated advance financed reimbursement due from each intervening property owner.

[Section 3.160 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.165 Public Hearing.

Any person has the right to comment on the proposed advance financed public improvement and proposed reimbursement at the informational public hearing. Because an advance financed public improvement does not result in an assessment or lien, the public hearing is for informational purposes only and is not subject to mandatory termination because of remonstrances. The city council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether an advance financing resolution shall be adopted. The public hearing may not be continued past the date of acceptance by the city of the advance financed improvement.

[Section 3.165 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.170 Notice.

Notice of the application will be provided to the applicant and all intervening property owners at least 10 days before the hearing. Notice is effective when mailed. Failure of the developer or any intervening property owner to be sent or receive notice shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any advance financing resolution or the city council’s action.

[Section 3.170 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.175 Advance Financing Resolutions and Agreements.

After the public hearing pursuant to Section 3.165, if the city council desires to proceed with an advance financed public improvement, it shall pass an advance financing resolution. The resolution shall designate the advance financed improvements and provide for advance financed reimbursement by intervening property owners pursuant to sections 3.150 to 3.210. The resolution shall state the methodology for determining the amount of advance financed reimbursements. The city shall adopt a methodology that requires payment in proportion to geographic area, taking into account the geographic area of all intervening properties and the development, unless the geographic area methodology is inequitable. If the final costs of the advance financed improvements are known at the time of the resolution, the resolution shall set forth those costs. The resolution shall acknowledge any payment by an intervening property owner or agreement between intervening property owner and development that the city has notice of at the time the resolution is adopted. When the developer is other than the City, the advance financing resolution shall instruct the city manager to enter into an agreement with the developer pertaining to the advance financed public improvements. The agreement shall be signed by both parties before the City accepts the advance financed improvements. The agreement shall contain the following provisions:

(1)    The advance financed public improvements shall meet all applicable city standards.

(2)    The total advance financed reimbursement shall not exceed the actual cost of public improvements.

(3)    The developer shall guarantee the advance financed public improvement for a period of 18 months from the date of acceptance by the City.

(4)    The developer shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments or other costs or expense associated with the advance financed resolution and agreement.

(5)    The developer shall acknowledge that the City is not obligated to collect the advance financed reimbursement from intervening property owners.

(6)    Other provisions as the city council determines necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of Section 3.150 to 3.210.

[Section 3.175 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.180 Notice of Adoption of Resolution.

The city shall notify all intervening property owners and the developer of the adoption of an advance financing resolution. The notice shall be sent by first class mail and shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was adopted, and a short explanation of sections 3.150 to 3.210. The city shall record a copy of the resolution in the County Clerk deed records for each intervening property.

[Section 3.180 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.182 Approval of Cost Amount.

If the full costs of the advance financed improvements are not known when the advance financing resolution is adopted, the developer shall provide the city and all intervening property owners notice of the full amount of the costs within 10 business days of completion of the advance financed public improvements. Any notice recipient may object to the cost by filing a written objection within 14 days with the City Manager. If no objections to the costs are received within 14 days of the notice, the costs as stated in the notice shall not be subject to challenge. If written objections are received, the amount of actual costs shall be determined by the city council after a public hearing.

[Section 3.182 added by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.185 Advance Financed Reimbursement.

(1)    An advance financed reimbursement shall be imposed on all intervening properties, at such time as an intervening property owner or agent, employee or independent contractor or the intervening property owner, utilizes the advance financed improvements.

(2)    Reimbursement Rate. The intervening property owner shall be liable for advance financing reimbursement calculated as follows:

The intervening property’s proportionate share, as determined in the advance financing resolution, of the actual cost of the advance financed public improvement, increased by the current Prime Rate annual simple interest upon the anniversary of execution of the agreement.

(3)    Collection. The advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable to the city by intervening property owners upon utilization of an advance financed public improvement. If connection is made or construction commenced without required city permits, then the advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was required. No city permit of any kind for the intervening property shall be issued until the advance financed reimbursement is paid in full. As an alternative to payment through the City, an intervening property owner may pay the developer directly, provided that both the intervening property owner and developer report the payment to the City.

(4)    Public Hearing for Unpaid Advance Financed Reimbursement. Whenever the full advance financed reimbursement has not been paid and collected for any reason after it is due, the city manager shall report to the city council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the legal description of the intervening property on which the reimbursement is due, the date upon which the reimbursement was due and the intervening property owner’s name or names. The city council shall then, by motion, set a public hearing date and direct the city manager to give notice of that hearing to each of the identified intervening property owners, together with a copy of the city manager’s report concerning the unpaid advance financed reimbursement. Such notice may be either by certified mail or personal service. At the public hearing, the city council may accept, reject or modify the city manager’s report. If the city council accepts or rejects the city manager’s report and determines that the advance financed reimbursement is due but has not been paid for whatever reason, the city may take any action including all legal or equitable means necessary to collect the unpaid amount. An unpaid advance financing reimbursement shall prohibit any issuance of permits by the city for the intervening property.

[Section 3.185 amended by Ordinance No. 1446 approved April 24, 2000.]


3.190 Payment to Developer.

Developers shall receive all advance financed reimbursement collected by the city for their advance financed public improvements. Such reimbursement shall be delivered to the developer for a period of 10 years from and after the date the advance financing agreement has been executed. Such payments shall be made by the city within 90 days of receipt of the reimbursements.


3.195 Recording.

The advance financing resolution and agreement shall be recorded by the city in the Deed Records of Clackamas County, Oregon. Failure to record the resolution and agreement shall not affect the legality of an advance financing resolution or agreement.


3.200 Public Improvements.

Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city.


3.205 Multiple Public Improvements.

More than one public improvement may be the subject of an advance financing agreement or resolution.


3.210 Other Fees and Charges.

The advance financing reimbursement fee is in lieu of a local improvement district charge for the improvements installed pursuant to the reimbursement district agreement. The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit any other fee or charge collected by the city. [Section 3.210 replaced by wording in Ordinance No. 1480 approved January 9, 2002.]


WORK IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS


3.250 City Approval Required.

(1)    No person shall engage in any excavation, grading, surfacing, or paving operation or activity, or install, construct, or connect to any public sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or pipeline, or any other public utility or public improvement in the public right-of-way (ROW) or public utility easement (PUE) without first securing City authorization from the City Manager or City Engineer. All persons, other than the City or those working for or under contract with the City, must obtain a Public Works permit before engaging in any such activity. Any franchise utility whose franchise exempts the franchisee from obtaining a Public Works permit shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a Public Works permit before engaging in any such activity but shall still be bound by the requirement of Section 3.285 (Traffic Control Plans and Open Trenches). All work within the ROW/PUE shall be consistent with engineering plans, profiles, specifications, and standards approved by the City Engineer in accordance with City of West Linn requirements.

(2)    The City Manager or City Engineer may deny an application for a Public Works permit if the application would result in development of additional street area and the development does not further the City’s Transportation Plan, is not needed to improve traffic circulation within the City, or is otherwise not required by the public interest. The City Manager or City Engineer shall deny any permit application that is inconsistent with the City’s public works standards or that results in permanent interference with the transportation system or the provision of public utilities.

[Section 3.250 amended by Ordinance No. 1505 adopted July 21, 2004.]


3.255 Fees, Deposits, Financial Guarantees, and Administrative Requirements.

(1)    The standard fee for a Public Works ROW/PUE permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council and shall be due and payable at the time of the permit application. The fee shall be set in an amount to only cover the City’s costs in processing the permit. Charges for administering the permit, plan review, inspection and other associated charges shall be billed at the current billing rate for the employee performing the work or the direct cost of the consultant if used.

(2)    In addition to the permit fee, a deposit is required to cover the estimated costs of plan review and inspection of the work by the City to assure compliance with City standards and specifications. The City Engineer or designee shall set the deposit amount based on estimated construction costs. The City shall keep accurate records of the time and costs incurred in such review and inspections, and upon completion of the project, and its acceptance by the City, any amount remaining in the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. Any cost incurred by the City in excess of the amount of the deposit shall be billed to the permittee and shall be due and payable prior to approval and acceptance of the project by the City. Time spent in plan review and inspection shall be billed at the established hourly rate.

(3)    If a person is required to construct public improvements as a condition of a land use approval, the applicant shall post a cash deposit, bond, or other financial guarantee, acceptable to the City, in the amount of 125 percent of the value of the proposed work in the ROW/PUE. The bond shall remain valid until the City accepts the work and the work is covered by a satisfactory financial guarantee, maintenance bond, in the amount of 20 percent of the public improvements installed in the ROW/PUE for the maintenance period of 18 months from the date of acceptance by the City.

(4)    A person or entity obtaining a permit under this section must have and keep in full force and effect property damage and liability insurance in the amounts specified in Section 107.06.04 of the current West Linn Public Works Standards while performing any work in the public ROW/PUE. Certificates evidencing such insurance coverage shall be in a form acceptable to the City and such insurance shall be filed with the city at time of application for the permit.

(5)    All permittees and their contractors shall comply with all applicable requirements of this code, including requirements imposed by Sections 7.000 to 7.080 (pertaining to City business licenses).

[Section 3.255 amended by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004; amended by Ordinance No, 1598, adopted 09-13-2010.]


3.260 Standards.

All street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main and pipeline construction and any other construction within streets in the City shall be in accordance with the West Linn Design and Construction Manual or in accordance with any special provisions established by the City Engineer.

[Section 3.260 amended by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004.]


3.265 Street Sections and Construction Details.

Standard street sections and standard construction details shall be as specified in City’s standard drawings. No deviation from these standard drawings will be allowed without written findings documenting the need and written approval of the deviation being granted by the City Engineer.

[Section 3.265 amended by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004.]


3.270 Engineer’s Approval in Phases.

The City Engineer or his or her designee, prior to the placement or construction of any subsequent phase, layer, or course, shall approve each phase, layer, or course of work. Failure to comply with this section may be cause for requiring the removal and replacement of that phase, layer, or course which was placed without approval of the preceding course.

[Section 3.270 amended by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004.]


3.275 Contractor – Appointment of Project Superintendent.

A contractor shall employ competent and experienced workmen and foremen and for each project or contract shall designate a project superintendent who will be responsible for coordinating with the City on all aspects of the work.

[Section 3.275 amended by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004.]


3.280 Contractor – Submission of Plans.

Projects consisting of single house connections will not normally require submission of plans and specifications but can be usually conveyed by a sketch. For more complex installations requiring plans and specifications:

A contractor, or the person, firm, or corporation employing the contractor, shall be responsible for the preparation of, and submission to the City for approval, all plans and specifications covering any work in any ROW/PUE.

These plans and specifications are to be prepared by, and bear the seal of, a professional engineer registered in the State of Oregon. This engineer or his or her duly authorized representative shall set all grade, line, and other control stakes.

[Section 3.280 amended by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004.]


3.285 Traffic Control Plans and Open Trenches.

(1)    No work in the public ROW will be authorized without first submitting and receiving approval from the City Engineer of a project traffic control plan.

(2)    No trenches shall remain open in the ROW after normal working hours. Plating will be allowed for no longer than 24 hours.

[Section 3.285 added by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004.]


3.290 Unauthorized Work in the Right- of-Way.

Any violation of Sections 3.250 through 3.285 is a Class A violation. 

[Section 3.290 added by Ordinance No. 1505, adopted 07-21-2004; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS (STREET/UTILITY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS)


3.300 Public Works Standards.

(1)    All public works shall be designed and constructed according to the City of West Linn Public Works Standards, a copy of which is on file at City Hall. The City of West Linn Public Works Standards may be amended as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section.

(2)    The City Engineer may amend technical provisions and standards of the City of West Linn Public Works Standards. Public notice of technical amendments shall be posted in City Hall 30 days prior to the effective date of the amendments.

(3)    All provisions of the City of West Linn Public Works Standards may be amended by resolution of the City Council upon recommendation by the City Engineer.

(4)    The City Engineer is authorized to enforce all the provisions of the City of West Linn Public Works Standards. The City Engineer shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of the City of West Linn Public Works Standards. The City Engineer is authorized to issue stop work orders as needed in the enforcement of these standards.

(5)    Any violation of the City of West Linn Public Works Standards shall constitute a Class A violation. Each day that a violation exists is a separate violation. For purposes of this section, defects in design or construction that are corrected without delay and prior to acceptance of the public works by the City by the person responsible for the design or construction shall not constitute a violation.

(6)    Any uncorrected violation of the City of West Linn Public Works Standards shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated as provided in Sections 5.400 to 5.527.

[Ordinance No. 1238, adopted 07-13-1988. Section 3.300 amended by Ordinance No. 1449, adopted 05-22-2000; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE


3.350 Definition of “Sidewalk.”

“Sidewalk” means the part of the street right-of-way between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, and includes a culvert located in a part of the street.


3.355 Repair of Sidewalks.

It is the duty of the owner of land abutting a sidewalk to maintain the sidewalk in good repair and safe condition.


3.360 Liability for Sidewalk Injuries.

(1)    The owner of real property abutting a sidewalk is liable to any person injured because of failure by the owner to maintain the sidewalk in good repair or safe condition.

(2)    If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to any person caused by the failure of an owner to maintain a sidewalk in good repair or safe condition, the owner shall reimburse the city for the amount of the damages thus paid, and for the attorney fees and costs of defending against the claim for damages. The city may maintain an action in court to enforce the provisions of this section.


3.365 Standards and Specifications.

Sidewalks shall be constructed, altered, and repaired in accordance with standards and specifications determined by the public works director.


3.370 Submission of Plans.

No person shall construct, alter, or repair a sidewalk without first submitting the plans and specifications for the proposed work and obtaining a permit. The application for a permit shall be made to the city manager. The city manager may issue a permit for the proposed work upon finding that the plan conforms with the applicable standards and specifications.


3.375 Supervision of Work.

The construction, alteration, or repair of sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the public works director. The public works director may inspect materials and construction details that in the public works director’s judgment may be necessary to ensure compliance with the plans and the applicable standards and specifications.


3.380 Notice to Construct, Alter, or Repair Sidewalk.

(1)    When the council determines that a sidewalk needs construction, alteration, or repair, it shall by resolution direct the city manager to issue a notice.

(2)    The notice shall require the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk to complete the work within 60 days after service of notice. The notice shall also state that if the work is not completed by the owner within the 60 days, the city reserves the right to complete it and assess the cost against the property abutting the sidewalk.

(3)    The city manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be served personally upon the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the notice may be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If after diligent search the owner is not discovered, the city manager shall post a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the property, and the posting shall be considered to have the same effect as personal service of notice upon the owner of the property.

(4)    The person serving the notice shall file with the manager a return of service, reciting the time, place, and manner of service.


3.385 City May Construct, Alter, or Repair Sidewalk.

If the sidewalk alteration or repair is not completed within 60 days after service of the notice, the public works director may complete it if so directed by the council. On completion of the project, the public works director shall submit a report to the council containing an itemized statement of costs.


3.390 Assessment for Sidewalk Work Done by City.

After receipt of the report, the council, by ordinance, shall assess the cost of the work against the property abutting the sidewalk. The assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be levied and collected in the same manner as is provided for in the city’s general local improvement assessment procedures.


3.395 Sidewalk Construction Requested by the Property Owner.

If a property owner petitions the council for an order to build a sidewalk on the part of the street abutting on his or her property, agrees to pay cash or to make application to pay the cost in installments as provided by the Bancroft Bonding Act, ORS 223.205, waives the right of service and publication of notice of construction, and consents to the assessment of the property upon which the sidewalk abuts, the council may order the construction of the sidewalk.


Chapter 4 UTILITIES

SEWER REGULATIONS

4.000    Definitions.

4.002    Environmental Services Utility and Fund.

4.003    Policy.

4.005    Use of Public Sewers Required – Subsurface Disposal Systems.

4.010    Discontinuance of Sewer Service by Customer.

4.015    Responsibility for Sewer Charges, Delinquent Payments, Water Shut Off for Nonpayment, Security Deposit Required and Charge for Nonsufficient Funds.

4.020    Prohibited Actions.

4.025    Private Sewage Disposal.

4.030    Building Sewers and Connections.

4.040    Application for Building Sewer Permit.

4.045    Maintenance and Damage Responsibility for Private Sewer Lines.

4.050    Use of Public Sewers.

4.055    Protection From Damage.

4.060    Sealing of Abandoned Septic Tanks Required.

SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT

4.062    Storm Sewer Policy.

4.063    General Discharge Prohibitions.

4.065    City Responsibilities.

4.070    Private Responsibilities.

4.072    Charges for Storm Drainage Service.

4.075    Enforcement.

4.080    Request for Service.

4.082    Administration Regulations.

4.085    Reduced Storm Drainage Service Charges for Low Income Citizens.

4.090    Appeal.

SIDE SEWER INSTALLATION

4.100    Adoption of Specifications.

4.105    Council Findings.

4.110    Licensing of Sewer Contractors.

WATER REGULATIONS

4.150    Connection Fees and Meter Charges.

4.155    Rates.

4.160    Use of Water.

4.165    Service Pipe Standards.

4.170    Installation of Service Pipes.

4.175    Installation of Fire Services, Larger Diameter Meters, Infill Development and Infill Fire Hydrants, and Related Minor Main Extensions or System Modifications.

4.180    Service Pipe Maintenance.

4.185    Discontinuance of Water Service by Customer.

4.190    Separate Service Pipe Required.

4.195    Prohibited Use of Water.

4.200    Alteration to or Operation of the System.

4.205    Water Shut Off – Notice.

4.210    Right of Inspection.

4.215    Buildings Not Supplied With City Water.

4.220    Meter Test.

4.225    Violation.

4.230    Compliance Required.

4.235    Responsibility for Water Charges, Delinquent Payment, Water Shut Off for Nonpayment, Security Deposit Required and Charge for Nonsufficient Funds.

4.240    Permits – Customer’s Consent Required.

4.245    Limitations on Use.

4.250    Findings and Declaration of a Water Emergency.

4.255    Levels of Prohibition.

4.260    Enforcement.

4.265    Penalties.

4.270    Amendments, Special Rules, Contracts.

WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTION

4.300    Purpose and Scope.

4.305    Definitions.

4.310    Cross Connections.

4.315    Use of Backflow Prevention Assemblies.

4.320    Cross Connection Inspection.

4.325    Liability.

4.330    Penalties.

SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

4.400    Purpose.

4.405    Scope.

4.410    Definitions.

4.415    System Development Charge Imposed; Method for Establishment.

4.420    Methodology.

4.425    Authorized Expenditure.

4.430    Expenditure Restrictions.

4.435    Project Plan.

4.440    Collection of Charge.

4.442    Delay of Payment.

4.445    Installment Payment.

4.450    Exemptions.

4.452    Credits.

4.453    Credit for Existing Use.

4.455    Credit Against Improvement Fee.

4.457    Capital Improvement Credit.

4.460    Segregation and Use of Revenue.

4.465    Appeal Procedure.

4.470    Prohibited Connection.

4.475    Effect of Annexation.

4.480    Penalty.

4.485    Construction.

SOLID WASTE REGULATIONS

4.500    Rental Property Requirements.

4.501    Applicability.

4.502    Definitions.

4.503    Payment Responsibility.

4.505    Notification of Missed Collection or Billing Errors.

4.507    Location of Receptacles.

4.509    Set Out Time for Receptacles.

4.511    General Preparation of Materials.

4.513    Weight of Receptacles.

4.515    Putrescible Waste Storage.

4.517    Drop Box Collection.

4.519    Preparation of Recyclable Materials.

4.520    Business Recycling Requirements.

4.521    Preparation of Yard Debris Materials.

4.523    Preparation of Other Solid Waste.

4.525    Disposal of Unacceptable Solid Waste Materials.

4.526    Violation.

4.528    Business Food Waste Requirement.

ROADWAY MAINTENANCE SERVICE

4.550    Purpose.

4.552    Definitions.

4.555    Roadway Maintenance Service Fees Shall Only be Used for Qualifying Roadway Maintenance Service Expenditures.

4.560    Establishment and Revision of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

4.562    Duties of Director of Public Works.

4.564    Duties of Finance Director.

4.570    Calculation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Residential Units.

4.572    Calculation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Non- Residential Uses.

4.574    Calculation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Mixed Uses.

4.575    Annual Review of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

4.580    Reduced Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Low Income Residents.

4.581    Initiation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

4.582    Billing and Collection of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

4.585    Recovery of Unpaid Charges - Enforcement.

4.590    Moneys to be Paid into Roadway Maintenance Fund.

4.595    Appeal.

PARKS UTILITY SERVICE

4.600    Purpose.

4.605    Definitions.

4.620    Parks Utility Service Fees Shall Only be Used for Qualifying Park Utility Service Expenditures.

4.630    Duties of Director of Parks and Recreation.

4.640    Establishment and Revision of Parks Utility Service Fee.

4.650    Amount of Fee.

4.655    Reduced Parks Utility Service Fee for Low Income Residents.

4.660    Billing and Collection of Parks Utility Service Fee.

4.670    Recovery of Unpaid Charges - Enforcement.

4.680    Moneys to be Paid into Parks Utility Fund.

4.690    Appeal.

UTILITY STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT

4.700    Purpose and Scope.

4.710    Municipal Water.

INSUFFICIENT UTILITY CUSTOMER PAYMENTS

4.800    Allocation of Insufficient Utility Customer payments.

 


SEWER REGULATIONS


4.000 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in sections 4.000 to 4.090, shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.

Building Drain. That part of the lower horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewers, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building walls.

Building Sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.

Combined Sewer. A sewer designed and intended to receive both storm water and non-storm water sewage.

Development. Any man made change to improved or unimproved real property, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

Dwelling Unit or DU. That part of a building or structure which contains one or more rooms with a bathroom and kitchen facilities designed for occupancy by one family.

Equivalent Service Unit or ESU. An area of impervious surface which is estimated to place approximately equal demand on the city’s storm drainage system as that placed by a single dwelling unit. One ESU shall be equal to 2,914 square feet of impervious surface. This figure was obtained through a statistical analysis of impervious area on lots with single-dwelling units within West Linn. This analysis concluded that the average single dwelling unit contains 2,914 square feet of impervious area.

Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

Impervious surface. Any surface area which either prevents or retards saturation of water into the land surface, or a surface which causes water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, oiled or macadam surfaces or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration or increase runoff patterns.

Improved Premises. Any area which the public works director determines has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than that which could historically have been expected. “Improved premises” does not include public roads under the jurisdiction of the city, county, state or federal government.

Industrial Wastes.

(1)    The liquid wastes from any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the “Standard Industrial Classification Manual”, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions:

(a)    Division A Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;

(b)    Division B Mining;

(c)    Division D Manufacturing;

(d)    Division E Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services;

(e)    Division I Services.

(2)    A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

Manufactured Home Park. Has the same meaning as the term used in Section 36.030 of the West Linn Community Development Code.

Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.

On site Control System. A storm drainage facility which the public works director has determined prevents the discharge or substantially reduces the discharge of storm water, or nonpoint source pollution into a receiving water or public storm drainage facility.

Open Drainageway. A natural or man made path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of conveying natural stream water or storm runoff water.

pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

Person Responsible. The owner, agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser or other person having possession of property, or if no person is in possession, then the person in control of the use of property, or in control of the supervision of development on property.

Properly Shredded Garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

Public Sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.

Public Works Director. The person or agent designated by the city manager.

Runoff Control. Any measure approved by the public works director by which storm water runoff from impervious surface is controlled.

Sanitary Sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority, and which is designed and intended to exclude storm water.

Sewage. A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present, including combined sewer flows when authorized by the City. Sewage also includes the separate collection, transportation and treatment of storm water through the storm drainage system.

Sewage Treatment Plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

Sewage Works. All facilities for collecting, transportation, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.

Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

Slug. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation.

Storm Drain or Storm Sewer. A sewer designed and intended to carry only stormwater and surface water and drainage.

Storm Drainage Service. The operations of the city’s storm drainage system in providing programs and facilities for maintaining, improving, regulating, collecting, and managing storm water quantity and quality within the city’s service area.

Storm Drainage System. Any structure or configuration of ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where storm water flows or is accumulated, including but not limited to pipes, sewers, curbs, gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainageways and their appurtenances. “Storm drainage system” does not include the Willamette or Tualatin Rivers or creeks expressly excluded by action of the city.

Storm Water. Water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from any source, drainage and nonseptic waste water.

Suspended Solids. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

[Section 4.000, Definitions, amended by Ordinance No. 1437, effective July 1, 1999.]


4.002 Environmental Services Utility and Fund.

There is hereby created the Environmental Services Utility and Fund. The Fund shall be known as the Environmental Services Fund.

[Section 4.002 added by Ordinance No. 1437, effective July 1, 1999.]


4.003 Policy.

(1)    The sewerage system for the City shall be known as the Environmental Services Utility. It is composed of the sanitary sewer, storm sewer and combined sewer systems. ORS Chapters 224, 454 and 468B authorize local governments to provide a sewage system which separately, or in combination, collects, transports and treats sanitary and storm waters. The City Council determines that the combination of the previously existing separate sanitary and storm water utilities will result in the most efficient method of carrying out the authority granted by these provisions.

(2)    The fund for the City’s sewerage system shall be known as the Environmental Services Fund. All revenue collected from charges imposed under Section 4.005 and 4.072 shall be placed in the Fund. Money in the Fund shall be used for planning, design, construction, regulation, maintenance and administration of the sewage system and providing sewage service, including repayment of indebtedness incurred after the effective date of this provision, and for all expenses of any kind incurred in the operation and management of the Environmental Services Utility and providing sewage service.

(3)    Rate increases for the Environmental Services Utility are subject to the provisions of Section 44 of the City Charter. The storm sewer and sanitary sewer systems were separate systems at the time Section 44 was approved by the voters. Section 44 does not prevent the combination of utilities. For the purposes of consideration of rate increases, the Environmental Services Utility is one utility system. Any rate increase for the Environmental Services Utility is subject to the provisions of Section 44 as a single utility system.

[Section 4.003 added by Ordinance No. 1437, effective July 1, 1999.]


4.005 Use of Public Sewers Required –  Subsurface Disposal Systems.

(1)    All premises on which there is located any building, structure, mobile home, motor home, vacation trailer, or any other facility containing sinks, water closets, bathtubs, showers, or any device for receiving sewage and/or waste water shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer system in all cases where such sewers are adjacent to, or within 200 feet of, such premises. Connection to the sanitary sewer shall not be required of any motor home, vacation trailer, or camper which is parked on the premises for storage only. All existing premises located adjacent to or within 200 feet of a city sanitary sewer at the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in sections 4.000 to 4.060 shall connect to said sanitary sewer within 90 days of receiving written notice from the city manager to connect to said sanitary sewer.

(2)    No cesspools, septic tanks, subsurface disposal field, leaching bed, or wet wall shall be installed or utilized for the purpose of disposal of sewage or waste water from any premises which are adjacent to, or within 200 feet of, a city sanitary sewer.

(3)    (a) Properly designed and approved subsurface disposal systems may be approved for installation where premises to be served are not adjacent to, or within 200 feet of, a city sanitary sewer.

(b)    Complete detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted with each application for a permit for a subsurface disposal system. These plans and specifications shall include, as a minimum, the following information:

(i)    Topographic map of the lot or parcel showing existing elevations, drainage channels and/or drainage patterns, together with a detailed, scaled, plot plan showing all existing or proposed and detailed layout of the proposed subsurface disposal system;

(ii)    A valid permit, issued by the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality, or the County Public Works Department.

(4)    All permits issued for installation of subsurface disposal systems subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance codified in sections 4.000 to 4.060 shall be granted under the express condition and agreement, that, within 90 days following the installation of sanitary sewers adjacent to, or within 200 feet of, the premises, the use of such subsurface disposal system shall be discontinued and the premises connected to the sanitary sewer. Abandonment of the subsurface disposal systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 4.060 of this code.

(5)    (a) No storm water including drainage from roof drains, area or driveway drains, swimming pools, catch basins or storm sewers, springs, or any other source other than normal plumbing devices, shall be connected to or allowed to enter any sanitary sewer without prior approval by the City for that sewer to become a combined sewer.

(b)    Basement drains may be connected to sanitary sewers provided there is no excess water in such basement and such drain shall receive only that water which may seep into a concrete lined basement or such water as may be used for cleaning such basement.

(6)    (a) No person, firm, or corporation shall install, construct, or lay any sanitary sewer pipe connecting to the city sanitary sewer system, or install, construct, or utilize any subsurface disposal system, without first making proper application, paying the required fee, and receiving a duly authorized permit from the city.

(b)    Issuance of such permit, and all installations, authorized thereby, shall be in full conformance with all requirements of sections 4.000 to 4.060 and all other applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, and rules and regulations of the Oregon State Plumbing Code. No portion may be covered prior to approval by the city.

(7)    No matter, material, or substance other than sewage, shall be permitted to enter the sanitary sewer system, and no matter, material, or substance of any kind shall be deposited in any manhole or cleanout except such cleaning or flushing materials or substances as may be authorized or directed by the city manager. No commercial, manufacturing, or processing wastes and no septic tank or cesspool contents or effluent shall be placed in any sanitary sewer system, unless a permit therefor shall have been first obtained from the city. Such permit will be issued only under conditions, and for such materials, as may be designated by the city.

(8)    Any existing private sewer line or house service line connecting to any city sanitary sewer and which is deemed to be a hazard to public health due improper construction, deterioration, lack of repair and maintenance, or from any other cause shall, upon determination of the existence of such hazard by the city manager, be repaired as directed by the city manager. Such repairs shall be completed within 30 days of the date of delivery to the owner or occupant of the property of written notice to make the repairs.

(9)    Any subsurface disposal system which is found to be malfunctioning as determined by the county soil scientist, D.E.Q., or the city manager, shall be repaired by the owner or occupant of the property within 30 days of delivery of written notice to make such repairs. All premises which are determined to have a malfunctioning subsurface disposal system, and are adjacent to, or within 200 feet of, a City sanitary sewer, shall be connected to said sanitary sewer within 90 days of receiving written notice from the City Manager to connect to said sanitary sewer, and the subsurface disposal system shall be abandoned in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.060.

(10) (a) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to connect to the sanitary sewer system or to install a subsurface disposal system shall make written application therefor to the City.

(b)    Such application shall be accompanied by a connection fee and in an amount conforming to the connection fee required by the Tri-City Service District at the time of the application for a sewer connection.

(c)    The Tri-City Service District is a service district under the jurisdiction of the Clackamas County Commission, which has the authority to establish sewer connection fee and sewer service charge within the City.

(d)    The collection of the connection fee by the City is not to be construed as constituting the imposition of that fee by the City. Collection by the City occurs only for the purpose of providing convenient administration for the benefit of applicants.

(e)    In the event of future revisions in the equivalent service unit connection fee and/or the sewer service charges by the Tri-City Service District, applications for sewer connections submitted after the effective date of such revised equivalent sewer connection unit fee and sewer service charges incurred after the effective date of such revised sewer service charge shall be charged the then prevailing connection fee and/or sewer service charge.

(11)    The sewer service charge schedule established for the Tri-City Service District by the Clackamas County Commission is established as the sewer service charge for the City with such changes being effective on the effective date of the adoption of the Clackamas County Commission orders regarding establishment and revision of such sewer service charges. The Tri-City sewer service charge is the charge passed through to the City for sewage treatment.

(12)    Any sewer service charges within the City which are above and in addition to the pass-through rates charged by the Tri-City Service District, as established by the Clackamas County Commission, may be set by resolution of the City Council. The additional City charge may not increase by more than five percent in any calendar year without voter approval. Any request for an additional charge increase shall be referred to the Utility Advisory Board for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. The rates for sewer service charges and rates for storm drainage fees established by Section 4.072(2)(d) may be considered separately or in combination. The sum total increase that results from separate or combined consideration is the increase for the Environmental Service Utility system for the purpose of the five percent limitation of Section 44 of the City Charter. If considered separately the combined rate increase shall not exceed five percent in any calendar year without voter approval. If the Utility Advisory Board fails to refer a recommendation to the Council within 60 days of receipt of the request for consideration, the Council may consider the request without a Utility Advisory Board recommendation.

(13)    Reduced Sewer Service Charges for Low Income Citizens.

(a)    Reduced sewer service charges shall be made available to low income citizens meeting the eligibility requirements pursuant to Section 4.155.

(b)    This section shall in no way limit any similar reduction in sewer service charges by the Tri-City Service District for its portion of the rates.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1437, effective July 1, 1999; amended by Ordinance No. 1468, effective March 16, 2001.]


4.010 Discontinuance of Sewer Service by Customer.

(1)    Whenever any water customer wishes to have their sewer service discontinued for a period not less than 15 days, the customer shall apply in writing to the water office and pay their account balance in full. Water service will be turned off and turned on again at no charge to the customer and any unbilled charges for sewer services shall be prorated, based on the actual days of service provided during the billing cycle.

(2)    In the event a water customer wishes to have their sewer service discontinued for a period less than 15 days, the customer shall apply in writing to the water office, pay their account balance in full and pay a $20.00 service charge. Any unbilled charges for sewer services shall be prorated, based on actual days of service provided during the billing cycle.

(3)    Water service will not be turned off and turned on again without written notice and receipt of payment as prescribed in this section.


4.015 Responsibility for Sewer Charges, Delinquent Payments, Water Shut Off for Nonpayment, Security Deposit Required and Charge for Nonsufficient Funds.

(1)    The customer shall be responsible for all charges for sewer service.

(2)    Whenever any sewer charge is not paid when due, the Water Department may discontinue service by shutting off water service for nonpayment. Water shall not be returned to service until the customer pays, or makes arrangements to pay, their account balance in full and any additional service charges set by resolution of the Council. Upon receipt of these payments at the Water Office during regular office hours, the customer’s water service will be restored by the City during regular working hours. Written notice for discontinuing water service for nonpayment of charges shall be given to the customer by regular mail, or by posting a notice on the premises at least 10 days in advance of the shut off. The notice shall state that if the charges are disputed, the responsible customer may request an informal conference with the City Manager or his/her designee. Such request must be received no later than two days prior to the scheduled shut off date.

(3)    The City may require security (cash) deposits prior to providing, or to continue providing, sewer service to any customer. The amount of the security deposit may not be less than one or more than four months minimum billing charges. In lieu of a deposit, the City may accept a signed agreement from the property owner (whether the customer or not) stating that they will be ultimately liable for any and all charges for services provided to the premises, and that the City may use a lien as one method for securing payment if the charges are not paid. However, the City may not require a property owner to sign such an agreement. If the property owner elects to authorize the use of a lien on real property to secure payment of charges in lieu of a security deposit, all sewer charges shall be a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing. The entry of charges on the City’s ledgers or other records pertaining to its lien shall be made accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for services remains unpaid, the lien hereby created may be foreclosed in the manner provided for by ORS 223.610, or in any other manner provided by law or City ordinance.

(4)    When a customer’s check is returned for nonsufficient funds, the City shall charge a fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council.

[Section 4.015(4) amended by Ordinance No. 1492, adopted December 18, 2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


4.020 Prohibited Actions.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.

(2)    It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of Sections 4.000 to 4.060.

(3)    Except as herein provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.


4.025 Private Sewage Disposal.

(1)    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Sections 4.000 to 4.060, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of Sections 4.000 to 4.060.

(2)    The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Environmental Quality of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.

(3)    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.

(4)    No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements which may be imposed by the Department of Environmental Quality, county soil scientist, or the City.


4.030 Building Sewers and Connections.

(1)    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.

(2)    There shall be three classes of building sewer permits: For single-family residential service; for service to multifamily residential buildings; and for commercial establishments. In any case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City.

(3)    The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent by the city. A permit and inspection fee shall be as provided in Section 4.005(10).

(4)    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.

(5)    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where otherwise approved by the City.

(6)    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the City, to meet all requirements of Sections 4.000 to 4.060.

(7)    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City and State.

(8)    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.

(9)    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of stormwater runoff of groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer without prior written approval from the City to create a combined sewer.

(10)    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City or State. All such connections shall be made gastight or watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the City before installation.

(11)    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City.

(12)    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work, shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999.]


4.040 Application for Building Sewer Permit.

(1)    Application for a building sewer permit to connect to a sanitary sewer line shall be made contemporaneously with the application for a building permit for the building or structure which is to be connected to the sanitary sewer line, except when the building sewer permit is to allow connection to a sanitary sewer line from a building or structure already in existence and already serviced by a subsurface disposal system; and further provided, that such building or structure serviced by a subsurface disposal system is not in the process of being enlarged or altered so as to require the issuance of a building permit.

(2)    Every building sewer permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if connection is not made to a sanitary sewer line within 120 days from the date of issuance of such permit. In the event a building sewer permit so expires, before a connection to a sanitary sewer line is made, the building sewer permit fee for connection to a sanitary sewer line which has previously been paid is not refundable.

(3)    Before a connection can be made in the event of the expiration of a building sewer permit, a new sewer permit fee shall be obtained to do so, and the sewer permit fee for connection to a sanitary sewer line shall be one half the amount required for a new building sewer permit fee; provided, that no significant changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for the structure which will be connected to the sanitary sewer line; and provided further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year from the original issuance of the building sewer permit.


4.045 Maintenance and Damage Responsibility for Private Sewer Lines.

The customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the private sewer line from the public sewer connection to the premises served. The City shall not be liable for any damage accruing from the failure of a private sewer or of fixtures or appurtenances attached thereto.


4.050 Use of Public Sewers.

(1)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer without prior written approval from the City to create a combined sewer.

(2)    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the City, to a combined sewer, storm sewer, or natural outlet.

(3)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

(a)    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;

(b)    Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l or CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;

(c)    Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;

(d)    Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

(4)    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the City, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In determining the acceptability of these wastes, the City will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. Substances prohibited are:

(a)    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius);

(b)    Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees and 65 degrees Celsius);

(c)    Any garbage that has not been property shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the City;

(d)    Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;

(e)    Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City for such materials;

(f)    Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters;

(g)    Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the City in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;

(h)    Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;

(i)    Materials which exert or cause:

(i)    Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);

(ii)    Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);

(iii)    Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;

(iv)    Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein;

(j)    Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.

(5)    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this section, and which, in the judgment of the City, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:

(a)    Reject the wastes;

(b)    Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;

(c)    Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

(d)    Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section 4.005(10).

(6)    If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.

(7)    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999.]


4.055 Protection From Damage.

No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.


4.060 Sealing of Abandoned Septic Tanks Required.

It is unlawful or any owner of a septic tank to abandon the tank without first completely pumping same out. All septic tank roofs shall be removed and the tank filled with sand and water settled. If the tank is constructed of concrete and in good condition it need not be pumped out and filled with sand. The concrete roof shall be permanently sealed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or his or her representative. The septic tank shall be inspected and approved by the City Engineer or his or her representative before the tank is covered.


SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT


4.062 Storm Sewer Policy.

(1)    Pursuant to the general laws of the State of Oregon and the powers granted in the charter of the City, the Council does hereby declare its intention to acquire, own, construct, reconstruct, equip, operate, regulate and maintain within the City limits of the City, and outside the City limits when consistent with the Council’s adopted policies or intergovernmental agreements, a storm drainage system, as an integral part of the Environmental Services Utility and also, when authorized by law, to require persons responsible to construct, reconstruct, maintain and extend the storm drainage system.

(2)    The improvement of both public and private storm drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be provided by the person responsible for the development. Said improvements shall comply with all applicable City ordinances, policies and standards.

(3)    No portion of Sections 4.000 to 4.090 or statement herein or subsequent interpretations or policies shall relieve any property owner of assessments levied against real property for a local improvement project or for abating conditions on the property that violate any provision of this code.

[Amended and renumbered 4.062 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously Section 4.555, Policy]


4.063 General Discharge Prohibitions.

(1)    It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly into the City storm sewer system and/or a surface water body, any of the following:

(a)    Any discharge having a visible sheen;

(b)    Any discharge having a pH of less than 6.0 Standard Units (S.U.) or greater than 9.0 (S.U.);

(c)    Any discharge that contains toxic chemicals in toxic concentrations;

(d)    Any discharge that contains visible floating solids;

(e)    Any discharge which causes or may cause damage to the City’s storm sewer system;

(f)    Any discharge which causes interference in the City’s storm sewer system;

(g)    Any discharge which causes or may cause a nuisance or hazard to the City’s system, City personnel or the receiving waters.

[Section 4.063 added by Ordinance No. 1453, adopted 06-12-00.]


4.065 City Responsibilities.

The City shall manage public storm drainage facilities located on City owned property, City right-of-way, and City easements through the Environmental Services Utility. Public storm drainage facilities that may be managed by the City include but are not limited to:

(1)    An open drainageway serving a drainage basin within the City;

(2)    A piped drainage system and its related appurtenance which have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the City;

(3)    Roadside drainage ditches along unimproved City streets;

(4)    Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention systems, retention systems, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the City.

[Amended and renumbered 4.065 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously Section 4.560, City Responsibilities]


4.070 Private Responsibilities.

(1)    Storm drainage facilities to be managed by the person responsible include but are not limited to:

(a)    A storm drainage facility not located on City owned property, City right-of-way, or City easement;

(b)    A private parking lot storm drain;

(c)    Any roof, footing, or area drain;

(d)    A storm drainage facility not designed and constructed for use by the general public;

(e)    An open drainageway;

(f)    Access drive culverts in the public right-of-way or on private property;

(g)    A detention, retention or treatment system, in the construction of which the City did not financially participate.

(2)    Any person responsible shall keep open drainageways on property which they possess or control cleared of debris and vegetation as required by Sections 5.400 to 5.430.

(3)    Any person responsible for non-public storm treatment and detention facilities such as catch basins, manholes, filter systems, rain gardens, etc., shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the City, and maintain such facilities so as to prevent flooding or damage to other property not possessed or controlled by the person responsible and to prevent injury to any person or property not owned or controlled by the person responsible.

(a)    The maintenance agreement shall be recorded in the deed records of Clackamas County, Oregon.

(4)    Any person responsible shall not alter a detention, retention or treatment system from its original properly functioning condition or intended design without prior approval of the City Engineer.

(5)    Private parking lots and private streets must be swept or cleaned at least semi-annually. Prior to the sweeping or cleaning, bio-filter bags (or filter fabric inlet sacks) must be installed to prevent pollution during the maintenance effort from entering the City’s storm drainage system and impacting downstream water quality. The property owner or manager must certify every year through a cleaning contractor that the inspections and cleanings have been completed.

(6)    The failure of any person responsible to comply with the obligations stated in subsection (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section is in violation.

(7)    The conditions on private property which may result in situations proscribed by subsection (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section are declared to be a danger to public health and safety and therefore are a nuisance to be abated as provided in Sections 5.400 to 5.430.

[Renumbered 4.070 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously numbered Section 4.565; Section 4.070 amended by Ordinance No. 1489, adopted 09-18-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1564, adopted 04-14-2008.]


4.072 Charges for Storm Drainage Service.

(1)    Except as the fees may be reduced under subsection (4) of this section, the obligation to pay storm drainage fees arises whenever there is a request for storm drainage service for an improved premises. Unless another person responsible has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the City, the person receiving the City’s water utility charge bill shall pay the storm drainage fees set by Council resolution. If there is no water service to the property or if water service is discontinued and the property is an improved premises, the storm drainage fees shall be paid by the person responsible for the property. The person required to pay the fee is hereafter referred to as the “customer.”

(2)    The Council may by resolution establish fees and charges necessary to provide and operate a storm drainage system and service. When establishing the fees for storm drainage service the Council shall:

(a)    Establish a monthly service rate for a structure on an individual lot which contains one, two or three dwelling units at the rate set for one ESU for each dwelling unit in the structure.

(b)    Establish a monthly service rate for all customers not included in subsection (2)(a) of this section, which is calculated by dividing the total measured area of impervious surface by 2,914 square feet and rounding the result to the nearest whole number. The rate to be charged is this whole number multiplied by the rate set for one ESU.

(c)    Establish a monthly service rate for manufactured home parks in the manner established by subsection (2)(b) of this section.

(d)    Storm drainage fees shall be placed in the Environmental Services Fund. Any rate increase may not exceed five percent in any calendar year without voter approval. Any request for an increase shall be referred to the Utility Advisory Board for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. The rates for sewer service charges established by Section 4.005(12) and rates for storm drainage fees may be considered separately or in combination. The sum total increase that results from separate or combined consideration is the increase for the Environmental Service Utility system for the purpose of the five percent limitation of Section 44 of the City Charter. If considered separately the combined rate increase shall not exceed five percent in any calendar year without voter approval. If the Utility Advisory Board fails to refer a recommendation to the Council within 60 days of receipt of the request for consideration, the Council may consider the request without a Utility Advisory Board recommendation.

(3)    (a) All improved premises, other than structures on individual lots with one, two or three dwelling units, existing on the effective date of this provision, have been individually evaluated and measured through the use of aerial photographs and computer analysis to establish square footage of impervious surface area. The results of this analysis are used in establishing monthly service rates.

(b)    In circumstances where an analysis of impervious surface area does not exist, or is determined to be incorrect, the City may in its discretion use actual measurement or measurements from site plans approved by the City to determine the area of impervious surface.

(4)    The City formerly issued storm water charge reductions/waivers to those demonstrating mitigation through on-site storm water facilities. Effective May 14, 2008, no new waivers will be issued. Approved waivers will remain valid but will not be transferable to new owners upon transfer of property ownership.

[Amended and renumbered 4.072 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously numbered Section 4.570. Section 4.072 amended by Ordinance No. 1564, adopted 04-14-2008]


4.075 Enforcement.

In addition to other lawful remedies, the City Manager may enforce the collection of charges required by Sections 4.005 to 4.090 by withholding delivery of water to any improved premises where the storm drain utility charges are delinquent or unpaid.

[Amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously numbered Section 4.580]


4.080 Request for Service.

A request for water service constitutes a request for storm drainage service and will initiate appropriate billing for storm drainage services. If development of a parcel does not require initiating water service, the creation of an improved premises from which storm water may be discharged into the public storm drainage system shall constitute a request for service and initiate the obligation to pay the fees and charges authorized in Sections 4.000 to 4.090.

[Amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously numbered Section 4.585]


4.082 Administration Regulations.

The City Manager may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the administration of the duties required by Sections 4.000 to 4.090 and for the public health, safety and welfare.

[Amended and renumbered by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously numbered Section 4.590]


4.085 Reduced Storm Drainage Service Charges for Low Income Citizens.

Reduced storm drainage service charges shall be made available to low income citizens meeting the eligibility requirements pursuant to Section 4.155.

[Renumbered by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; previously numbered Section 4.595; amended by Ordinance No. 1468, effective 03-16-2001.]


4.090 Appeal.

Any customer aggrieved by any decision made with regard to the customer’s account may appeal to the Hearing Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[Renumbered by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999. Previously numbered Section 4.600; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


SIDE SEWER INSTALLATION


4.100 Adoption of Specifications.

Those specifications entitled “Regulations for Installation of Side Sewers,” dated June 18th, 1970, attached to Ordinance 710, copies of which are on file in the City Clerk’s office, and by reference made a part of Sections 4.100 to 4.110, shall become part of Sections 4.100 to 4.110 as though they were fully set forth herein, and each and every provision therefore be and the same is adopted by reference by the City.


4.105 Council Findings.

The Council finds that to protect the citizens of West Linn and to assure adequate construction of sewers and the proper attachment thereof to the City sewer system it is immediately necessary to adopt the provisions of Sections 4.100 to 4.110 providing for the licensing of sewer contractors.


4.110 Licensing of Sewer Contractors.

(1)    No person other than the owner of the property on which the sewer is being installed or a licensed sewer contractor may install side sewers in the City.

(2)    As a prerequisite to entering into contracts with the property owners in the City for the installation of side sewers, septic tanks, cesspools, septic tank drain fields and of soliciting such work, a contractor shall apply for and with the approval of the City, be licensed as a qualified sewer contractor.

(3)    Before being issued a license, a sewer contractor shall submit to the City a statement showing his or her qualifications for performing such work.

(4)    A sewer contractor shall execute and deliver a dual obligee surety bond to be approved by the City in the amount of $2,000 in favor of the City and the owner of the premises to be served, conditioned that he or she will perform all sewer work in conformance with the laws of the City and the requirements of other governmental agencies and that he or she will indemnify and save the City and the owners of the premises harmless against all expenses, damages, costs, and claims arising out of his or her negligence or unskillfulness in performing such work.

(5)    The licensed sewer contractor shall have and keep in full force and effect property damage and liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000 property damage and $100,000/$200,000 personal injury while performing any work in the City. A certificate of such insurance shall be filed with the City; said certificate shall indicate that coverage includes sewer excavation, including explosion, collapse, and underground exposure.

(6)    The license of any sewer contractor may be revoked upon evidence of his or her failure to comply with any and all regulations of the City or other governmental agency or for fraud or abuse of owners.


WATER REGULATIONS


4.150 Connection Fees and Meter Charges.

The charges for water connections and water meters shall be established by resolution of the West Linn City Council.


4.155 Rates.

(1)    The monthly water rates shall be established by resolution of the City Council. No monthly water rate increase may exceed 5% in any calendar year without first receiving voter approval pursuant to Charter Section 44. The City Council may increase monthly water rates by a percentage of no more than 5% in any calendar year after having considered a recommendation from the Utility Advisory Board for the percentage increase, if one is received. Any request for a monthly rate increase shall be referred to the Utility Advisory Board for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. If the Utility Advisory Board fails to refer a recommendation to the Council within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for consideration, the Council may consider the request without a Utility Advisory Board recommendation.

(2)    Reduced Charges for Low Income Citizens.

(a)    There shall be no reduced water service charge for a water meter greater than 3/4” (inch).

(b)    The monthly user charge for water service provided to the principal resident or family having a maximum income under the qualifying income limits shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

(c)    Pursuant to Section 4.005, Subsection 13, the monthly user charge for sewer service provided to the principal resident or family having a maximum income under the qualifying income limits shall be fifty percent (50%) of the monthly sewer service charge.

(d)    Pursuant to Section 4.085, the monthly user charge for storm drainage service provided to the principal resident or family having a maximum income under the qualifying income limits shall be fifty percent (50%) of the monthly storm drain charge.

(e)    On July 1st of each year, the qualifying income limits shall be set at one hundred eighty-five percent (185%) of the most recently published poverty guidelines in the Federal Register by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Resources under authority of 42 U.S.C.9902(2), and shall remain in force until the next July 1st. The qualifying income limit for a single person household shall be based on the federal poverty guidelines for a one-person household. The qualifying income limit for a family shall be based on the poverty guidelines for a two-person household.

(f)    In order to be eligible for the reduced user charge: (i) the qualified person must be the person or family to whom the monthly user charge is billed and must have completed and filed with the City an application for the reduced rate on a form supplied by the City; and (ii) the premises to which the services are provided must be the primary residence of the qualified person or family.

(g)    An approved application shall entitle the qualified person or family to reduced billings for the remainder of the City’s fiscal year (July 1 through June 30) in which the application is approved. At least ten (10) days prior to July 1st of each year, a new application must be submitted to continue reduced billings for the entire subsequent fiscal year.

[Section 4.155, Subsection 2, amended by Ordinance No. 1468 effective March 16, 2001.]

(3)    Bulk Water Rates.

(a)    A special bulk water rate shall be charged to bulk users, such as commercial cleaning services, commercial spraying businesses, and other commercial bulk users of water recognized by the City. Bulk water users shall pay the rates established by resolution of the City Council.

(b)    Each bulk user shall obtain a permit from the Public Works Department, which permit shall be free of charge. To acquire the permit, the applicant’s tankers shall be inspected by the city water department personnel for cross connection control devices and valve compliance. The permit shall specify exactly the location of the hydrant to which connection is permitted along with a tally sheet to log consumption. The permit holder shall submit the tally sheet to the City at the first of each month following usage in the past month for billing purposes.

(c)    Failure of the bulk user to fulfill these conditions shall be justification for the city to cancel the permit.

(4)    Water meter size requirements.

All services shall have the proper size meters as designated and approved by the public works director on existing and future installations.

[Amended by a vote of the people November 7, 1995; See City Charter, Section44; Ordinance No. 1366 repealed by a vote of the people November 7, 1995; Ordinance No. 1234 (adopted April 13, 1988) reinstated. Amended by Ordinance No. 1420, by vote of the people 11-03-98, effective 12-01-98; amended by Ordinance No. 1436, by vote of the people 05-18-99, effective July 1, 1999]


4.160 Use of Water.

No person supplied with water from the city mains will be entitled to use it for any purpose other than stated in his or her application, or to supply in any way other persons or families.


4.165 Service Pipe Standards.

Service pipes of all sizes, within or without the premises, whether for domestic, commercial, or fire protection purposes, must be materials, quality, class, and size as specified by the state plumbing code or regulations of the city.


4.170 Installation of Service Pipes.

The installation of all service pipes from the main to the meter shall be made by employees of the city public works department or the city’s subcontractor.


4.175 Installation of Fire Services, Larger Diameter Meters, Infill Development and Infill Fire Hydrants, and Related Minor Main Extensions or System Modifications.

(1)    The public works department, or its subcontractor, will be the responsible party for the installation of water services, meters, and necessary appurtenances described in this section. Developers or their contractors or agents will not be allowed to make these connections in the public right-of-way.

(2)    If the city designs these installations, design costs will be billed to the developer along with all construction costs pursuant to section 4.150. If the developer designs the installations, the design must be approved in advance by the public works department.


4.180 Service Pipe Maintenance.

The service pipe within the premises and throughout its entire length to the water meter or to the property line if the water meter is set behind the property line, must be kept in repair and protected from freezing at the expense of the customer, lessee, or agent, who must be responsible for all damages resulting from leaks or breaks.


4.185 Discontinuance of Water Service by Customer.

(1)    Whenever any water customer wishes to have their water service discontinued for a period of not less than 15 days, the customer shall apply in writing to the water office and pay their account balance in full. Water service will be turned off and turned on again at no charge to the customer, and any unbilled charges for services shall be prorated based on the actual days of service provided during the billing cycle.

(2)    In the event a water customer wishes to have their water service discontinued for a period of less than 15 days, the customer shall apply in writing to the 	, pay their account balance in full and pay a $20 service charge. Any unbilled charges for services shall be prorated, based on actual days of service provided during the billing cycle.

(3)    Water service will not be turned off and turned on again without written notice and receipt of payment as prescribed in this section.


4.190 Separate Service Pipe Required.

A metered service connection will be required for each single-family residence that is to be supplied with water.


4.195 Prohibited Use of Water.

(1)    Water will not be furnished where there are defective or leaking faucets, closets, or other fixtures, or where there are water closets or urinals without self-closing valves, or tanks without self-acting float valves; and when such may be discovered, the supply may be withdrawn.

(2)    Water must not be allowed to be wasted by being kept running at any time longer than necessary in its proper use. When such waste is found to exist, the water may be shut off from the premises.

(3)    No new water service will be installed to any structure, building, or premises, until all provisions of the City’s building, zoning, subdivision, and sewer ordinances have been complied with. Service may be installed on a temporary basis for use in the construction of a building or structure but such temporary service may be disconnected in the event of failure to comply with all provisions of such ordinances.

[Section 4.195(2) amended by Ordinance No. 1459, adopted 08-28-2000.]


4.200 Alteration to or Operation of the System.

The operation and repair of the City’s water system, including pipes, valves, pumps, reservoirs, fixtures, etc., is the complete responsibility of the City’s Public Works Department. No plumber, contractor, or other person will be allowed to connect to or operate any part of the City’s water system up to and including the water meter.


4.205 Water Shut Off – Notice.

The water may at any time be shut off from the mains for repairs or other necessary purposes with notice to be given as hereinafter provided, and the City will not be responsible for any consequent damages. Water for steam boilers for power purposes will not be furnished by direct pressure from the City mains; tanks for holding an ample reserve of water shall always be provided by the customer. Except in the event of emergency repairs, such as necessitated by a broken water line, the West Linn Public Works Department will give at least four hours’ notice of shut off to the affected customers.


4.210 Right of Inspection.

Agents of the West Linn Public Works Department may have free access at proper hours of the day to all parts of the building and premises in which water may be delivered from the City mains for the purposes of inspecting the condition of the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the water is used.


4.215 Buildings Not Supplied With City Water.

Buildings supplied with water other than that furnished by the City may obtain City water at meter rates, providing that no physical connection shall in any way, directly or indirectly, exist between the private system and the City’s water system. When such connection is found to exist, the water will be shut off.


4.220 Meter Test.

The Public Works Department will, upon request, have a meter tested for accuracy. Should a consumer desire the meter to be tested, consumer will be required to make a deposit of $20.00 to cover the cost of making such test. The meter will then be tested. Should such meter show an error of over five percent in favor of the West Linn Public Works Department, the $20.00 deposit will be refunded to the consumer. If the test of such meter would show an accurate measurement of the water, or should it show an error in favor of the consumer, the $20.00 deposit will be retained by the Public Works Department to cover the expense of such test.


4.225 Violation.

Violation of any of the provisions of Sections 4.150 to 4.265 shall constitute a Class A violation.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


4.230 Compliance Required.

The foregoing rules and regulations must be strictly complied with in every instance and water must be paid for by all premises supplied according to the “schedule of water rates.”


4.235 Responsibility for Water Charges, Delinquent Payment, Water Shut Off for Nonpayment, Security Deposit Required and Charge for Nonsufficient Funds.

(1)    The customer shall be responsible for all charges for water service.

(2)    Whenever any water charge is not paid when due, the Water Department may discontinue service by shutting off water service for nonpayment. Water shall not be returned to service until the customer pays, or makes arrangements to pay, their account balance in full and any additional service charges set by resolution of the Council. Upon receipt of these payments at the City Water Office during regular office hours, the customer’s water service will be restored by the City during regular working hours. Written notice for discontinuing water service for nonpayment of water charges shall be given to the customer by regular mail, or by posting a notice on the premises at least 10 days in advance of the shut off. The notice shall state that if the charges are disputed, the responsible customer may request an informal conference with the City Manager or his/her designee. Such request must be received not later than two days prior to the scheduled shut off date.

(3)    The City may require security (cash) deposits prior to providing, or to continue to providing, water service to any customer. The amount of the security deposit may not be less than one or more than four months minimum billing charges. In lieu of a deposit, the City may accept a signed agreement from the property owner (whether the customer or not) stating that they will be ultimately liable for any and all charges for services provided to the premises, and that the City may use a lien as one method for securing payment if the charges are not paid. However, the City may not require a property owner to sign such an agreement. If the property owner elects to authorize the use of a lien on real property to secure payment of charges in lieu of a security deposit, all water charges shall be a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing. The entry of charges on the City’s ledgers or other records pertaining to its lien shall be made accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for services remains unpaid, the lien hereby created may be foreclosed in the manner provided for by ORS 223.610, or in any other manner provided by law or City ordinance.

(4)    When a customer’s check is returned for nonsufficient funds, the City shall charge a fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council.

[Section 4.235(4) amended by Ordinance No. 1492, adopted 12-18-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


4.240 Permits – Customer’s Consent Required.

Applications for permits to connect premises with the City water system, or requests to turn off water, or to turn on water, shall, in all cases, be in writing and signed by the customer.


4.245 Limitations on Use.

The Public Works Director shall have full power and authority at any time to declare that a shortage of water exists and to prescribe definite hours for use or nonuse of water through hose or other sprinkling devices; such regulations are to be immediately effective and are to be enforced by the Public Works Director. Violation of these rules may because for turning off water.


4.250 Findings and Declaration of a Water Emergency.

Upon a finding that the municipal water supply system is incapable of providing an adequate water supply for normal usage due to a prolonged drought, system failure, or any other event, the City Council may declare that water usage must be curtailed. The declaration shall include the effective date, the reason for the declaration, and the level of prohibition declared. The City Council may include an estimated time for review or revocation of the declaration.


4.255 Levels of Prohibition.

(1)    Level I – Limited. The following activities or actions are prohibited under a Level I declaration:

(a)    Watering, sprinkling or irrigating lawn, grass or turf; exceptions:

(i)    New lawn, grass or turf that has been seeded or sodded 90 days prior to declaration of a water shortage may be watered as necessary until established;

(ii)    High-use athletic fields that are used for organized play.

(b)    Watering, sprinkling or irrigating flowers, plants, shrubbery, ground-cover, crops, vegetation, or trees except from 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m.;

(c)    Washing, wetting down, or sweeping with water, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, open ground or other hard surfaced areas; exceptions:

(i)    Where there is a demonstrable need in order to meet public health or safety requirements, such as: to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards; for dust control to meet air quality requirements mandated by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality;

(ii)    Power washing of buildings, roofs and homes prior to painting, repair, remodeling or reconstruction, and not solely for aesthetic purposes.

(d)    Washing trucks, cars, trailers, tractors or other land vehicles or boats or other water-borne vehicles, except by commercial establishments or fleet washing facilities which recycle or reuse the water in their washing processes, or by bucket and hose with shut-off mechanism; exceptions:

(i)    Where the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as: to clean garbage trucks and vehicles that transport food and other perishables, or otherwise required by law. Owners/operators of these vehicles are encouraged to utilize establishments which recycle or reuse the water in their washing process.

(e)    Cleaning, filling or maintaining decorative water features, natural or manmade, including but not limited to, fountains, lakes, ponds and streams, unless the water is recirculated through the decorative water feature. Water features which do no include continuous or constant inflowing water are not included.

(f)    Wasting water by leaving unattended hoses running.

(g)    Other actions deemed necessary.

(2)    Level II – Moderate. The following activities or actions are prohibited under a Level II declaration; where not covered, the Level I restriction still applies:

(a)    Watering of any lawn, grass or turf, regardless of age or usage.

(b)    Watering, sprinkling or irrigating flowers, plants, shrubbery, ground-cover, crops, vegetation, or trees.

(c)    Washing of vehicles other than in establishment which recycles.

(d)    Power washing of buildings, regardless of purpose, is prohibited.

(3)    Level III – Severe. In addition to the restrictions in Level II, the following actions may by taken under Level III:

(a)    Restriction or limitation of residential usage.

(b)    Restriction or limitation of activities which require or may require the need for water supplies. By way of example, this restriction might be placed upon a fireworks display which would otherwise be allowed under State law and local ordinance.

(c)    Any restriction which is identified by the Director of Public Works.

(d)    Any restriction which is identified by the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee within the Fire Department.


4.260 Enforcement.

(1)    Warning. Each violation shall receive a warning. The letter of warning shall be in writing, shall specify the violation, may require compliance measures, and shall be served upon the resident either personally, by office or substitute service, or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested.

(2)    Citation. After the resident has received a warning letter, any subsequent violation shall be treated as a violation pursuant to Sections 1.215 to 1.265. No forfeiture assessed for violation of this article shall be less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


4.265 Penalties.

(1)    First violation – Warning letter.

(2)    Second violation of same type – Class C violation $100.00.

(3)    Third violation of same type – Class B violation $250.00.

(4)    Fourth and subsequent violation – Class A violation $500.00.

(5)    Third and subsequent violations under Level III may include water shut-off.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


4.270 Amendments, Special Rules, Contracts.

The City Council shall have the power, at any time, to amend, change, or modify any rule, rate, or charge, and to make special rules, and contracts, and all water service is subject to such power.


WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTION


4.300 Purpose and Scope.

The purpose of Sections 4.300 to 4.330 is to protect the public health of water consumers by the control of actual and/or potential cross connections to customers.


4.305 Definitions.

Backflow. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any sources other than its intended source, and is caused by backsiphonage or backpressure.

Backpressure. An elevation of pressure downstream of the distribution system that would cause, or tend to cause, water to flow opposite of its intended direction.

Backsiphonage. A drop in distribution system pressure below atmospheric pressure (partial vacuum) that would cause, or tend to cause, water to flow opposite of its intended direction.

Backflow prevention assembly (approved). A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, reduced pressure principle-detector backflow prevention assembly, double check valve backflow prevention assembly, double check-detector backflow prevention assembly, pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly, or spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly of a make, model, orientation, and size approved by the Department. Assemblies listed in the currently approved backflow prevention assemblies list developed by the University of Southern California, Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, or other testing laboratories using equivalent testing methods, are considered approved by the Department.

Department. The Oregon Department of Human Services.

Backflow prevention assemblies (type). Any approved assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used should be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential.

Contaminant. Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water that creates a health hazard.

Cross connection. Any actual or potential unprotected connection or structural arrangement between the public or user’s potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substances other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel, or change-over devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow can occur are considered to be cross connections.

Director. The Director of Public Works of the City of West Linn, or authorized agent.

Degree of Hazard. Either pollution (non-health hazard) or contamination (health hazard) and is determined by an evaluation of hazardous conditions within a system.

Health Hazard (Contamination) An impairment of the quality of the water that could create an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, or other substances.

Non-Health Hazard (Pollution) An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree that does not create a hazard to the public health, but does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of such water for potable use.

Public Health Hazard. A condition, device or practice which is conducive to the introduction of waterborne disease organisms, or harmful chemical, physical, or radioactive substances into a public water system, and which presents an unreasonable risk to health.

Health Division Officer. The Oregon Department of Human Services, Health Services Officer, or authorized agent.

Potable water supply. Any system of water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.

Air gap. An approved air gap, or an approved reduced pressure backflow assembly (RPBA) shall be installed where the substance that could backflow is hazardous to health, such as but not limited to; sewage treatment plants, sewage pump stations, chemical manufacturing plants, plating plants, hospitals, mortuaries, car washes, and medical clinics.


4.310 Cross Connections.

The installation or maintenance of an unprotected cross connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable water supply system of the city shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such unprotected cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is declared to be a public hazard and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross connections shall be in accord with sections 4.300 to 4.330. The building official is authorized to enforce the provisions of sections 4.300 to 4.330 in the inspection of existing, new, and remodeled buildings.


4.315 Use of Backflow Prevention Assemblies.

(1)    No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by state law and regulation and sections 4.300 to 4.330. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the city if an approved backflow prevention assembly required by sections 4.300 to 4.330 or applicable state statute or regulation is not installed, tested or maintained or if it is found that a required backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.

(2)    The customer’s system should be open for inspection and tests at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

(3)    When required, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line, except for nondedicated irrigation sprinkler systems or nondedicated fire sprinkler systems. Location of the approved backflow assembly installation in special circumstances is subject to approval by the Director, Plumbing Inspector, or Building Official.

(4)    Premise isolation requirements:

(a)    For service connections to premises listed or defined in Table 1 (premises Requiring Isolation), the City of West Linn shall ensure an approved backflow prevention assembly or an approved air gap is installed;

(A)    Premises with cross connections not listed or defined in Table 1 (Premises Requiring Isolation), shall be individually evaluated. The City of West Linn shall require the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly or an approved air gap commensurate with the degree of hazard on the premise, as defined in Table 2 (Backflow Prevention Methods);

(B)    In lieu of premise isolation, the City of West Linn may accept an in-premise approved backflow prevention assembly as protection for the public water system when the approved backflow prevention assembly is installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code and these rules.

(b)    Where Premise isolation is used to protect against a cross connection, the following requirements apply;

(A)    The City of West Linn shall:

(i)    Ensure the approved backflow prevention assembly is installed at a location adjacent to the service connection or point of delivery;

(ii)    Ensure any alternate location used must be with the approval of the City of West Linn and must meet the City’s cross connection control requirements; and

(iii)    Notify the premise owner and/or water user, in writing, of thermal expansion concerns.

(B)    The premise owner shall:

(i)    Ensure no cross connections exist between the point of delivery from the public water system and the approved backflow prevention assemblies when these are installed in an alternate location; and

(ii)    Assume responsibility for testing, maintenance, and repair of the installed approved backflow prevention assembly to protect against the hazard.

(c)    Where unique conditions exist, but not limited to, extreme terrain or pipe elevation changes, or structures greater than three stories in height, even with no actual or potential health hazard, an approved backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the point of delivery; and

(d)    Where the City of West Linn chooses to use premise isolation by the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on a one or two family dwelling covered by the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, and there is no actual or potential cross connection, the water supplier shall:

(A)    Install the approved backflow prevention assembly at the point of delivery;

(B)    Notify the water user in writing of thermal expansion concerns; and

(C)    Take responsibility for testing, maintenance and repair of the installed approved backflow prevention assembly.

(5)    The type of backflow prevention installed shall be at least commensurate with the degree of hazard which exists:

(a)    All Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code approved residential multi-purpose fire suppression systems constructed of potable water piping and materials do not require a backflow prevention assembly:

(6)    Backflow prevention assemblies required by sections 4.300 to 4.330 shall be installed with the approval, of the city.

(7)    Any protective assembly required by Sections 4.300 to 4.330 shall be approved by the Director.

(8)    These assemblies shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.

(9)    It shall be the duty of the customer user at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have operational tests/inspection made at least once per year by an OHS certified backflow assembly tester. For residential landscaping systems, these tests must be performed annually when the sprinkler system is activated which is normally in the spring. Regardless, all systems must be tested no later than July 1st of each year. In those instances where the director deems the hazard to be great enough he or she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user. It shall be the duty of the Director to see that these timely tests are made. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced, and re-tested at the expense of the customer user whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and copies sent to the Director.

(10)    No underground sprinkling system or device will be installed without adequate backflow prevention assemblies.

(11)    Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention devices required by Sections 4.300 to 4.330 or by State law shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises.


4.320 Cross Connection Inspection.

(1)    No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the City of West Linn or within areas served by City water until the same shall have been inspected by the City for possible unprotected cross connections and been approved as being free of same.

(2)    Any construction for industrial or other purposes which is classified as hazardous facilities where it is reasonable to anticipate intermittent cross connections, or as determined by the Director, shall be protected by the installation of one or more backflow prevention assemblies at the point of service from the public water supply or any other location designated by the City.

(3)    Inspections shall be made at the discretion of the Director of all buildings, structures, or improvements for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross connections exist. Such inspections shall be made by the City.


4.325 Liability.

Sections 4.300 to 4.330 shall not be construed to hold the City responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or testing herein, or the failure to inspect or test or by reason of approval of any cross connections.


4.330 Penalties.

Violation of any rule or regulation contained herein shall constitute a Class A violation.

[Sections 4.300 through 4.330 relating to water supply cross connection amended by Ordinance No. 1516, adopted on 02-14-2005; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]

[See Tables 1 and 2.]



TABLE 1

PREMISES REQUIRING ISOLATION BY AN APPROVED AIR GAP

OR

REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE TYPE OF ASSEMBLY

HEALTH HAZARD 

	1.	Agricultural (e.g. farms, dairies)

	2.	Beverage bottling plants*

	3.	Car washes

	4.	Chemical plants

	5.	Commercial laundries and dry cleaners

	6.	Premises where both reclaimed and potable water are used

	7.	Film processing plants

	8.	Food processing plants

	9.	Medical centers (e.g., hospitals, medical clinics, nursing homes, veterinary clinics, blood plasma centers)

	10.	Premises with irrigation systems that use the water supplier’s water with chemical additions (e.g., parks, playgrounds, golf courses, cemeteries, housing estates)

	11.	Laboratories

	12.	Metal plating industries

	13.	Mortuaries

	14.	Petroleum processing or storage plants

	15.	Piers and docks

	16.	Radioactive material processing plants and nuclear reactors

	17.	Wastewater lift stations and pumping stations

	18.	Wastewater treatment plants

	19.	Premises with piping under pressure for conveying liquids other than potable water and the piping is installed in proximity to potable water piping

	20.	Premises with an unapproved auxiliary water supply that is connected to a potable water supply

	21.	Premises where the water supplier is denied access or restricted access for survey

	22.	Premises where the water is being treated by the addition of chemical or other additives

	* A Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly could be used if the water supplier determines there is only a non-health hazard at a beverage bottling plant.

 

TABLE 2

BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS

USED FOR PREMISE ISOLATION 

	DEGREE OF IDENTIFIED HAZARD

	Non-Health Hazard (Pollutant)	Health Hazard (Contaminant)

	BACKSIPHONAGE OR BACKPRESSURE	BACKSIPHONAGE OR BACKPRESSURE

	Air Gap (AG)	Air Gap (AG)

	Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP)	Reduced Pressure Principle Prevention Assembly (RP)

	Reduced Pressure Principle-Detector Backflow Prevention Assembly (RPDA)	Reduced Pressure Principle-Detector Backflow Prevention Assembly (RPDA)

	Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly (DC)	 

	Double Check-Detector Backflow Prevention Assembly (DCDA)	 


SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES


4.400 Purpose.

Sections 4.400 to 4.485 are intended to provide authorization for systems development charges for capital improvements pursuant to ORS 223.297-223.314 for the purpose of creating a source of funds to pay for the installation, construction and extension of capital improvements. These charges shall be collected at the time of the development of properties which increase the use of capital improvements and generate a need for those facilities, or as otherwise provided in this code. [Section 4.400 amended by Ordinance No. 1416, enacted September 9, 1998.]


4.405 Scope.

The system development charges imposed by sections 4.400 to 4.485 are separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development.


4.410 Definitions.

For purposes of sections 4.400 to 4.485, the following mean:

Actual Project Cost. Cost of materials, land and construction directly attributable to the construction of a capital improvement. These costs include design, construction materials and equipment, labor, short term financing costs (incurred from the date of a City agreement on improvement cost estimate to date of written acceptance of improvement), project management costs (not to exceed 5% of actual project cost), and City administration fees for the project. Land cost is the real market value of fee-title or dedication, as determined by the County Assessor or by a City approved appraiser at the time of application for systems development charge credit. The method of land valuation and type of property interest to be conveyed is at the discretion of the City Engineer. [Definition added by Ordinance No. 1418 enacted September 9, 1998.]

Capital improvements. Facilities or assets used for:

(1)    Water supply, treatment and distribution;

(2)    Sewage and wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

(3)    Drainage and flood control;

(4)    Transportation; or

(5)    Parks and recreation.

City Manager. The person holding the office of City Manager or his/her designee. [Definition added by Ordinance No. 1416 enacted September 9, 1998.]

Development. Conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, or creating or terminating a right of access.

Final Land Use Approval. A director’s decision, subdivision, partition, design review or conditional use final decision approving an application which has either not been appealed at the City level, or which is the decision ending City appeal processes. If a City decision has been appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals, the decision is final as of the date of the City decision which is appealed unless the Board has issued a stay of decision pursuant to ORS 197.845. [Definition added by Ordinance No. 1418 enacted September 9, 1998.]

Final Land Use Approval Modification. A final land use approval made after September 9, 1998, that changes a final land use approval by including new or expanded capital improvements eligible for SDC credits. [Definition added by Ordinance No. 1418 enacted September 9, 1998.]

Future Urban Area. The Future Urban Area (FUA) is the Study Area defined in the Tanner Basin Master Plan adopted by the city in October 1991.

[Definition added by Ordinance No. 1395, August 26, 1996.]

Improvement fee. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to section 4.415.

Land area. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.

Owner. The owner(s) of record title or the purchaser(s) under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

Parcel of land. A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances.

Permittee. The person to whom a Building Permit, Development Permit, Permit to Connect to the sewer or water system or Right of Way Access Permit is issued.

Qualified Public Improvement. A capital improvement that is:

(1)    Required as a condition of development approval;

(2)    Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to section 4.435; and either

(a)    Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval; or

(b)    Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

[Definition amended by Ordinance No. 1395, August 26, 1996.]

Reimbursement fee. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to section 4.415.

System Development Charge. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, at the time of connection to the capital improvement or as otherwise provided in this code. “Systems development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water systems connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the City for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. “Systems development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision, expedited land division, or limited land decision.

[Definition amended by Ordinance No. 1416 enacted 09-09-1998; amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.415 System Development Charge Imposed; Method For Establishment.

(1)    Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of Sections 4.400 to 4.485 or other local or state law, effective July 1, 1991, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development in the City and the Future Urban Area at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to a capital improvement.

(2)    System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the City Council. 

(3)    On July 1st of each year the SDC reflected in this methodology shall be adjusted based upon the change in the Engineering New Record (ENR) Construction Cost Index (CCI) for the most recent 12-month period. No action is required of the City Council to effectuate such adjustment. 

[Section 4.415 amended by Ordinance No. 1593, adopted 01-25-2010; amended by Ordinance No. 1395, adopted 08-26-1996.]


4.420 Methodology.

(1)    The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of the then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing system users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

(2)    The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related and other relevant factors identified by the Council.

(3)    The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be adopted by resolution.


4.425 Authorized Expenditure.

(1)    Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

(2)    Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for such improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or projected development.

(3)    A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from system development charges shall be included in the System Development Charge Funding Project Plan adopted by the City pursuant to Section 4.435.

(4)    Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge funds.

[Section 4.425 amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.430 Expenditure Restrictions.

(1)    System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

(2)    System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.


4.435 Project Plan.

(1)    The Council shall adopt by resolution the Systems Development Charge Funds Project Plan. This plan:

(a)    Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues; and

(b)    Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement.

(2)    In adopting this plan the City Council may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section. The City may modify this project plan at any time through the adoption of an appropriate resolution.


4.440 Collection of Charge.

(1)    For all single-family residential development and for multiple family residential, commercial and industrial development not eligible for credit for construction of a capital improvement, the improvement fee portion and the reimbursement fee portion of a systems development charge are payable upon issuance of:

(a)    A building permit;

(b)    A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit;

(c)    A permit to connect to the water system;

(d)    A permit to connect to the sewer system;

(e)    A right-of-way access permit.

(2)    For multiple family residential, commercial and industrial development eligible for credit for construction of a capital improvement, the improvement fee portion and the reimbursement fee portion of a systems development charge are payable upon issuance of:

(a)    A building permit;

(b)    A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit;

(c)    A permit to connect to the water system;

(d)    A permit to connect to the sewer system;

(e)    A right-of-way access permit;

unless payment of the improvement fee portion of the systems development charge is delayed pursuant to subsection (3) of this section.

(3)    Payment of the improvement fee portion of a systems development charge for multiple family residential, commercial and industrial development eligible for credit for construction of a capital improvement may be delayed until a date certain to be set by the City Manager at the time of building permit issuance or not later than 10 days after the issuance of a credit against the improvement fee pursuant to Section 4.455 or 4.457, whichever occurs first. The ability to delay payment of the improvement fee portion of a systems development charge shall only apply to those systems development charges which are for the use of the same type of capital improvement as the improvement being constructed by the multiple family residential, commercial and industrial development. For example, if a commercial development is constructing a water main, payment of the improvement fee portion of the water systems development charge may be delayed. All other applicable systems development charges must be paid pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. Delay of the payment is subject to the provisions of Section 4.442.

(4)    The resolution which sets the amount of the charge shall designate the permit or permits to which the charge applies.

(5)    If a capital improvement is used, development is commenced, or a connection to a capital improvement is made without an appropriate permit, the systems development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

(6)    The City Manager shall collect the applicable systems development charge from the permittee.

(7)    The City Manager shall not issue such permit or allow connection until the charge has been paid in full, unless provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to Section 4.445, unless an exemption is granted pursuant to Section 4.450 or unless the permittee has met the requirements of Section 4.442.

[Section 4.440 amended by Ordinance No. 1416 enacted 09-09-1998; amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.442 Delay of Payment.

(1)    A permittee eligible for delay of payment of a systems development charge pursuant to Section 4.440(3) shall make application to delay payment on a form provided by the City, prior to issuance of any permit described in Section 4.440(2). Payment of a systems development charge may only be delayed for the same development which is associated with the construction of the capital improvement for which credit is given.

(2)    If a permittee applies for delay of payment of a systems development charge pursuant to Section 4.440(3), the permittee shall provide the City Manager with security acceptable to the City Manager to secure payment of the systems development charge. The security shall be in an amount determined by the City Manager, must be in a form approved by the City Attorney, and must accompany the application described in subsection (1) of this section.

[Section 4.442 added by Ordinance No. 1416 enacted 09-09-1998.]


4.445 Installment Payment.

(1)    (a) When a system development charge is due and payable, the permittee may apply for payment in 20 semi-annual installments, secured by a lien on the property upon which the development is to occur or to which the utility connection is to be made, to include interest on the unpaid balance, if that payment option is required to be made available to the permittee by ORS 223.207.

(b)    When a system development charge is due and payable, the permittee may apply for payment not to exceed 20 annual installments if the permittee is the City, including any City department, and the development will provide a public service.

(2)    The City Manager shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors.

(3)    A permittee requesting installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the permittee’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the property and that the interest of the permittee is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4)    The City Manager or designee shall docket the lien in the City lien docket and record the lien with the county pursuant to ORS 93.643. From that time, the City shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the Council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223, and shall be superior to all other liens pursuant to ORS 223.230.

[Section 4.445(1) amended by Ordinance No. 1472, adopted and effective immediately on 07-11-2001; Section 4.445(4) amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.450 Exemptions.

(1)    Structures and uses established and existing on or before the effective date of the resolution which sets the amount of the system development charge are exempt from the charge, except water and sewer charges, to the extent of the structure or use existing on that date and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. Structures and uses affected by this subsection shall pay the water or sewer charges pursuant to the terms of this chapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water or sewer system.

(2)    Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the building code adopted pursuant to Section 8.000 of this code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(3)    An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of a capital improvement is exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(4)    Proposed development that incorporates on-site design features and facilities that reduce transportation system demand.

(5)    Proposed development for which local traffic studies are determined by the City Engineer to better reflect transportation demand of the proposed development.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1605, adopted 11-28-2011.]


4.452 Credits.

Credits against a system development charge due pursuant to this code are available pursuant to the provisions of Sections 4.453, Credit for Existing Use; 4.455, Credit Against Improvement Fee; and 4.457, Capital Improvement Credit. Credits may be obtained and utilized pursuant to Sections 4.452 through 4.457.

[Section 4.452 added by Ordinance No. 1405 enacted 06-09-1997.]


4.453 Credit for Existing Use.

When development occurs that is subject to a system development charge, the system development charge for the existing use, if applicable, shall be calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for the use that will result from the development, the difference between the system development charge for the existing use and the system development charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge. If the change in the use results in the system development charge for the proposed use being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system development charge shall be required; however, no refund or credit shall be given unless provided for by Section 4.455.

[Section 4.453 renumbered by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996; previously designated as Section 4.455(1).]


4.455 Credit Against Improvement Fee.

(1)    (a) When a person provides a capital improvement which is included in the Systems Development Charge Funds Project Plan to the City, and is eligible for a credit through the provisions of this section and Section 4.457, a credit usable to satisfy systems development charge improvement fee obligations will be issued by the City.

(b)    When a permittee seeks a credit for a qualified public improvement the following process and standards shall be applied:

(i)    The maximum credit that will be allowed for a qualified public improvement will be the estimate for the improvement included in the Systems Development Charge Funds Project Plan, unless prior to the beginning of construction on the improvement the permittee and the City meet and establish a different estimate.

(ii)    The request for credit shall be filed by the permittee in writing no later than 60 days after written acceptance of the qualified public improvement by the City. The request shall be for not more than the agreed upon estimate or actual project cost, whichever is lower.

(iii)    Qualified public improvements which are located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related may be granted credit only for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the City’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The permittee shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit pursuant to this subsection. The estimate required by this section will be for only the cost of the oversized portion of the improvement.

(c)    [Repealed by Ordinance No. 1593, adopted 01-25-2010.]

(d)    When a person seeks a credit pursuant to Section 4.457, the provisions of that section will be followed.

(2)    The City shall evaluate a request for credit and determine that the amount of the credit to be issued does not exceed actual project cost, except as allowed by this section.

(a)    If a request is related to a qualified public improvement and exceeds the preconstruction estimate, the request shall be supported by documentation which establishes by clear and convincing evidence that the amount in excess of the estimate does not exceed actual project cost and that the excess cost was due to factors that could not have been reasonably anticipated by the permittee. The City Engineer shall evaluate the request and make a recommendation to the City Council on the appropriate credit due. The City Council shall consider the City Engineer’s recommendation and the justification offered by the requestor and make a determination on the credit due.

(b)    [Repealed by Ordinance No. 1593, adopted 01-25-2010.]

(c)    If the actual project cost, verified by the City Engineer, is less than the preconstruction estimate, the amount of the credit shall be equal to the actual project cost plus one-half of the difference between the preconstruction estimate and the verified actual project cost.

(3)    The City shall issue a credit certificate in the amount determined pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. The credit certificate shall contain at a minimum the following information:

(a)    The name of the person to whom the credit was issued and the project to which the improvement giving rise to the credit is related;

(b)    The systems development charge to which the credit may be applied;

(c)    The zone or zones in which the credit is useable;

(d)    The issue date and the expiration date;

(e)    The amount of the credit given;

(f)    The original signatures of the City Manager and the City Finance Director;

(g)    A place for entry of the date of any transfer(s) of the certificate.

(4)    The City shall establish a system development charge credit list. Upon issuance of a credit certificate, the City shall enter onto the list the information contained in the certificate. No credit certificate shall be valid or may be redeemed unless there is an entry in the system development charge credit list which corresponds to the information on the system development charge credit certificate.

(5)    Credits given pursuant to this section are:

(a)    Valid for a period of 10 years;

(b)    Transferable from the permittee to any other person. The bearer of the system development charge credit certificate issued by the City shall be the owner of those credits. A transferred credit shall contain a notation of the date(s) of transfer;

(c)    Not refundable for cash or any other thing of value;

(d)    Not available to a permittee who has entered an advanced financing agreement with the City pursuant to Sections 3.150 to 3.210;

(e)    Not transferable from one type of system development charge to another;

(f)    Only useable to satisfy up to one-half of a systems development charge obligation if the credit had been issued for an improvement related to a project which received final land use approval after September 9, 1998, and is (i) tendered to satisfy a systems development charge obligation by a person other than the person to whom the credit was originally issued, or (ii) is tendered by the person to whom the credit was originally issued to satisfy a systems development charge obligation that arises from a project other than the project related to the improvement for which the credit was originally issued.

(g)    The credit use restriction of subsection (f) of this section does not apply when the credit is tendered by a person other than the person to whom the credit was originally issued to satisfy a systems development charge obligation which arises from the same project for which the credit was originally issued.

(h)    The credit use restriction of subsection (f) of this section does apply to credits issued for improvements included in a final land use approval modification. The credit use restriction does not apply to credits issued for improvements included in the final land use approval prior to the modification if that final land use approval was granted on or before September 9, 1998.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1418 enacted 09-09-1998; Subsection 4.455(1) renumbered 4.453 and amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.457 Capital Improvement Credit.

(1)    Upon approval of the City Council a person may pay money into a system development charge fund, for the purpose of funding in whole or in part a capital improvement listed on the project plan adopted by the City pursuant to Section 4.435, and receive an SDC capital improvement credit in an amount approved by resolution of the City Council. The capital improvement credit may be used to satisfy the improvement fee portion of a system development charge for the same fund for which the credit was issued.

(2)    The credit certificate shall contain at a minimum the following information:

(a)    The name of the person to whom the credit was issued;

(b)    The systems development charge to which the credit may be applied;

(c)    The zone or zones in which the credit is useable;

(d)    The issue date and expiration date of the credit;

(e)    The amount of the credit given and the capital improvement which was funded in whole or in part by the person;

(f)    The original signatures of the City Manager and the City Finance Director;

(g)    A place for entry of the date of any transfer(s) of the certificate. 

(3)    Upon issuance of the capital improvement credit certificate, the City shall enter onto the City’s system development charge credit list the information contained in the certificate. No credit certificate shall be valid or may be redeemed unless there is an entry in the system development charge credit list which corresponds to the information on the system development charge credit certificate.

(4)    The capital improvement credit certificate shall have the same characteristics and limitations as provided by Section 4.455(5) with the exception that capital improvement credit certificates may not be redeemed until the capital improvement for which the money was paid and the credit certificate issued has been completed and, if necessary, accepted by the City.

[Subsection 4.457(2) amended by Ordinance 1418 enacted 09-09-1998; Section 4.457 added by Ordinance No. 1405 enacted 06-09-1997.]


4.460 Segregation and Use of Revenue.

(1)    All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds by the City. That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in this article.

(2)    The City Manager shall provide an annual accounting, based on the City’s fiscal year, of system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type of charge and the projects funded from each account.


4.465 Appeal Procedure.

(1)    A person aggrieved by a decision required or permitted to be made by the City Manager under Sections 4.400 to 4.485 or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. 

(2)    An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. Appeals of any other decision must be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision.

(3)    The Hearings Officer shall determine whether the City Manager’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with Sections 4.400 to 4.485 and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 228.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decisions. If the Hearings Officer determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the Hearings Officer shall notify the Council to allow the Council to direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year of the date of that determination to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

(4)    A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council pursuant to Sections 4.415 and 4.420 shall not be filed later than 60 days after the adoption.

(5)    A person may request that the City Council issue systems development charge credits to them as compensation for the impact of the limitation of use of transferred credits provisions of Section 4.455(5)(f) if;

(a)    The person has received the credit for a qualified public improvement;

(b)    The credit amount received exceeded the systems development charge obligation for the original development project and all subsequent phases of the original development project; and

(c)    The person has transferred the credits, establishes that the value received for the transferred credit was less than face value, and that the reduction in value was directly caused by the limitation in Section 4.455(5)(f).

The request pursuant to this subsection must be filed with the City within 30 days of the date of the transfer of the credit. The Council will consider the request and if it finds that the value of the credit has in fact been reduced it shall offer compensation for the reduction in the form of additional credits for the system for which the credit was originally issued.

[Subsection 4.465(5) added by Ordinance No. 1418, enacted 09-09-1998; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


4.470 Prohibited Connection.

No person may connect to or utilize the capital improvements of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid.

[Section 4.470 amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.475 Effect of Annexation.

The amount of system development charges for any parcel within the Future Urban Area zone will be unaffected by annexation. The charges have been computed based upon the boundary defined in the current methodology. This boundary will remain unchanged by annexation and therefore the related system development charges will remain unchanged. [Section 4.475 amended by Ordinance No. 1395, 08-26-1996.]


4.480 Penalty.

Violation of Sections 4.400 to 4.485 is a Class A violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


4.485 Construction.

The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted and by this reference made a part of Sections 4.400 to 4.485.


SOLID WASTE REGULATIONS


4.500 Rental Property Requirements.

The owner of any residence or multifamily building who rents, leases or lets dwelling units for human habitation shall arrange for solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard debris collection in compliance with subsection (1) or (2) of this section:

(1)    Comply with subsections (1)(a) through (c) of this section:

(a)    Provide a sufficient number of receptacles of adequate size to prevent the overflow of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris from occurring. Receptacles shall be placed in a location accessible to all dwelling units;

(b)    Provide for the proper removal and disposal of putrescible materials in manner that does not constitute a nuisance as defined by Section 5.455; and

(c)    If the dwelling complex has four or fewer units and the owner is self-hauling tenants’ solid waste, provide for the same level and frequency of collection of source-separated recyclable materials and yard debris as are required of the franchisee serving the City’s residential customers. Upon request by the City, the owner shall provide proof of compliance with this requirement.

(2)    With the agreement of tenant or occupant, allow the tenant or occupant to provide for the proper removal and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris.


4.501 Applicability

The following Sections 4.502 to 4.525 apply to customers of the City’s solid waste franchisees. Other waste generators who do not receive service from the franchisees are subject to other provisions of this code, including but not limited to Sections 5.400 to 5.527.


4.502 Definitions

The following words and phrases, when used in Sections 4.500 to 4.525, shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

Business. Any entity of one or more persons, corporate or otherwise, engaged in commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial, educational, or other activity that is non-residential in nature, including public bodies.

Business recycling service customer. Any person who enters into a service agreement with a waste hauler or recycler for business recycling services.

Curbside. The placement of receptacles for pickup no more than five feet from any traveled street or alleyway or as designated by City.

Customer. The generators of solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris to whom the franchisee provides collection service.

Drop Box. A single receptacle designed for the storage and collection of large volumes of solid waste or recyclable materials, which usually is 10 cubic yards or larger in size, and which is taken from the storage or collection site on a drop box truck for disposal or processing of the contents of the said single receptacle.

Franchisee. The person granted a franchise, certificate, contract or license issued by the City authorizing it to provide solid waste collection services.

Hazardous waste. The meaning given that term in ORS 466.005.

Medical and infectious waste. The meaning given that term in ORS 459.386 and OAR 093-030, and any successor provisions thereto.



Other solid waste. Solid waste materials including, but not limited to, white goods, bulky waste, tires, and medical and infectious waste.

Physically impaired customer. A customer who is recognized by the Oregon Department of Motor Vehicles as handicapped, or a customer whose ability to move a full solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard debris receptacle is constrained by a medical or physical condition as evidenced by a letter from the customer’s physician.

Receptacle. A can, cart, container, or drop box used by the customer to contain solid waste, recyclable materials or yard debris for collection service.

Recyclable materials. Any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

Solid Waste. All useless or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible materials, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, paper and cardboard, sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge, useless or discarded commercial, industrial, demolition and construction materials, discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid materials, dead animals and infectious waste as defined in ORS 459.386. “Solid waste” does not include:

(a)    Hazardous waste as defined in ORS 466.005.

(b)    Materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of animals.

Yard debris. Grass clippings, leaves, hedge trimmings and similar vegetative waste generated from residential property or landscaping activities, but does not include dirt, sod, stumps or similar bulky wood materials, animal wastes or kitty litter, ashes or food waste.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1585, adopted 02-23-2009.]


4.503 Payment Responsibility.

(1)    Any person who receives service from a franchisee shall be responsible for payment of the service.

(2)    A customer may not deduct the cost of past unreported missed collections from the customer’s service bills.

(3)    The customer is responsible for requesting a vacation credit from the franchisee. The customer may request a vacation credit to stop service for a minimum period of two consecutive weeks and must give at least 48 hours advance notice to the franchisee of the request for service suspension.


4.505 Notification of Missed Collection or Billing Errors.

The customer shall promptly notify the franchisee about a missed collection or billing error.


4.507 Location of Receptacles.

(1)    The customer shall place receptacles in a location that does not obstruct mailboxes, water meters, the sidewalk, fire hydrants, driveways, or impede traffic flow or on-street parking. The customer shall provide for reasonable vertical clearance for receptacle(s) picked up away from the curbside or roadside.

(2)    Residential (single-family residences and buildings of four or fewer units) receptacles must be placed at the curbside, unless the customer subscribes to backyard service at the approved backyard service rate. Special placement arrangements for physically impaired customers may be made by agreement between a customer and the franchisee.

(3)    Multifamily (five or more dwelling units) customers shall set solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles at a location that is readily accessible and safe to empty and load and that is agreed upon by the franchisee and the customer.

(4)    Commercial customers shall set solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles at a location that is readily accessible and safe to empty and load and that is agreed upon by the franchisee and the customer.

(5)    Drop boxes shall be placed in locations agreed upon by the franchisee and the customer that are readily accessible and safe to empty and load. Unless agreed to by the City in writing, drop boxes shall not be placed on any public right-of-way or any city property.

(6)    Compactor customers shall place compactors at a location that is readily accessible and safe to empty and load and that is agreed upon by the franchisee and the customer.


4.509 Set Out Time for Receptacles.

The customer is responsible for proper placement of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles by 6:00 a.m. on the customer’s designated collection day. Receptacles shall not be set out at the curb more than 24 hours before the scheduled pickup and all receptacles must be retrieved from the curb within 24 hours of the collection.


4.511 General Preparation of Materials.

The customer shall place solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris safely and securely in the franchisee-provided receptacles to prevent lightweight materials from blowing away prior to and while being placed into the collection vehicle. The customer shall load the contents of a receptacle in such a manner that they fall freely from the receptacle while being emptied by the franchisee. The franchisee shall not be responsible for digging the contents out of a receptacle. The customer shall not overfill a receptacle so that the lid cannot be securely closed or, for a drop box, that a tarp cannot be securely fastened. The customer is responsible for closing the receptacle as securely as possible to prevent the lid or materials from blowing away or rain from getting into the receptacle. If a drop box is overfilled, the customer shall be responsible for removing the excess material to another drop box so that a tarp cover can be securely fastened on both drop boxes. The customer shall bag cold ashes, animal wastes, kitty litter and other fine materials separately from other solid waste. The customer may dispose of these materials in the solid waste receptacle.


4.513 Weight of Receptacles.

(1)    Residential customers shall limit the weight of a receptacle and its contents to the maximum weights listed as follows:

	Cart Capacity	Maximum Weight

	21-gallon	35 lbs.

	35-gallon	60 lbs.

	65-gallon	120 lbs.

	95-gallon	145 lbs.

(2)    The weight of material put into a commercial receptacle or drop box, whether compacted or not, shall not exceed the lifting capacity of the franchisee’s equipment, nor shall the weight of a loaded drop box put the franchisee over the weight limit for the loaded vehicle. The franchisee shall furnish the customer with information concerning limitations on its equipment, upon request. A franchisee is not required to collect receptacles exceeding 300 pounds gross loaded contents per cubic yard. However, if the franchisee collects an overweight receptacle, the franchisee may charge the customer for disposal costs on the excess over 300 pounds per cubic yard. If drop boxes are overloaded to exceed the weight limit for a loaded vehicle, the customer shall be charged for any fine resulting from an overweight ticket. If the contents of a drop box are compacted, either manually or mechanically, the customer shall pay the City-approved compactor rate.


4.515 Putrescible Waste Storage.

The customer shall store putrescible materials in manner that does not constitute a nuisance as defined by Section 5.455.


4.517 Drop Box Collection.

The collection frequency for drop boxes shall be determined between the franchisee and the customer based on:

(1)    The waste composition;

(2)    The weight of the material and receptacle;

(3)    The ability of the franchisee to transport said loaded receptacle to a disposal facility without being in violation of the highway weight regulations; and

(4)    The proper maintenance of said receptacle by the customer to prevent leakage.


4.519 Preparation of Recyclable Materials.

(1)    Commercial and multifamily customers shall prepare recyclable materials for collection in accordance with City-approved instructions provided by the franchisee.

(2)    Residential customers shall separate and prepare recyclable materials for collection as outlined below.

(a)    Remove the lids and labels and rinse glass bottles and jars. Place these containers in the 14-gallon bin provided by the franchisee. Do not include broken glass, drinking glasses, cooking ware, plate glass, safety glass, light bulbs, ceramics, and non-glass materials. Also, place motor oil in a clear leak-proof, unbreakable container of not more than one gallon each, with a screw-on cap and place the closed container in the 14-gallon bin provided by the franchisee. Do not include other fluids.

(b)    Place the following materials in the 95-gallon cart provided by the franchisee for this purpose:

(i)    Empty aerosol cans;

(ii)    Aluminum cans, food trays, and foil (rinse and flatten);

(iii)    Corrugated cardboard and brown paper bags (flatten);

(iv)    Magazines and catalogs;

(v)    Newspapers;

(vi)    Plastic bottles and jugs with a neck smaller than the base (remove the lids and labels, rinse, and flatten);

(vii)    Scrap metal, but not including appliances, car parts, bicycles and lead batteries; and

(viii)    Steel and tin cans (remove the lids and labels, rinse, and flatten).


4.520 Business Recycling Requirements.

The purpose of this section is to comply with the business recycling requirements set forth in Metro Code Chapter 5.10. A significant increase in business recycling will assist the Metro region in achieving waste reduction goals, conserving natural resources, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

(1)    This section applies to all businesses and business recycling service customers for which the principal office is not a residence.

(2)    Businesses and business recycling service customers shall recycle paper, cardboard, glass and plastic bottles and jars, and aluminum and tin cans for reuse or recycling.

(3)    Businesses and business recycling service customers shall ensure the provision of recycling containers for internal maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials may be collected, stored, or both.

(4)    Businesses and business recycling service customers shall post accurate signs that:

(a)    Describe the location where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both;

(b)    Identify the materials that the business must source separate for reuse or recycling; and

(c)    Provide recycling instructions.

(5)    A business or business recycling service customer may seek exemption from the business recycling requirement by providing access to a recycling specialist for a site visit and establishing that it cannot comply with the business recycling requirement.

(6)    A business or business recycling service customer that does not comply with the business recycling requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall describe the violation, provide the business or business recycling service customer an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance.

(7)    A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation shall provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the citation and shall notify the business or business recycling service customer that it may be subject to a fine.

(8)    A business or business recycling service customer that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the citation may be subject to a fine.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1585, adopted 02-23-2009.]


4.521 Preparation of Yard Debris Materials.

(1)    The customer shall place yard debris in the 65-gallon carts supplied by the franchisee. The customer may place excess yard debris in 32-gallon cans or kraft bags for collection by the franchisee at the City-approved rate.

(2)    The customer shall include only the materials that meet the definition of yard debris in the yard debris receptacle.


4.523 Preparation of Other Solid Waste.

The customer shall place medical and infectious wastes in appropriate containers. The customer shall not place medical and infectious waste materials into a receptacle for collection with solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard debris materials. The customer should contact the franchisee for information on proper disposal options. The customer is responsible to prepare other wastes as agreed upon with the franchisee.


4.525 Disposal of Unacceptable Solid Waste Materials.

The customer shall not place unacceptable materials in solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris receptacles. If a customer places unacceptable materials in a receptacle furnished by a franchisee and that receptacle is damaged as a result, the customer shall be responsible for paying the cost of repair or replacement of that receptacle. Unacceptable materials include hazardous materials, chemicals, paint, corrosive materials, infectious waste, semi-solid wastes, flammable materials or hot ashes. The customer should contact the franchisee for information on proper disposal options.


4.526 Violation.

Violation of the provisions of Sections 4.500 to 4.528 is a Class A violation and a nuisance subject to Sections 5.400 to 5.527.

[Sections 4.500 to 4.526 added by Ordinance No. 1452, adopted 06-12-2000; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1697, adopted 06-10-2019.]


4.528 Business Food Waste Requirement.

All covered businesses in the City of West Linn that fall within the Metro District boundary and Clackamas County shall comply as set forth in this section and regulations promulgated hereunder.

(1)    Purpose and Intent.

(a)    The purpose and intent of this section is to:

(i)    Separate food waste and prevent that waste from entering the solid waste system; and

(ii)    Comply with applicable provisions of Metro’s solid waste administrative rules and Clackamas County’s solid waste management ordinances.

(2)    Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have these meanings:

Covered business. Businesses that cook, assemble, process, serve or sell food or do so as service providers for other enterprises.

Food waste. Waste generated from the distribution, storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling or serving of food for human consumption. Food waste includes but is not limited to excess, spoiled or unusable food and includes inedible parts commonly associated with food preparation such as pits, shells, bones, rinds, and peels. Food waste does not include liquids or large amounts of oils and meats which are collected for rendering, fuel production or other nondisposal applications, or any food fit for human consumption that has been set aside, stored properly and is accepted for donation by a charitable organization, or any food collected to feed animals in compliance with applicable regulations.

(3)    Applicability. Covered businesses subject to the business food waste requirement include without limitation: cafeterias and buffets, caterers, correctional facilities, food product manufacturing, food service contractors, full-service restaurants, grocery retail, grocery wholesalers, limited service restaurants, specialty food markets, warehouse clubs. For the following uses only those businesses with full-service restaurants or on-site food preparation/service are subject to the requirement: colleges and universities, drinking places, bars, taverns, K-12 (elementary and secondary) schools, hospitals, hotels, nursing and residential care, retirement and assisted living facilities.

(4)    Business Food Waste Requirements.

(a)    Covered businesses must separate food waste that is controlled by the business, its agents and employees from all other solid waste for collection. This requirement does not apply to food wastes controlled by customers or the public. At its discretion, a business may also collect food waste from customers or the public but must ensure that food wastes are free of nonfood waste items. K-12 schools may also include student-generated food waste from school cafeteria meals but must ensure that food wastes are free of nonfood items.

(b)    Covered businesses must have correctly labeled and easily identifiable receptacles for internal maintenance or work areas where food waste may be collected, stored, or both.

(c)    Covered businesses must post accurate signs where food waste is collected or stored that identify the materials that the covered business must source separate.

(d)    Owners, managers and operators of single tenant or multitenant buildings containing covered businesses must allow or otherwise enable the provision of food waste collection service to lessees or occupants subject to the business food waste requirements.

(5)    Compliance Timeline. Covered businesses must comply with the food waste requirement as determined by the quantity of food waste they generate per week, on average. Implementation will follow the schedule below. Covered businesses that demonstrate they generate less than 250 pounds per week of food waste are not subject to the food waste requirements.

(a)    Covered businesses, other than K-12 schools, generating greater than 1,000 pounds of food waste per week must comply with this section by March 31, 2021.

(b)    Covered businesses, other than K-12 schools, generating greater than 500 pounds of food waste per week must comply with this section by September 30, 2022.

(c)    All covered businesses generating greater than 250 pounds of food waste per week must comply with this section by September 30, 2023.

(6)    Temporary Compliance Waivers.

(a)    A covered business may seek a temporary compliance waiver issued by Clackamas County, subject to the following conditions:

(i)    The temporary compliance waiver will not exceed 12 months; and

(ii)    The covered business provides access to a Clackamas County recycling specialist for a site visit and demonstrates to the County’s satisfaction that the covered business cannot comply with this section; and

(iii)    The covered business allows periodic site visits to ensure the conditions allowing a temporary compliance waiver under this section are still in place and cannot be remedied.

(b)    Temporary compliance waivers must be renewed annually following the procedure described in subsection (6)(a) of this section.

(7)    Enforcement of the Business Food Waste Requirement.

(a)    A covered business that does not comply with subsections (1) through (5) of this section may receive a written notice of noncompliance from the City, or designee. The notice of noncompliance will describe the violation, provide the covered business an opportunity to cure the violation within a time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance.

(b)    A covered business failing to cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation that will provide an additional opportunity, with a deadline, to cure the violation and notify the business that it is subject to a fine.

(c)    A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the citation is subject to a fine as described in Section 4.526.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1697, adopted 06-10-2019.]


ROADWAY MAINTENANCE SERVICE


4.550 Purpose.

A roadway maintenance fund is created for the purpose of providing for the operational maintenance of the City’s street system and adjacent public rights-of-way. The City declares the necessity of providing maintenance of the City’s roadway system as a roadway utility, providing a necessary and sustainable source of funding, with such maintenance to include actions necessary to (1) provide safe facilities, (2) properly maintain such facilities and areas to maximize their use, utility, and longevity, (3) maintain landscaped areas within the street rights-of-way, (4) provide maintenance for roadway facilities used by pedestrians, bicyclists, and mass transit users as well as those used by vehicle drivers, and (5) take any other action necessary to ensure that existing city roadways are maintained at standards that support the needs of city residents, businesses, and institutions.

[Section 4.550 repealed by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-99; Section 4.550 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.552 Definitions.

“Qualifying Roadway Maintenance Service Expenditures.” Those portions of the annual budget which can be identified as relating to ordinary maintenance of public roadways for which the City of West Linn is responsible for maintenance, and also capital maintenance and upgrade of such existing roadways. Qualifying roadway maintenance fund expenditures shall include: (1) maintenance, repair, and replacement of street surfaces, street curbs and gutters, sidewalks, guardrails, traffic control markings, traffic control signs, street traffic signals, street striping, neighborhood traffic calming devices; (2) tree and brush trimming affecting city streets; (3) maintenance of street improvements used by pedestrians, bicyclists, and mass transit users; (4) administrative, engineering design, construction management, and other related costs of administering the roadway utility maintenance fund; (5) street lighting expenses; and (6) any other items that can be reasonably related to the ordinary and capital maintenance of existing City public streets and adjacent public rights-of-way.

“Residential Unit.” Any single-family residence, detached or attached, duplex, manufactured home, or multi-family dwelling, apartment or condominium within the corporate boundaries of West Linn. Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered residential units unless they are on a separate water meter.

“Structure Square Footage.” The area of a building enclosed on all four sides by walls, doors, windows, or similar enclosures.

[Section 4.552 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.555 Roadway Maintenance Service Fees shall only be used for Qualifying Roadway Maintenance Service Expenditures.

The roadway maintenance service fees shall be used only for qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures. Qualifying expenditures shall be identified by the City Manager in each fiscal year budget, and shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council when adopting the budget.

[Section 4.555 amended and renumbered 4.062, Storm Sewer Policy, by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-99; Section 4.555 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.560 Establishment and Revision of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

The City Council hereby establishes a roadway maintenance service fee to be paid by the responsible party for each residential unit and each non-residential use within the corporate limits of the City. The annual amount of the aggregate fee collected shall be based upon the annual amount of qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures as determined in the City budget, taking into consideration other potential sources of revenue available to the City for qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures. If the actual amount of roadway maintenance service fees collected in any fiscal year exceeds the actual amount of qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures during the same fiscal year, the resulting surplus shall be credited toward the following year’s qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures, and the roadway maintenance service fee rate shall be reduced accordingly. Any deficit in funds at the end of each budget year shall be reconciled with other funds available to the City. If additional revenues become available to the city from the state gasoline tax, the City shall proportionately reduce the amount of the roadway maintenance service fee to account for the increase.

[Section 4.560 amended and renumbered 4.065 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-99; Section 4.560 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.562 Duties of Director of Public Works.

The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for administration of the roadway maintenance fund, including developing maintenance programs, establishing standards for the operation and maintenance of city streets and adjacent public rights-of-way, developing administrative procedures for the roadway maintenance fund and service fee, consideration and assignment of classifications of use for the purpose of establishing a trip generation rate and total trips generated, determination of appropriate building square footage for purposes of calculating total trips generated, and all other activities related to the purpose of the roadway maintenance fund, except as provided by Section 4.564. The Public Works Director will make an annual report on the work performed using the roadway maintenance fund and the work projected for the next year.

[Section 4.562 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.564 Duties of Finance Director.

The Finance Director shall be responsible for the collection of roadway maintenance service fees.

[Section 4.564 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.570 Calculation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Residential Units.

The roadway maintenance service fee to be collected for each residential unit in the City shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

[Section 4.570 amended and renumbered 4.072 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-99; Section 4.570 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.572 Calculation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Non-Residential Uses.

The roadway maintenance service fee for non-residential uses shall be based upon the most recently published edition of Trip Generation prepared by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE). The City Council shall establish the most appropriate rate, and may use sliding scales, maximum caps, or other techniques in setting appropriate rates.

The structure square footage used for purposes of calculating the appropriate roadway maintenance service fee for non-residential uses shall be the structure square footage documented in City records, including building permits, business licenses, or other available data. At the responsible party’s request, the City shall conduct an on-site survey to determine the appropriate square footage measurement for calculating the appropriate roadway maintenance service fee. The maximum fee for any individual business establishment shall be $893.00 per month, which may be increased by a maximum of three percent annually. The maximum fee for any public or institutional establishment shall be $300.00 per month.

[Section 4.572 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08; amended by Ordinance No. 1634, adopted 11-10-14.]


4.574 Calculation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Mixed Uses.

Roadway utility users with both residential and non-residential uses shall pay a service fee based upon calculating the residential and non-residential uses separately, and then adding the two calculations together. Roadway utility users with mixed non-residential uses shall pay the rate associated with the predominant or largest type of non-residential use.

[Section 4.574 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-08.]


4.575 Annual Review of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

The amount of the roadway maintenance service fee shall be reviewed annually by the City Council and shall be adjusted as necessary to provide adequate funding for the qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures as defined in Section 4.552.

[Section 4.575 repealed by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; Section 4.575 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008.]


4.580 Reduced Roadway Maintenance Service Fee for Low Income Residents.

Reduced roadway maintenance service fees for residential units shall be made available to low-income citizens meeting the eligibility requirements pursuant to Section 4.155. The user charge for the roadway maintenance service fee provided to the principal resident or family having a maximum income under the qualifying income limits shall be 50 percent of the roadway maintenance service fee.

[Section 4.580 amended and renumbered 4.075 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; Section 4.580 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008.]


4.581 Initiation of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

The roadway maintenance service fee shall be collected from each utility customer from the time a building permit is issued for the subject property. The City shall initiate a roadway maintenance service account upon issuance of a building permit to collect the roadway maintenance service fee. The amount of the fee shall be the amount to be charged upon completion of the building as set forth in the City’s fee schedule. If the building permit expires without completion of construction and is not renewed prior to expiration, the roadway maintenance service fee shall be terminated as of the date of expiration.

[Section 4.581 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008.]


4.582 Billing and Collection of Roadway Maintenance Service Fee.

The responsible party shall pay a monthly roadway maintenance service fee according to the rate set forth in Section 4.570, 4.572, or 4.574. Unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the City, the person or entity paying the City’s water utility charges shall pay the roadway maintenance service fee for the same property or use that receives water service on that account. If water service to a property is discontinued at the request of the responsible party for a period of at least 15 days, the property shall be considered vacant or use discontinued, and no roadway maintenance service fee shall be charged for that residence or non-residential property or use while a vacancy exists. If a residential property or a portion of a non-residential property is vacant, or a non-residential use is discontinued, for greater than 30 days and water service is still provided to the property, the City will not assess some or all of the roadway maintenance service fee upon written application for non-assessment by the responsible party and verification by the city of the vacancy.

[Section 4.582 added by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008.]


4.585 Recovery of Unpaid Charges – Enforcement.

Any roadway maintenance service fee due that is not paid when due may be recovered from the responsible party in an action at law by the City. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or any other ordinance of the City, failure of any user to pay the roadway maintenance service fee when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of water service pursuant to procedures authorized by Section 4.235.

[Section 4.585 amended and renumbered 4.080 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; Section 4.585 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008.]


4.590 Moneys to be Paid into Roadway Maintenance Fund.

All roadway maintenance service fees collected by the City shall be paid into the roadway maintenance fund and used only for qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures. To the extent that the fees collected do not fully fund qualifying roadway maintenance service expenditures, the City may use other City funds as determined by the City Council to make up the difference. The roadway maintenance service fees collected may not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary uses of the City. It shall not be necessary that the operations and maintenance expenditures from the fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected.

[Section 4.590 amended and renumbered 4.082 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; Section 4.590 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008.]


4.595 Appeal.

Upon written request from a utility customer, the City Manager, upon the advice of the Director of Public Works or Finance Director, as appropriate, shall issue a written determination concerning any administrative aspect of the roadway maintenance service fee that affects the utility customer. The utility customer may appeal the administrative determination to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. 

[Section 4.595 renumbered 4.085 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; Section 4.595 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted 01-14-2008; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


PARKS UTILITY SERVICE


4.600 Purpose.

A parks utility fund is created for the purpose of providing for the operational maintenance of the City’s parks, recreation, and open space system and the capital maintenance and replacement of facilities within this system. The City declares the necessity of providing maintenance of the City’s parks, recreation facilities, and open space areas as a parks utility, providing a necessary and sustainable source of funding, with such maintenance to include actions necessary to (1) provide safe facilities, (2) properly maintain such facilities and areas to maximize their use, utility, and longevity, (3) modernize existing parks and recreation facilities to ensure that they meet today’s standards for accessibility, comfort, and ease of use, (4) allow for aesthetic enjoyment of city parks and city open space and natural areas, (5) provide proper upkeep of flora within City parks and open space areas, including especially maintenance of a healthy and diverse tree canopy and removal of invasive and destructive vegetation, (6) provide proper maintenance of driveways and walkways providing ingress and egress for City parks, and (7) take any other action necessary to ensure that City parks, recreation facilities, and open space areas are maintained at standards that support the need of City residents.


4.605 Definitions.

Residential Unit. Any single-family residence, detached or attached, duplex, manufactured home, or multi-family dwelling, apartment or condominium within the boundaries of West Linn. Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered residential units. Group residential facilities, residential facilities, residential homes, and senior citizen/handicapped housing facilities, as defined in the West Linn Community Development Code, shall be counted as a single residential unit.

Qualifying Parks Utility Service Expenditures. Those portions of the annual budget which can be identified as relating to ordinary maintenance of parks, recreation facilities, and open space areas owned and managed by the City of West Linn and also capital maintenance (defined as replacement or extensive modernization or rehabilitation of an existing parks asset) of such facilities. Qualifying parks utility fund expenditures shall include employee-related costs, vehicle expense, insurance costs, office supplies, utility services, equipment, communications charges, volunteer work coordination, materials, supplies, park and facility repair and renovation, and any other items that can be reasonably related to the ordinary and capital maintenance of existing City parks, recreation facilities, and open space areas.


4.620 Parks Utility Service Fees shall only be used for Qualifying Park Utility Service Expenditures.

The parks utility service fees shall be used only for qualifying parks utility service expenditures. Qualifying expenditures shall be identified by the City Manager in each fiscal year budget, and shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council when adopting the budget.


4.630 Duties of Director of Parks and Recreation.

The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible for administration of the parks utility fund, including developing maintenance programs, establishing standards for the operation and maintenance of City parks, recreation facilities, and open space areas, and all other activities related to the purpose of the parks utility fund.


4.640 Establishment and Revision of Parks Utility Service Fee.

The City Council hereby establishes a parks utility service fee to be paid by the responsible party for each residential unit within the corporate limits of the City. The annual budgeted amount of the aggregate parks utility service fee shall not exceed the annual budgeted amount of qualifying parks utility service expenditures as determined in the City budget. If the actual amount of parks utility service fees collected in any fiscal year exceeds the actual amount of qualifying parks utility service expenditures during the same fiscal year, the resulting surplus shall be credited toward the following year’s qualifying parks utility service expenditures, and the parks utility service fee rate shall be reduced accordingly. Any deficit in funds at the end of each budget year shall be reconciled with City general funds.


4.650 Amount of Fee.

The parks utility service fee to be collected for each residential unit in the City shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The amount of the parks utility service fee shall be reviewed annually by the City Council and shall be adjusted as necessary to provide adequate funding for the qualifying parks utility service expenditures as defined in Section 4.605 and as limited in amount by Section 4.640.


4.655 Reduced Parks Utility Service Fee for Low Income Residents.

Reduced parks utility service fees shall be made available to low-income citizens meeting the eligibility requirements pursuant to Section 4.155. The user charge for the parks utility service provided to the principal resident or family having a maximum income under the qualifying income limits shall be 50 percent of the parks utility service fee.


4.660 Billing and Collection of Parks Utility Service Fee.

The responsible party shall pay the parks utility service fee according to the rate and frequency set forth in the resolution as provided in Section 4.650. Unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay and a copy of that writing is filed with the City, the person or entity paying the City’s water utility charges shall pay the parks utility service fee. If water service to a property is discontinued at the request of the responsible party for a period of at least 15 days, the property shall be considered vacant, and no parks utility service fee shall be charged for that residence or residences while a vacancy exists. Parks utility service fees for new development shall commence upon the initiation of water service. If a property is vacant for greater than 30 days and water service is still provided to the property, the City will not assess the parks utility service fee upon written application for non-assessment by the responsible party and verification by the City of the vacancy.


4.670 Recovery of Unpaid Charges – Enforcement.

Any parks utility service fee due that is not paid when due may be recovered from the responsible party in an action at law by the City. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or any other ordinance of the City, failure of any user to pay the parks utility service fee when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of water service pursuant to procedures authorized by Section 4.235.


4.680 Moneys to be Paid into Parks Utility Fund.

All parks utility service fees collected by the City shall be paid into the parks utility fund and used only for qualifying parks utility service expenditures. To the extent that the fees collected do not fully fund qualifying parks utility service expenditures, the City may use other City funds as determined by the City Council to make up the difference. The parks utility service fees collected may not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary uses of the City. It shall not be necessary that the operations and maintenance expenditures from the fund specifically relate to any particular property from which the fees for said purposes were collected.


4.690 Appeal.

Any customer aggrieved by any decision made by the City Manager with regard to the customer’s parks utility service fee account may appeal to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[Section 4.600 renumbered 4.090 by Ordinance No. 1437, effective 07-01-1999; Sections 4.600 through 4.690 added by Ordinance No. 1551, adopted 07-09-2007, and effective 08-08-2007; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


UTILITY STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT


4.700 Purpose and Scope.

Sections 4.700 through 4.710 provide utility standards for the City. Section 4.710 establishes: (1) the definition of adequate water system; (2) criteria by which development applications will be evaluated; and (3) criteria under which approvals may be granted. Compliance with ORS Chapter 197, Goal 11, and other applicable State and federal statutes is also required. Proper notice must be provided to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development and Metro prior to changing the criteria contained in these sections. City utilities must be capable of being maintained within the acceptable limits described in Section 4.710 in order for any proposed development/land-use application to be approved by the City Engineer.

[Section 4.700 added by Ordinance No. 1448, approved 05-22-2000.]


4.710 Municipal Water

(1)    The water system is adequate if it:

(a)    Meets minimum fire flow and domestic flow requirements for each zone;

(b)    Maintains a system pressure of at least 45 psi;

(c)    Maintains equalization storage within each pressure zone of at least 25 percent of projected peak day demand; and

(d)    Maintains emergency storage within each pressure zone of one average day’s demand.

The system is deficient if it does not meet these criteria.

(2)    For all land use applications that will result in additional water use, a registered civil engineer shall prepare a plan for the provision of water. The land use application may be approved only if the City Engineer finds the following criteria are met:

(a)    The development has no impact on the water system; or

(b)    The water system and all its components are adequate and will remain adequate after the development’s impacts are added to the system; or

(c)    The applicant will construct, fund, or provide proportional funding for water utility infrastructure to compensate for the impact of the development on the water system that creates or exacerbates a deficiency. In determining funding for water infrastructure, the City Engineer shall consider SDC payments.

(3)    If the development would create or exacerbate a deficiency in the system, the development may be approved under subsection (2)(c) but the approval shall be made conditional upon achieving the following:

(a)    Maintaining fire flow and domestic flow for the zone adequate to meet the highest approved land use demand in the zone and any adjacent zone that is affected by the project;

(b)    If storage is already deficient, maintaining equalization and emergency storage that meets the minimum criteria for storage established in the 1982 Water System Master Plan;

(c)    If storage is made deficient by the development, maintaining the minimum criteria for storage established by the 1999 Water System Master Plan.

[Section 4.710 added by Ordinance No. 1448, approved 05-22-2000.]


INSUFFICIENT UTILITY CUSTOMER PAYMENTS


4.800 Allocation of Insufficient Utility Customer Payments.

In the event funds received from the City’s utility billings for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, roadways, and parks are inadequate to satisfy in full all of an individual customer’s utility charge, the funds received shall be allocated first to the parks utility, second to the roadway maintenance utility, third to the storm sewer utility, fourth to the sanitary sewer utility, and last to the water utility.

[Section 4.800 added by Ordinance No. 1551, adopted July 9, 2007, and effective August 8, 2007; Section 4.800 amended by Ordinance No. 1557, adopted January 14, 2008.]


Chapter 5 PUBLIC PROTECTION

OFFENSES

5.000    Oregon Criminal Code Adopted.

5.010    Drinking in Certain Public Places.

5.012    Smoking, Vaping, and Tobacco Use Prohibited.

5.015    Interfering in Emergencies.

5.020    Discharge of Weapons.

5.025    Fireworks.

5.030    Violating Privacy of Another.

5.035    Children Confined in Vehicles.

5.040    Endangering Welfare of Minor.

5.045    Places of Amusement.

5.050    Providing Liquor to Person Under 21.

5.055    Purchase or Possession of Liquor by Person Under 21.

5.060    Providing Premises for the Consumption of Alcohol by Minors Prohibited.

5.065    Obstructing Governmental Administration.

5.070    Tampering with Public Records.

5.075    False Reports.

5.080    Police and Fire Communications.

5.085    Failure to Appear on Citation.

5.090    Failure to Appear in the Second Degree.

5.095    Soliciting to Violate Code.

5.100    Attempt to Commit Offense.

5.105    Indecent Conduct.

5.110    Possession of Marijuana.

5.115    Overnight Camping on Public Property Prohibited.

5.120    Removal of Campsite.

CURFEW FOR MINORS

5.150    Hours of Curfew.

5.155    Parental Responsibility.

5.160    Custody of Minors Violating Curfew.

PROHIBITED TOUCHING

5.200    Designated.

5.205    Promoting Prohibited Touching.

5.210    Nudity in Massage.

5.215    Nuisances Declared.

5.220    Nuisance – Suit in Equity.

DOGS

5.250    Definitions.

5.255    Enforcement.

5.260    Violations.

5.265    Removal of Animal Wastes.

5.270    Rabies Inoculation Required.

5.275    Licensing.

5.280    Conditions for Reduction of License Fees Issued After July 1st of Each Calendar Year.

5.285    Impounding.

5.290    Seizing Certain Dogs.

5.295    Destroying Certain Dogs.

5.300    Pound Regulations.

5.305    Record of Impound.

5.310    Finders of Lost Dogs.

5.315    Interference with Officers.

5.320    Injured or Sick Dogs.

5.325    Duties of a Driver of Motor Vehicle.

5.330    Poisonous Food.

5.335    Kennels Prohibited.

5.340    Penalties.

NUISANCES

5.400    Definitions.

5.405    Animals – Communicable Disease.

5.410    Dangerous Animals.

5.415    Livestock and Poultry.

5.416    Domestic Chickens.

5.420    Removal of Carcasses.

5.425    Nuisances Affecting Public Health.

5.426    Light Trespass.

5.430    Abandoned Iceboxes.

5.435    Scattering Rubbish.

5.440    Junk.

5.445    Maintaining Inoperable Vehicles on Private Property Prohibited.

5.450    Logs, Firewood and Building Materials.

5.455    Garbage.

5.460    Blocking Public Right-of-Way Prohibited.

5.465    Repealed.

5.470    Noxious Vegetation.

5.475    Drainage.

5.477    Erosion.

5.480    Radio and Television Interference.

5.485    Repealed.

5.487    Sound Levels and Noise.

5.490    Notices and Advertisements.

5.495    Violations – Public Nuisance Declaration – Abatement.

5.500    Notice – Posting and Mailing – Contents.

5.505    Abatement – By Owner or Other Person Responsible for the Nuisance.

5.510    Abatement – By City.

5.515    Abatement – Assessment of Costs.

5.520    Liability.

5.525    Summary Abatement.

5.527    Duty to Abate.

5.535    Judicial Review.

PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES

5.550    Establishment of Park Rules and Hours.

5.552    Standard Park and Open Space Hours.

5.555    Violation – Penalty and Exclusion.

5.560    Vehicles and Horses Prohibited in City Parks.

5.565    Camping Prohibited.

FIRE HAZARDS

5.600    Combustible Vegetation Prohibited.

5.605    Vegetation Defined.

5.610    Fire Chief Determination – Notice.

5.615    Removal by City.

EXPLOSIVES

5.650    Purpose.

5.655    Definitions.

5.660    Applicability.

5.665    Storage – Permit Required.

5.670    Storage – Application for Permit.

5.675    Storage – Consideration of Application.

5.680    Issuance of Storage Permit.

5.685    Overnight Storage Limitations.

5.690    Revocation of Permit.

5.695    Appeal.

5.700    Inspections.

5.705    Transportation – General Applicability.

5.710    Transportation – Operation of the Vehicle.

5.715    Transportation – Competent Person to Attend Vehicle.

5.720    Transportation – Parking and Stopping Restricted.

5.725    Transportation – Disabled Vehicles.

BLASTING

5.750    Permit Required.

5.755    Permit Affidavit.

5.758    Notification Required.

5.760    Insurance Requirements.

5.765    Revocation of Permit.

5.770    Appeal.

5.775    Nonliability of City.

5.780    General Regulations.

5.785    Application Fee.


OFFENSES


5.000 Oregon Criminal Code Adopted.

(1)    ORS Chapters 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, and 167, except for any provisions classified as a felony under State law, are adopted by reference. Violation of an adopted provision of those chapters is an offense against this City.

(2)    The provisions of ORS Chapter 161, relating to defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification apply to offenses defined and made punishable by Sections 5.000 to 5.110.

(3)    Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, definitions appearing in the general definitional and other particular sections of chapters adopted by subsection (1) of this section are applicable throughout Sections 5.000 to 5.110.


5.010 Drinking in Certain Public Places.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic liquor or have in their possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic liquor which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, while in or upon any public street, alley, public boat landing, docks and other attendant facilities, school grounds or municipal buildings. However, the City Council or its designee may permit the service and consumption of alcoholic liquors in any public place or within designated municipal buildings on such terms and conditions as the Council may provide. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit drinking of alcoholic liquor in any establishment wherein the same may be sold for on premises consumption under the laws of the State, or when a permit has been granted by the City Council.

(2)    Drinking in certain public places is a violation and is punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00.


5.012 Smoking, Vaping, and Tobacco Use Prohibited.

(1) Smoking, vaping, and tobacco use is prohibited on City owned or operated properties that are open to the public. 

(a)    “Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, or possessing any lighted or burning cigar, cigarette, pipe, grass, plant, liquid, vapor or other substance grown, manufactured, or processed which is intended to be used for smoking in any form.

(b)    “Vaping” means inhaling, exhaling, or possessing any noncombustible product that employs a mechanical heating element, electronic element, battery, circuit, cartridge, or other system that creates smoke, vapor, aerosol or any other byproduct.

(c)    “Tobacco use” means smoking, inhaling, exhaling, vaping, use of an electronic cigarette or other smoking device, the use of smokeless tobacco products, and any other ingestion or consumption of a tobacco product, except for the use of tobacco cessation products approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration.

(2) Smoking, vaping, and tobacco use prohibited is a violation, and it is punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1674, adopted 07-09-2018.]


5.015 Interfering in Emergencies.

(1)    Whenever a threat to the public health or safety is created by any fire, explosion, accident, cave in, or similar emergency, catastrophe or disaster, or by riot, presence of an armed person, hostage being held, or other disturbance, officers of the Police, Fire or Public Works Departments may restrict or deny access to the area where such threat exists, for the duration of the threat, when the presence of a person in the area would constitute a danger to themselves, or when the officer reasonably believes that the presence of the person would substantially interfere with the performance of the police or other emergency services. Any person refusing to obey the direction of an officer who has denied or restricted access to the area where a threat exists may be found guilty of interfering in emergencies.

(2)    Interfering in emergencies is a class C misdemeanor.

[Section 5.015(1) amended by Ordinance No. 1459, adopted 08-28-2000.]


5.020 Discharge of Weapons.

(1)    No person other than a peace officer shall fire or discharge a gun or other weapon, including spring or air actuated pellet guns, air guns, BB guns, or other weapons which propel a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive or jet or rocket propulsion.

(2)    No person may shoot a slingshot, bow and arrow or an instrument of any similar type or throw a dagger, spear, stiletto or an instrument of any other type.

(3)    The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the firing or discharging of a weapon by any person in defense or protection of his or her property, person or family or at firing ranges approved in writing by the Chief of Police.


5.025 Fireworks.

The following sections of the Oregon Fireworks Law are adopted by reference and made a part of Sections 5.000 to 5.110: ORS 480.110, 480.120, 480.130, 480.140(1), 480.150 and 480.170.


5.030 Violating Privacy of Another.

No person other than a peace officer performing a lawful duty shall enter upon land or into a building used in whole or in part as a dwelling not his or her own without permission of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof, and while so trespassing look through or attempt to look through a window, door or transom of the dwelling or that part of the building used as a dwelling with the intent to violate the privacy of any other person.


5.035 Children Confined in Vehicles.

(1)    No person who has under his or her control or guidance a child under eight years of age shall lock or confine, or leave the child unattended, or permit the child to be locked or confined, or left unattended in a vehicle for a period of time longer than 15 consecutive minutes.

(2)    It is lawful and the duty of a policeman or other peace officer finding a child confined in violation of the terms of this section, to enter the vehicle and remove the child, using such force as is reasonably necessary to effect an entrance to the vehicle where the child may be confined in order to remove the child.


5.040 Endangering Welfare of Minor.

(1)    No person shall:

(a)    Knowingly sell, or cause to be sold, tobacco in any form to a person under 18 years of age;

(b)    Employ a person under 18 years of age in or about a cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor, or in any establishment at which any alcoholic liquor is sold for on-premises consumption.

(2)    No person shall solicit, aid, abet, or cause a person under 18 years of age to:

(a)    Violate a law of the United States, or a state, or to violate a City or county ordinance;

(b)    Run away or conceal himself or herself from a person or institution having lawful custody of the minor.


5.045 Places of Amusement.

(1)    No person under 18 years of age shall enter, visit, or loiter in or about a public cardroom, poolroom, or billiard parlor.

(2)    No person operating or assisting in the operation of a public cardroom, poolroom, or billiard parlor shall permit a person under 18 years of age to engage in a game of cards, pool, billiards, dice, or games of chance, for amusement or otherwise.

(3)    This section shall not apply to playing billiards in a recreational facility. As used in this section, “recreational facility” means an area, enclosure or room in which facilities are offered to the public to play billiards or pool for amusement only, and;

(a)    Is clean, adequately supervised, adequately lighted and ventilated.

(b)    No alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed.

(c)    Where access does not require passing through a room where alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed.


5.050 Providing Liquor to Person Under 21.

ORS 471.410(2) and (3) are adopted by this reference and made a part of Sections 5.000 to 5.110.


5.055 Purchase or Possession of Liquor by Person Under 21.

ORS 471.430 is adopted by this reference and made a part of Sections 5.000 to 5.110.




5.060 Providing Premises for the Consumption of Alcohol by Minors Prohibited.

No person who owns or is in control of a premises shall knowingly allow a minor to consume alcoholic liquor on the premises except as provided in Section 5.050. Violation of this section is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.


5.065 Obstructing Governmental Administration.

(1)    No person shall intentionally obstruct, impair or hinder the administration of law or other governmental function by means of intimidation, force or physical interference or obstacle.

(2)    This section shall not apply to the obstruction of unlawful governmental action or interference with the making of an arrest.


5.070 Tampering with Public Records.

No person shall, without lawful authority, knowingly destroy, mutilate, conceal, remove, make a false entry in or falsely alter any public record.


5.075 False Reports.

(1)    No person shall knowingly initiate a false alarm or report which is transmitted to a fire department or law enforcement agency or other organization that deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property.

(2)    No person shall knowingly make or file with the Police Department or with the City Attorney or a police officer engaged in his or her official duties a false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the violation or alleged violation of a City ordinance or the commission or alleged commission of a crime.


5.080 Police and Fire Communications.

No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a disturbance of such magnitude as to interfere with the proper functioning of any City radio communication system.

[Section 5.080 amended by Ordinance No. 1459, adopted 08-28-2000.]


5.085 Failure to Appear on Citation.

No person shall willfully fail to appear before the Municipal Court pursuant to a citation issued and served under authority of ORS 133.045 to 133.080, 133.110 and 156.050, and a complaint is filed.


5.090 Failure to Appear in the Second Degree.

(1)    A person commits the crime of failure to appear in the second degree if, having by court order been released from custody upon a release agreement or security agreement or continued on release on his or her own recognizance upon the condition he or she will subsequently appear personally in connection with a charge against him or her of having committed a misdemeanor or violation, he or she intentionally fails to appear as required.

(2)    Violation of this section is a Class A misdemeanor.


5.095 Soliciting to Violate Code.

No person shall solicit, employ or engage another, or confederate with another to violate a provision of Sections 5.000 to 5.110.


5.100 Attempt to Commit Offense.

A person who attempts to commit any of the offenses mentioned in Sections 5.000 to 5.110 or any other ordinance of the City, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.


5.105 Indecent Conduct.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to masturbate, urinate, defecate or copulate in a public place or a premises open to the public, or in a place visible from a public place or premises open to the public.

(2)    Violation of this section shall be a Class A violation.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.110 Possession of Marijuana.

Any person who knowingly or intentionally is in unlawful possession of less than one avoirdupois ounce of the dried leaves, stems and flowers of the plant Cannabis family Moraceae is guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.


5.115 Overnight Camping on Public Property Prohibited.

(1)    Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no person shall establish a campsite to camp overnight or sleep overnight on any public property. Overnight camping on public property prohibited is a Class C misdemeanor.

(2)    Exceptions. Overnight camping is allowed when:

(a)    The City Manager authorizes overnight camping during a declared emergency; the City Manager may waive any permit requirements for camping in the emergency order.

(b)    The property involved complies with all applicable State laws, is appropriately zoned, and has all necessary approvals for the proposed use of overnight camping.

(c)    A parks permit or special event permit authorizes overnight camping in accordance with the limitations, terms and conditions of the permit.

Nothing in this subsection creates any duty on the part of the city or its agents to ensure the protection of persons or property with regard to permitted overnight camping or overnight sleeping.

(3)    Camping equipment used in violation of subsection (1) of this section may be seized as evidence of the violation and, after seizure, shall be held by the police until further order of the applicable court. In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed, any campsite used in violation of this section or other provisions of this code shall constitute a nuisance and may be removed pursuant to Section 5.120. 

(4)    As used in this section the following definitions apply:

(a)    “Camping” or “to camp” means to set up or to remain in or at a campsite, for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a temporary place to live.

(b)    “Campsite” means any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other material used for bedding purposes, or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part of a vehicle.

(c)    “Overnight” means occurring anytime during hours of closure or between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

(d)    “Public property” means any real property, whether privately or publicly owned, that by its physical nature, function, custom, usage, notice, lack of notice, or other circumstances at the time would cause a reasonable person to believe that no permission to enter or remain is required, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parks, open spaces, and parking lots.

(5)    Nothing in this section prohibits prosecution for criminal trespass when a person enters or remains on public property or other premises open to the public during hours of closure or in violation of an exclusion notice or trespass order, including but not limited to those issued under Section 5.555.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1652, adopted 09-12-2016.]


5.120 Removal of Campsite.

(1)    Prior to removing a campsite, the City shall post a notice, 24 hours in advance. All posted notices shall be in English and Spanish. A City official shall not issue a citation for violation of Section 5.115 if the citation would be issued within 200 feet of the notice and within two hours before or after the notice required by this subsection was posted. 

(2)    At the time that a 24-hour notice is posted, the City shall inform a local agency that delivers social services to homeless individuals where the notice has been posted.

(3)    The local agency may arrange for outreach workers to visit the campsite where a notice has been posted to assess the need for social service assistance in arranging shelter and other assistance.

(4)    All personal property shall be given to the Police Department whether 24-hour notice is required or not. The property shall be stored for a minimum of 30 days during which it will be reasonably available to any individual claiming ownership. Any personal property that remains unclaimed for 30 days may be disposed of consistent with State law and City procedures for disposition of found, lost, unclaimed or abandoned property, as applicable. For purposes of this subsection, “personal property” means any item that is reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person and that has apparent utility. Items that have no apparent value or utility or are in an unsanitary or putrescent condition may be immediately discarded. Weapons, drug paraphernalia and items that appear to be either stolen or evidence of a crime shall be given to the Police Department.

(5)    The 24-hour notice required under subsection (4) of this section shall not apply:

(a)    When there are grounds for law enforcement officials to believe that illegal activities other than camping are occurring;

(b)    In the event of an exceptional emergency such as possible site contamination by hazardous materials or when there is immediate danger to human life or safety;

(c)    The location of the campsite is public property designated for day use recreation; and

(d)    The campsite is on public property occupied by an individual pursuant to a permit issued by the City.

(6)    Following the removal of a campsite on public property, the law enforcement officials, local agency officials and outreach workers may meet to assess the notice and removal policy, to discuss whether the removals are occurring in a humane and just manner and to determine if any changes are needed to this policy.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1652, adopted 09-12-2016.]


CURFEW FOR MINORS


5.150 Hours of Curfew.

(1)    No minor under the age of 18 years shall be in or upon any street, park or other public place between the hours specified in this section, unless:

(a)    The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have such care and custody of the minor.

(b)    The minor is engaged in a school activity or lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in or upon the street, park or other public place during the hours specified in this section.

(c)    The minor is emancipated under ORS 109.550 to 109.565.

(2)    For minors under the age of 14 years who have not begun high school, the curfew is between 9:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that on any day immediately preceding a day for which no public school is scheduled in the City, the curfew is between 10:15 and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning. For children 14 years of age or older who have begun high school, the curfew is between 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that on any day immediately preceding a day for which no public school is scheduled in the City, the curfew is between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following morning.


5.155 Parental Responsibility.

No parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall allow such minor to be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place, except between the hours specified in Section 5.150 and except as otherwise provided in that section. Violation of this section shall be deemed to be a Class A violation.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.160 Custody of Minors Violating Curfew.

Any minor who violates Section 5.150 shall be taken into custody as provided in ORS 419.569 and may be subjected to further proceedings as provided in ORS 419.472 through 419.597, 419.800 through 419.839 and 419.990(2).


PROHIBITED TOUCHING


5.200 Designated.

A person commits the offense of prohibited touching if:

(1)    He or she engages in or agrees to engage in sexual contact in return for a fee; or

(2)    He or she pays or offers or agrees to pay a fee to engage in sexual contact.

(3)    As used in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, “sexual contact” means any touching of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person not married to the actor or causing such person to touch the sexual or other intimate parts of the actor for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of either party.


5.205 Promoting Prohibited Touching.

A person commits the offense of promoting prohibited touching if, with intent to promote prohibited touching, he or she knowingly:

(1)    Owns, controls, manages, supervises or otherwise maintains a place or enterprise where prohibited touching takes place; or

(2)    Induces or causes a person to engage in prohibited touching or remain in a place where prohibited touching takes place; or

(3)    Receives or agrees to receive money or other property, other than compensation for personally rendered prohibited touching services, pursuant to an agreement or understanding that the money or other property is derived from a prohibited touching activity; or

(4)    Engages in any conduct that institutes, aids or facilitates an enterprise of prohibited touching.


5.210 Nudity in Massage.

(1)    As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

(a)    Massage. Pressure on, friction against, stroking and kneading the body by manual or mechanical means, and gymnastics, with or without appliances such as vibrators, infrared heat, sunlamps and external baths for the purpose of maintaining good physical condition.

(b)    Massage business. The operation of an establishment where massage is given.

(c)    Nudity. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernible turgid state. For the purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered.

(d)    Practice of massage. The performance of massage for compensation, either as the owner of or as an employee in a massage business.

(2)    A person commits the offense of nudity in massage if:

(a)    He or she appears in a state of nudity while engaged in the practice of massage; or

(b)    He or she, as a principal, agent, officer or employee of a massage business, appears in a state of nudity in any portion of a massage establishment where massage is given or where there is any patron of the establishment; or

(c)    He or she, as a principal, agent, officer or employee of a massage business, causes, permits, aids or abets any violation of this section by any agent or employee of the massage business.


5.215 Nuisances Declared.

Any places where prohibited touching, promoting prohibited touching or nudity in massage is conducted or carried on as described in Sections 5.200 to 5.210 is declared a nuisance and may be enjoined and abated as described in Section 5.220.


5.220 Nuisance – Suit in Equity.

Whenever a nuisance exists under Section 5.215, the City Attorney may maintain a suit in equity in the name of the City perpetually enjoining such nuisance and for its abatement. Such suit may be brought regardless of whether any individuals have been convicted under the provisions of Sections 1.205 to 1.255.


DOGS


5.250 Definitions.

As used in Sections 5.250 to 5.340, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

Owner of property. Any person who has legal or equitable interest in said real property or who has a possessory interest therein, or who resides on the property, or is a guest of any person who owns, rents, or leases said property.

Run at large. Off or outside the premises belonging to the person having the control, custody or possession of the dog while the dog is not under the complete control of such person by means of an adequate leash, or within a vehicle of such person.

Keeping a dog. Harboring, caring for, exercising control over, or knowingly permitting any dog to remain on the premises occupied by the person.

Dangerous dog. Any dog which bites any human being, dog, cat or livestock, or which chronically demonstrates menacing behavior toward human beings, dogs, cats or livestock. For purposes of this section, “menacing behavior” shall include, but not be limited to, baring of teeth, charging at a victim, growling in a threatening manner or approaching a victim within 10 feet while barking.

Permit. For purposes of Sections 5.250 to 5.340, conduct by the keeper of a dog which is intentional, deliberate, careless, inadvertent or negligent.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.255 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or any other designated police officer, or the Code Enforcement Officer of the City, to enforce the provisions of Sections 5.250 to 5.340.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.260 Violations.

It shall be a violation for a keeper of any dog to:

(1)    Permit any such dog to run at large, as defined in Section 5.250, upon any public street, highway or public place, or upon private property owned by a person or persons other than the keeper of the dog within the corporate limits of the City.

(2)    Permit a dog to chase a vehicle or person.

(3)    Permit a dog to scatter garbage.

(4)    Permit a dog to damage or destroy property of persons other than the keeper of the dog.

(5)    Permit any dog to make noise in violation of Section 5.487(4)(b).

(6)    Keep a dangerous dog. It shall be an affirmative defense that a dog bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its keeper or anyone wrongfully assaulting that dog or its keeper.

(7)    To leave a dog unattended for more than 24 consecutive hours without adequate food, water, shelter, care or supervision. Shelter shall include a structure or other means of protection from the weather and injury.

(8)    Physically mistreat any dog, either by deliberate abuse or neglect to furnish adequate care, including medical attention.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1612, adopted 04-08-2013.]


5.265 Removal of Animal Wastes.

Any person in physical possession and control of a dog shall remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by the dog in any area not designed to receive such wastes, including but not limited to public areas such as streets, sidewalks, parking strips, public parks and any private property owned by a person or persons other than the person in physical possession and control of the dog within the corporate limits of the City.


5.270 Rabies Inoculation Required.

All dogs must be inoculated against rabies, unless specifically exempted by rule of the State of Oregon Health Division or State Department of Agriculture. Rabies certificates shall be current through November of the current year.


5.275 Licensing.

Every person keeping a dog which has a set of permanent canine teeth or is six months old, whichever comes first, or within 30 days of acquiring the dog, shall obtain from Clackamas County a license for the dog by paying to the county a license fee and furnishing a current certificate of rabies inoculation for the dog. A dog owner who has moved to West Linn and does not have a current dog license from another Oregon city or county shall obtain a dog license within 30 days of moving into West Linn unless the dog has not yet reached six months of age. A dog with a current dog license from another Oregon city or county shall not require licensing under this section until expiration of the current license, if within 30 days of moving into West Linn the owner notifies Clackamas County Dog Services of the dog’s description, license number, city or county of issuance, and West Linn address. The license fee shall be established periodically by Clackamas County. The keeper of the licensed dog shall attach the license tag issued for the dog to a collar, which collar shall be worn by the dog at all times when not in the immediate possession of the keeper of the dog. If the person fails to obtain the license, then the license fee shall be in an amount equivalent to the regular license fee, plus an additional amount equivalent to the penalty established by the county.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1595, adopted 06-14-2010; amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.280 Conditions for Reduction of License Fees Issued After July 1st of Each Calendar Year.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1595, adopted 06-14-2010.]


5.285 Impounding.

Any member of the Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer of the City is authorized to impound any dog found running at large as defined in Section 5.250 or that is found to be unlicensed.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.290 Seizing Certain Dogs.

A dog found biting a person or which has bitten any person may be summarily seized by any person and promptly delivered to any member of the Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer for impounding. The West Linn Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer may allow impoundment of the dog in the keeper’s home if the person is bitten on a part of the body below the neck.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.295 Destroying Certain Dogs.

A dog which is rabid shall be destroyed. Any person may summarily kill a rabid dog.


5.300 Pound Regulations.

(1)    Whenever a dog is impounded under the authority of Sections 5.250 to 5.340 and the keeper of such dog is known, that person shall be given notice of the impounding by personal service or mailing the notice by regular mail, to the keeper’s last known address. The keeper of such dog shall have at least five days from the date of impoundment to claim the dog and pay the redemption fee hereinafter provided and if he or she fails to claim the dog within such time and pay the fees hereinafter provided, the dog shall be disposed of as hereunder provided.

(2)    When a dog is impounded under the authority of Sections 5.250 to 5.340, the keeper thereof is unknown, a notice shall be posted in three public places in or about the City. The notice shall contain a general description of the impounded dog, showing breed, sex, color, and markings and shall designate the date upon which the described dog shall be disposed of unless otherwise claimed and redeemed. Such date shall not be less than five days after impounding the dog; if no claim or redemption by the keeper of the described dog is made within the time fixed by the notice, such dog shall be disposed of as hereinafter provided.

(3)    Any dog impounded for having bitten a person shall not be released until after expiration of a 10-day period to allow an appropriate health check.

(4)    Any dog impounded under authority of Sections 5.250 to 5.340 may be released to the keeper thereof upon payment to the City Manager of the following charges:

(a)    A redemption fee of $20.00 for the first impound in a calendar year and $25.00 for all other impounds during the same calendar year;

(b)    The actual cost of boarding a dog; and

(c)    All applicable license fees and penalties if said dog is not licensed.

(5)    If an impounded dog is not claimed by its keeper within the time limits fixed above, it may be released to any person on payment to the City Manager of the fees and charges fixed in subsection (4) of this section and subject to the claim of the keeper of such dog upon reimbursement of the fees and charges so paid; provided, that the claim of such keeper is made within one month after the date of impounding. Upon releasing any dog to a person other than its keeper, the Police Department or Dog Control Officer shall obtain and keep a written receipt from such person acknowledging that such person holds the dog subject to the claim of the keeper upon reimbursement of the fees and charges paid.

(6)    If no claim or redemption by the keeper of the described dog is made within the time fixed by the applicable notice and if no person claims the impounded dog pursuant to subsection (5) of this section, such dog shall be sold, given away or humanely killed at the expiration of such time.


5.305 Record of Impound.

The Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer shall make in triplicate a detailed record of each dog impounded showing the date and time impounded, description of the dog, name and address of the keeper, if known, and the name and address of the person to whom the dog is released, date of release, or date and method of other disposal. The original of such records shall be retained with the kennels, the duplicate copy shall be kept by the Police Department and the triplicate copy shall be filed with the City Manager.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.310 Finders of Lost Dogs.

A person who finds a dog within the City limits may surrender the animal to the City or retain its possession subject to surrender upon demand of the City or the keeper of the dog. Records of reported findings shall be retained by the City and made available for public inspection.


5.315 Interference with Officers.

It is unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with any police officer or the Code Enforcement Officer of the City engaged in seizing or impounding any dog under authority of Sections 5.250 to 5.340.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.320 Injured or Sick Dogs.

(1)    The member of the Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer of the City who impounds any dog which is in need of medical attention, may, at their discretion, authorize the necessary medical attention, or have the dog humanely killed.

(2)    The member of the Police Department, or the Code Enforcement Officer of the City, shall make a diligent effort to locate the keeper of a dog in need of medical attention before authorizing such medical attention or disposal of said dog.

(3)    Should the member of the Police Department or the Code Enforcement Officer of the City authorize the necessary medical attention, the keeper of the dog shall be liable for the costs of the medical treatment rendered to the animal.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1703, adopted 10-14-2019.]


5.325 Duties of a Driver of Motor Vehicle.

(1)    Any person operating a motor vehicle upon premises open to the public who runs over, strikes, injures, maims or kills any dog shall:

(a)    Immediately stop;

(b)    Make a reasonable effort to determine the nature of the injuries;

(c)    Render reasonable aid to the dog, if injured;

(d)    Make due and diligent inquiry to determine and notify the keeper of the dog;

(e)    Notify the City of the injury or death, if unable to contact the keeper.

(2)    The requirements of this section for a driver to stop and attend to an injured dog depend upon the specific traffic hazards existing at the time of the accident.


5.330 Poisonous Food.

No person shall knowingly place food of any description containing poisonous or other injurious ingredients in any area reasonably likely to be accessible to animals other than rodents.


5.335 Kennels Prohibited.

It is unlawful for dog kennels to exist or operate in any area of the City other than areas which are zoned for such a use. For purposes of this section, any property where more than four dogs are kept, whether such animals are kept as personal property of the property owner or as a business venture, is deemed to be a kennel. A person may have more than four dogs and not be deemed a kennel, if one of the dogs is a female with a litter under the age of six months.


5.340 Penalties.

(1)    Any person convicted of a violation of Section 5.315 or 5.330 shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than six months or a fine not to exceed $1,000 or both.

(2)    Any person convicted of a violation of Section 5.325 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.00.

(3)    Any person convicted of a violation of Section 5.260(1) through (6) shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00; and the court, in its discretion, may also order the removal of the dog from the City of West Linn, restitution for damages or any other remedy within the power of the court. Further, for violation of Section 5.260(6), the court may order destruction of the dog involved. Destruction of a dog may be ordered if:

(a)    A dog, whether or not confined, causes the serious injury or death of any person; or

(b)    A dog, while at large, kills any domestic animal; or

(c)    A dog engages in or is found to have been trained to engage in exhibitions of fighting; or

(d)    A dog repeats behavior such as aggressively biting or causing physical injury to any person or domestic animal.

(4)    Except as where otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of any provisions of Sections 5.250 to 5.335 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation of a provision of Sections 5.250 to 5.335 constitutes a separate offense.


NUISANCES


5.400 Definitions.

For purposes of Sections 5.400 to 5.527, except where the context indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

Offensive. A condition that impacts the appearance of an area and offends the surrounding neighbors, or is a fire or health hazard. This definition applies to the word “offends.”

Person in charge of property. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser, or person, other than the owner, having possession or control of the property.

Poultry or livestock. Alpacas, burros, cattle, emu, fowl, horses, hogs, goats, jennies, jackasses, llamas, mules, ostriches, sheep, and any other farm animal, excluding dogs, cats, and domestic chickens.

Public place. A building, place, or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public.

Surrounding neighbors. Any two people of separate residences of property adjacent to, contiguous with or directly across the street from the offending property or condition.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1624, adopted 06-02-2014.]


5.405 Animals – Communicable Disease.

No person may permit an animal or bird owned or controlled by him or her to be at large within the City if the animal or bird is afflicted with a communicable disease.


5.410 Dangerous Animals.

No person may permit his or her wild or domesticated dangerous animal to run at large.


5.415 Livestock and Poultry.

(1)    Unless specifically permitted by the WLMC or CDC under prescribed conditions, no person shall keep or maintain livestock or poultry within the City. No person may maintain a slaughterhouse or tannery, or permit livestock or poultry owned by him or her to run at large within the City.

(2)    Livestock, poultry and other animals and fowl running at large in the City shall be taken up and impounded by a police officer and disposed of in accordance with the procedure provided by ordinance for the disposition of abandoned vehicles.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1624, adopted 06-02-2014.]


5.416 Domestic Chickens.

(1)    Purpose. The following regulations will govern the keeping of domestic chickens and are designed to prevent nuisance conditions that are unsanitary or unsafe. 

(2)    Domestic chickens are allowed subject to the following restrictions:

(a)    No more than five domestic chickens are allowed for each single-family residence.

(b)    No roosters shall be allowed.

(c)    Domestic chickens shall be kept in a secure enclosure at night.

(d)    Enclosures shall be covered, predator-resistant, well-ventilated, and provide a minimum of two square feet per domesticated chicken.

(e)    Enclosures must be located at least 20 feet from all neighboring residences.

(f)    Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent offensive odors.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1624, adopted 06-02-2014.]


5.420 Removal of Carcasses.

No person may permit any fowl or animal carcass owned by him or her or under his or her control to remain upon the public streets or places, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of such carcass.


5.425 Nuisances Affecting Public Health.

No owner or person in charge of property may permit or cause a nuisance affecting public health. The following are nuisances affecting public health, and may be abated as provided in Sections 5.400 to 5.527:

(1)    Privies. An open vault or privy constructed and maintained within the City, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the Department of Environmental Quality regulations;

(2)    Debris on Private Property. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse located on private property that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health, safety or welfare of the City;

(3)    Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests;

(4)    Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes, or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water;

(5)    Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption;

(6)    Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition;

(7)    Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises;

(8)    Attractive Nuisances. No owner or person in charge of property may permit any condition (such as pits) or accumulation of items (such as vehicles, equipment, lumber) which is likely to be inviting or alluring to children and which could cause injury to them. This section shall not apply to authorized construction if reasonable safeguards are maintained.


5.426 Light Trespass.

(1)    All outdoor lights that trespass onto lots with a dwelling shall be turned off between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. For purposes of this section, “trespass” means light that falls beyond the property line of the property it is intended to illuminate. Trespass shall be confirmed if a light fixture is visible when evaluated from a point six feet above ground elevation at an adjacent property line. “Light fixture” means the socket or similar component that holds the bulb or lamp in place, the bulb itself, and any covering around the bulb or lamp that allows light to pass through. This restriction shall not apply to:

(a)    Lights mounted on a structure at its main entry, rear entry, or beside garage doors;

(b)    Any motion-activated lighting used for safety or security purposes that does not remain on for more than 15 minutes;

(c)    Any lighting regulated or permitted pursuant to the Community Development Code; and

(d)    Temporary holiday lighting.

(2)    Light trespass is a Class A violation.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1612, adopted 04-08-2013.]


5.430 Abandoned Iceboxes.

No person may leave in a place accessible to children an abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or similar container which has an airtight door with a snap lock, lock, or other mechanism which may not be released for opening from the inside, without first removing such lock or door from such icebox, refrigerator or similar container.


5.435 Scattering Rubbish.

No person may throw, dump or deposit upon public or private property an injurious or offensive substance or any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench, detract from the cleanliness or safety of such property, or would be likely to injure an animal, vehicle or person traveling upon a public way.


5.440 Junk.

(1)    “Junk,” as used in this section, means and shall include used motors and motor parts, abandoned or unusable motor vehicles including trucks, tractors, trailers, parts removed from vehicles, household appliances, scrap iron, tin, plastic, glass and paper.

(2)    It is determined and declared that the keeping of any junk out of doors on any street, lot or premises within the City, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed except doors for use for ingress and egress, is a nuisance and is unlawful.

(3)    It is unlawful for any owner or person in charge of property to keep or allow to be kept any junk out of doors on any street, or on any lot or premises within the City, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely enclosed except doors used for ingress and egress.

(4)    The provisions of this section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house.


5.445 Maintaining Inoperable Vehicles on Private Property Prohibited.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to maintain any inoperable vehicle on private property for a period of time in excess of one month.

(2)    For the purposes of this section, “inoperable vehicle” means any vehicle which has no current state vehicle license and which cannot be moved without being either repaired or dismantled or which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured. This definition shall not include any vehicle kept in a building when not in use or any vehicles kept on the premises of a business lawfully engaged in wrecking, junking or repairing vehicles.

(3)    Any owner of an inoperable vehicle or any person maintaining such a vehicle on premises under his or her control for a period of time in excess of one month shall be liable to abatement proceedings by the City as maintaining a public nuisance.


5.450 Logs, Firewood and Building Materials.

(1)    Logs may be stored on the property for a period not to exceed 60 days if said storage pile is not otherwise a public nuisance pursuant to Section 5.425.

(2)    Firewood. Firewood may be stored outdoors on any property so long as it is neatly stacked and is not a public nuisance pursuant to Section 5.425, nor offensive to the surrounding neighbors.

(3)    Building Material. Building material, including lumber, pipe, roofing material or other material required for an in progress construction project, may be stored in a manner not offensive to surrounding neighbors for a period of time not to exceed 90 days from the start of the project. Permits may be issued for longer periods if the size of the project requires it, there is a valid building permit for the project, and the project is under active construction.


5.455 Garbage.

All garbage shall be contained in a closed container stored in a manner not offensive to surrounding neighbors. Other trash and debris shall be removed within 10 days from the date of deposit, except that leaves and trimmings may be stored in a manner not offensive to surrounding neighbors.


5.460 Blocking Public Right-of-Way Prohibited.

None of the items mentioned in Sections 5.400 to 5.527 shall be placed in the public right-of-way without a permit from the City.


5.465 Trees.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1706, adopted 01-13-2020.]


5.470 Noxious Vegetation.

No owner or person in charge of any property, improved or unimproved, shall permit noxious vegetation upon the property and the adjacent right-of-way.

(1)    The term “noxious vegetation” does not include vegetation that constitutes an agricultural crop or native landscape, unless that vegetation is deemed a hazard within subsection (2) of this section. The term “noxious vegetation” does not include vegetation that is part of the natural topographic condition of City or state parks and open space.

(2)    The term “noxious vegetation” includes:

(a)    Weeds listed under any weed category in the Oregon State Noxious Weed List maintained by the Oregon State Weed Board and lawn grass more than eight inches high and any poison oak, poison ivy or similar poisonous vegetation;

(b)    Tree and bush limbs 11 feet or less from the sidewalk surface or 14 feet or less from the street surface;

(c)    Hedges, shrubs, bush limbs, or debris encroaching into the edge of the street or sidewalk;

(d)    Vegetation that is a fire hazard including dead or dying trees, dead bushes, stumps and any other combustible material likely to cause a fire;

(e)    Blackberry vines or thickets and other invasive species that extend into a public right-of-way or across a property line, or conceal trash/debris, or create harborage for potential criminal activity;

(f)    Vegetation that is a health hazard because it impairs the view of a public right-of-way or interferes with the adjoining street or sidewalk traffic or creates rodent harborage.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1699, adopted 09-09-2019.]


5.475 Drainage.

(1)    No owner or person in charge of any building or structure may suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from such building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk, or to flow across such sidewalk.

(2)    The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk.


5.477 Erosion

(1)    No owner or person in charge of any project, building, structure, or parcel of land may intentionally or inadvertently allow any visible or measurable erosion which has entered, or is likely to enter, a public storm drainage facility or any surface water body as determined by the following criteria:

(a)    Deposition of soil, sand, dirt, dust, mud, rock, gravel, refuse, or any other organic or inorganic material exceeding one cubic foot in volume in a public right-of-way or public property, or into the City surface water drainage system either by direct deposit, dropping, discharge, or as a result of erosion; or

(b)    Flow of water over bare soils, turbid, or sediment laden flows, or bare soil slopes, where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on the property owner’s parcel of land; or

(c)    Earth slides, mud flows, land slumping, slope failure, or other earth movement that leaves, or is likely to leave, the property of origin.

(2)    Owners and persons in charge of any project, building, structure, or parcel of land shall be solely responsible for the cleanup of sidewalks, roadways, natural drainage ways, and adjacent properties of any debris, soil, dirt and foreign materials originating or derived from their building, structure or parcel of land.

[Section 5.477 added by Ordinance No. 1382, adopted October 23, 1995; amended by Ordinance No. 1453, adopted June 12, 2000.]


5.480 Radio and Television Interference.

(1)    No person may operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception; provided, that the radio or television receiver interfered with is of good engineering design.

(2)    This section does not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.


5.485 Unnecessary Noise.

[Section 5.485 repealed by Ordinance No. 1496, amending the West Linn Municipal Code by adding new Section 5.487 entitled Sound Levels and Noise, adopted on August 20, 2003.]


5.487 Sound Levels and Noise.

(1)    Purpose. The City Council of the City of West Linn finds that low and moderate ambient noise levels are a significant City amenity. They find further that the level of noise that exists in a community directly affects the livability of the community and the health, comfort and welfare of its residents. It is, therefore, the express intent and purpose of this section to establish noise level standards that protect and improve the quality of life of West Linn’s residents at work, rest and play and that can be objectively measured and enforced.

(2)    General Prohibition. No person shall make, continue, assist in making, or allow:

(a)    Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or raucous noise;

(b)    Any noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety, or peace of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the City; or

(c)    Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business.

(3)    The standard for judging loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises shall be that of an average, reasonable person with ordinary sensibilities after taking into consideration:

(a)    The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial;

(b)    The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;

(c)    The time of day or night the sound occurs;

(d)    The duration of the sound; and

(e)    Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

(4)    Prohibited Noises. The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this chapter. This enumeration does not constitute an exclusive list. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, create, assist in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of any of the following:

(a)    Radios, Televisions, Stereos, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. The use or operation of any device designed for sound production or reproduction, including, but not limited to, any radio, musical instrument, television set, stereophonic equipment, or similar device that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential areas, including multi-family or single-family dwellings.

(b)    Animals or Birds. Frequent or continuing noise for a period of 15 minutes in any hour emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible, except for animals provoked by a person trespassing, threatening to trespass, or unambiguously taunting the animal. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls, or otherwise cares for the animal or bird.

(c)    Mechanical Devices. The use of any mechanical device, fixed or mobile, operated by compressed air, steam, gasoline, electricity or otherwise, including the use of domestic power tools for lawn care, landscaping, and gardening, as well as hobby, craft, and household maintenance, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(d)    Construction or Repair of Building, Excavation of Streets and Highways. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, structure, street, or highway, between the following hours:

(i)    7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday;

(ii)    5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday and Federal holidays. In nonemergency situations, the City Manager may issue a construction noise permit, upon application, if the City Manager determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the loud and raucous noise, and if the City Administrator further determines that loss or inconvenience would otherwise result. The permit shall grant permission in nonemergency cases for a period of not more than seven days. The permit may be renewed once for a period of seven days or less.

(e)    Yelling, Shouting, and Similar Activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or creation of noise in residential areas or in public places, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities, unless a special permit is granted by the City Manager. This section is to be applied only to those situations where the disturbance is not a result of the content of the communication but due to the volume, duration, location, timing or other factors not based on content.

(f)    Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems, and Similar Devices. The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or other device for producing or reproducing sound is prohibited without a permit from the City Manager. The City Manager may grant a special permit to responsible persons or organizations for the broadcast or amplification of sound as a part of a national, State, or City event, public festival, or special events of a noncommercial nature. This permit shall not be required for any public performance, gathering, or parade for which a permit authorizing the event has been obtained from the City.

(g)    Emergency Signaling Devices. Owning, installing or causing to be installed any fire or anti-theft alarm system that produces an audible alarm on any building or any motor vehicle, unless such alarm terminates after 15 minutes of activation when there is no emergency. Existing systems shall be altered to conform to this section if the City or any of its officers receives a written complaint from a person disturbed by a nonconforming alarm. Nonconforming alarm owners shall have 60 calendar days to bring such alarm into compliance after receipt of written notification of its noncompliance.

(h)    The use of any compression or dynamic braking device, commonly referred to as “jake brakes,” for reasons other than to avoid imminent danger to persons or property, with the exception of vehicles traveling in transit through the City on I-205.

(i)    Vehicle Horns, Signaling Devices, and Similar Devices. The sounding of any horn, siren, gong, or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicles on any street, except as a necessary warning of danger to property or person.

(j)    The following forms of unnecessary vehicle noise:

(i)    Causing the squealing of tires by excessive acceleration or speed except to avoid imminent danger to person or property.

(ii)    Revving of an engine excessively or in a way unnecessary to the operation of the vehicle.

(k)    Loading or Unloading Merchandise, Materials, and Equipment. Unreasonably loud and excessive noise produced by the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence.

(5)    Exemptions. Sounds caused by the following are exempt from this section:

(a)    Sounds used for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or produced by the performance of emergency work, vehicles or equipment, including police, fire and ambulance.

(b)    Sounds of regular vehicular traffic upon premises open to the public.

(c)    Operations of the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) in constructing or maintaining any State highway, or operations required by ODOT to take place outside of the hours allowed in subsection (4)(d) of this section.

(d)    Operations required to take place outside of the hours allowed in subsection (4)(d) of this section by any Federal or State agency for the construction, excavation or maintenance of any structure or roadway, whether public or private.

(e)    Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or significant loss of property.

(f)    Noise from temporary construction activities that take place between hours allowed in subsection (4)(d) of this section, or those construction activities that are allowed due to a construction noise permit from the City Manager.

(g)    Outdoor School and Playground Activities. Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events.

(h)    Other Outdoor Events. Athletic events, outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting events, and other similar outdoor events; provided, that any required permits have been obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.

(i)    Holiday related activities, such as fireworks, on Independence Day and New Year’s Eve.

(6)    Penalties. A violation of this section is a Class A violation and a public nuisance.

(7)    Special Permits.

(a)    The City Manager may grant a special permit to any person or organization if findings are made that immediate compliance with any requirement of this section cannot be achieved because of special circumstances rendering immediate compliance unreasonable in light of economic or physical factors, encroachment upon an existing noise source or because of the unavailability of feasible technology or control methods.

(b)    Any such special permit shall be granted only for the minimum time period found to be necessary under the facts and circumstances.

(c)    The City Manager may attach conditions of approval to a special permit to mitigate noise impacts to surrounding properties.

(d)    The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[New Section 5.487 added by Ordinance No. 1496, adopted 08-20-2003; amended by Ordinance No. 1581, adopted 11-24-2008; amended by Ordinance No. 1588, adopted 08-10-2009; amended by Ordinance No. 1612, adopted 04-08-2013; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


5.490 Notices and Advertisements.

(1)    No person may affix or cause any placard, bill, advertisement or poster to be affixed upon real or personal property, including motor vehicles, or public or private property, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the City regulating the use of and the location of signs and advertising.

(2)    No person, either as principal or agent, may scatter, or cause any placards, advertisements or other similar material to be scattered on public property.


5.495 Violations – Public Nuisance Declaration – Abatement.

(1)    The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in Sections 5.405 to 5.490 are declared to be Class A violations and public nuisances, and such acts, conditions or objects as a public nuisance may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Sections 5.400 to 5.527.

(2)    All violations of Sections 8.000 to 8.175 and 8.300 to 8.315 are declared to be public nuisances and may be abated as set forth in Sections 5.400 to 5.527. All violations of the Community Development Code and all violations of any order or condition of approval issued pursuant to the Community Development Code are declared to be public nuisances and may be abated as provided in Sections 5.400 to 5.527. All violations of Section 3.300 are declared to be public nuisances and may be abated as provided in Section 5.400 to 5.527. All unresolved violations of the provisions specified in this section are deemed to be current and ongoing nuisances. A violation that involves a physical change to property is considered resolved only when the property is restored to its previous condition.

(3)    In addition to the nuisances listed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, all activities or man-made conditions on a property that have an unreasonable adverse effect on other properties may be declared a nuisance by the Council and abated as provided in Sections 5.400 to 5.527. A declaration of a nuisance under this subsection shall be supported by findings relating to the nature of the nuisance, the effect on other properties, whether permits were necessary and were obtained, and the effect on the natural environment.

(4)    In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within Sections 5.400 to 5.527, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the Council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the City is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in Sections 5.400 to 5.527.

[Section 5.495, Subsection (2), amended by Ordinance No. 1449 adopted 05-22-2000; Subsection (2) amended and new subsections (3) and (4) added by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


5.500 Notice – Posting and Mailing – Contents.

(1)    Upon determination by the City Manager that a nuisance exists as defined in this or any other ordinance of the City, a notice shall be posted on the premises where the nuisance exists. The persons responsible for the nuisance include the owners of the property and any person in charge of the property.

(2)    At the time of posting, the City Manager shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner and/or the person in charge of the property at the last known address of such owner or other person.

(3)    The posted and mailed notice declaring the nuisance shall contain:

(a)    A description of the real property by street address or otherwise, on which such nuisance exists;

(b)    A description of the nuisance and a statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of fines, jail or additional penalties;

(c)    A statement that the owner and any other person in charge of the property responsible for the nuisance may protest the abatement by giving notice to the City Manager within 10 days from the date of the notice;

(d)    A direction to the persons responsible for the nuisance to abate the nuisance within 10 days from the date of the notice; 

(e)    A statement that unless such nuisance is removed to the satisfaction of the City, the City may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property and against property of any person responsible for the nuisance plus any fines, jail or additional penalties; and

(f)    Any additional conditions relating to the abatement, including conditions that the work be performed by qualified persons, conditions disqualifying certain individuals from performing the work, conditions that necessary permits be obtained, or other conditions intended to ensure that the nuisance will be properly abated.

(4)    In the event that the City Manager determines that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance, the notice shall not include the statements required by subsections (3)(d) and (e) of this section and shall instead include a statement that the City Manager has determined that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance and a statement that unless a protest is filed within 10 days from the date of the notice, the City shall abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property and against property of any person responsible for the nuisance.

(5)    Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing the notice shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing and posting.

(6)    An error in the name or address of any person entitled to notice shall not make the notice void and in such a case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

(7)    The City Manager may determine that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate only if the City Manager finds that the person responsible for the nuisance is unlikely to properly abate the nuisance or if summary abatement is necessary. The determination that a person is unlikely to properly abate the nuisance shall be based on findings as to one of the following:

(a)    Whether the person acted intentionally and whether the nuisance is egregious; or

(b)    Whether the person had knowledge that the action was a violation of state law, or city code; or

(c)    Whether the person has the professional expertise to perform the abatement.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1699, adopted 09-09-2019.]


5.505 Abatement – By Owner or Other Person Responsible for the Nuisance.

(1)    Unless the City Manager has determined that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance, within 10 days after the posting and mailing of the notice as provided in Section 5.500, the owner, person in charge of the property or other person responsible for the nuisance shall remove the nuisance in accordance with the notice or show that no nuisance exists. Any person removing the nuisance shall notify the City Manager before removing the notice and shall allow the City to inspect during and on completion of the removal.

(2)    A person protesting that no nuisance exists shall file with the City Manager a written statement specifying the basis for the protest within 10 days of the posting of the notice.

(3)    The statement shall be referred to the Municipal Court. At the time set for consideration of the protest, the person protesting the nuisance may appear and be heard by the Municipal Court, and the Municipal Court shall thereupon determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists. The Municipal Court may impose conditions relating to the abatement to ensure that the nuisance will be properly abated.

(4)    Municipal Court determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement of protest has been filed.

(5)    If the Municipal Court determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the person responsible for the nuisance shall, within 10 days after such determination, abate such nuisance, unless the Municipal Court determines that the person responsible for the nuisance should not be given the opportunity to abate. The determination that a person should not be given the opportunity to abate the nuisance shall be based on findings related to Section 5.500(7). In the event the person responsible fails to abate the nuisance within 10 days, the City may, without further proceedings, have the nuisance abated. 

(6)    If no protest is filed with the City Manager within the time allowed, a nuisance shall be deemed to exist and the City may proceed to abate said nuisance and collect the costs incurred by the City in abating the nuisance by the methods set forth in Sections 5.510 to 5.525 plus any fines, jail or additional penalties.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1699, adopted 09-09-2019.]


5.510 Abatement – By City.

(1)    If the nuisance has not been abated within the time allowed or if it is determined that the persons responsible for the nuisance should not be afforded the opportunity to abate, the City may cause the nuisance to be abated.

(2)    The City officer charged with abatement of such nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a nuisance. However, before entering upon private property, the City officer shall obtain the consent of an occupant or a warrant of the Municipal Court authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection or removal, except when an emergency exists.

(3)    No warrant shall be issued under Sections 5.400 to 5.527 until an affidavit has been filed with the Municipal Court, showing probable cause for entry into or upon private property, by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed entry, citing Sections 5.400 to 5.527 as the basis for the entry into or upon private property, and setting forth relevant facts to support the issuance of the warrant to enter, inspect and abate.

(4)    No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent a City officer from entering upon private premises and inspecting or removing any nuisance when an emergency exists or the City officer exhibits a warrant authorizing entry.

(5)    The City Manager shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in declaring and abating the nuisance and shall include therein any charges for administrative overhead.

[Section 5.510 amended by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002.]


5.515 Abatement – Assessment of Costs.

(1)    The City Manager or designee, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to all persons responsible for the nuisance, a notice stating:

(a)    The total cost of declaring and abating the nuisance, including administrative overhead;

(b)    That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against property of persons responsible for the nuisance unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice;

(c)    That any person responsible for the costs may file a notice of objection to the costs with the City Manager not more than 10 days from the date of the notice;

(d)    The City Manager or Municipal Court may provide financial assistance for up to half of the cost of abatement to a low-income resident who meets the qualifying income limits identified in Section 4.155.

(2)    Upon the expiration of 10 days after the date of the notice, the Municipal Court shall hear and determine the costs to be assessed. If no objections are received, the Municipal Court shall adopt the City Manager’s statement of costs.

(3)    If the costs are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, an assessment of the costs shall constitute a lien upon property of all persons responsible for the nuisance. 

(4)    The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Such interest shall commence to run from date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(5)    An error in the name of any person to whom notice is sent shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against property of the person responsible for the nuisance.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1699, adopted 09-09-2019.]


5.520 Liability.

The City shall not be liable to any person for any loss or injury to person or property growing out of any casualty or accident happening to such person or property on account of a property owner, lessee or occupant of property who fails or neglects to promptly comply with the duties imposed by this section. The City shall be exempt from all liability, including but not limited to common-law liability that it might otherwise incur to an injured party as a result of the City’s negligent failure to abate a nuisance. If any property owner, lessee or occupant, by his or her failure or neglect to perform any duty required of him or her by the terms of this section, contributes in causing injury or damages, they shall reimburse the City for all damages or injury it has sustained or has been compelled to pay in such case, including but not limited to reasonable attorney fees for the defense of the same, and such payments as may be enforced in any court having jurisdiction.


5.525 Summary Abatement.

The procedure provided by Sections 5.400 to 5.527 is not exclusive but is in addition to procedure provided by other ordinances, and the City Manager or designee may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1699, adopted 09-09-2019.]


5.527 Duty to Abate.

The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating Sections 5.400 to 5.527 but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance.

[Section 5.527 added by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


5.535 Judicial Review.

Judicial review of the decision of the Municipal Court declaring a nuisance shall be on the record by writ of review pursuant to ORS Chapter 34 and not otherwise.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1485, adopted 04-17-2002; amended by Ordinance No. 1699, adopted 09-09-2019.]


PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES


5.550 Establishment of Park Rules and Hours.

The Parks and Recreation Director is delegated authority to establish hours of operation and rules for the use and enjoyment for all City parks and recreational facilities including boat ramps and boat landings. Hours of operation that differ from the standard park hours in Section 5.552 shall be posted for public view. However, the posting of signs shall not be a prerequisite to a prosecution of violations of this section or any other park or open space rule.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1603, adopted 09-12-2011; amended by Ordinance No. 1652, adopted 09-12-2016.]


5.552 Standard Park and Open Space Hours.

(1)    All public parks and open spaces of the City shall be open to the public from one hour before sunrise until one hour after sunset. Nothing in this section prohibits citing for criminal trespass under State law. Violating standard park and open space hours is a Class B violation.

(2)    Exceptions. The following people are permitted in City parks and open spaces during the hours of closure:

(a)    Police, Fire, and Parks Department employees on official business;

(b)    Staff and participants attending any event that is part of the Parks and Recreation Department’s programming; and

(c)    Individuals and groups that have a permit issued by the Parks and Recreation Director for an event that permits occupancy outside of the standard park and open space hours. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1652, adopted 09-12-2016.]


5.555 Violation – Penalty and Exclusion.

(1)    Rules Violation. Violation of any parks and recreational facilities rules established by the Parks and Recreation Director by any person shall constitute a Class B violation.

(2)    Violation. Any person who violates any of the parks and recreational facilities provisions in this chapter is guilty of a violation and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.205, unless the specific provision requires a different penalty.

(3)    Exclusion. In addition to other remedies provided for violation of this chapter, or of any of the laws of the State of Oregon, any peace officer or designated City official may exclude any person who violates any applicable provision of law in a City park or open space from any or all City parks for a period of 30 days for any violation or for a period not to exceed 120 days for criminal offenses. If the person to be excluded from a park has been excluded from a City park on two or more occasions within two years before the date of the present exclusion for criminal offenses, the exclusion shall be for a period not to exceed 180 days. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the State or Federal constitution. However, a person engaged in protected activity who commits acts that are not protected and violate applicable provisions of law shall be subject to exclusion as provided by this section.

(a)    For purposes of this section, “applicable provision of law” includes any applicable provision of this chapter; City ordinance; rule, regulation, order or permit issued by the Parks and Recreation Director or the City Manager; State or City criminal laws and vehicle codes; or any other applicable Federal or State law or regulation.

(b)    Criminal Trespass. No person shall enter or remain in any park or open space at any time during which a notice of exclusion is effective under this section. Entering a park or open space in violation of an exclusion order constitutes criminal trespass in the second degree, which is a Class C misdemeanor.

(4)    Exclusion Process.

(a)    Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any City park or open space. The notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall be signed by the issuing party; the consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.

(b)    A person receiving an exclusion notice may appeal to have the written notice rescinded or the period shortened pursuant to the City’s administrative appeals process. The appeal notice shall specify the relief sought and the reason for the requested relief. 

The Hearing Officer shall uphold the exclusion if, upon de novo review, the preponderance of the evidence convinces the Hearing Officer that, more likely than not, the person in fact committed the crime or violation, and that the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law. If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under Section 1.410(2)(a), the effectiveness of the exclusion shall be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal. If the exclusion is affirmed, the exclusion shall be effective immediately upon issuance of the written decision and run for the specified number of days.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14; amended by Ordinance No. 1652, adopted 09-12-2016.]


5.560 Vehicles and Horses Prohibited in City Parks.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or to ride or lead a horse within the boundaries of the public parks of the

City. This prohibition shall not apply to designated public streets or public parking areas.


5.565 Camping Prohibited.

(1)    No person shall camp in a tent, shelter, camper, vehicle or trailer in any park or open space, including park roads or parking lots, at any time, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section. The definitions in Section 5.115 apply to this section. Prohibited camping is a Class C misdemeanor.

(2)    Exceptions. The Parks and Recreation Director may allow camping in parks and open spaces by:

(a)    Issuing a permit that authorizes camping, not to exceed five days, in accordance with any limitations, terms, and conditions of the permit; or

(b)    Authorizing an event as part of the Parks and Recreation Department’s programming.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1652, adopted 09-12-2016.]


FIRE HAZARDS


5.600 Combustible Vegetation Prohibited.

It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property or premises within the City to allow or permit any vegetation which has dried out to the extent of becoming readily combustible to remain on said property when such dry and combustible vegetation lies within 100 feet of any building or structure.


5.605 Vegetation Defined.

Vegetation, as used in Sections 5.600 to 5.615, means any growth which, when allowed to dry normally during the summer and fall dry season, becomes combustible and thereby becomes a fire hazard. This shall include but not be limited to: grass, weeds, vines, brush, scrub trees, and landscape plantings, should they be allowed to go unattended to the point of becoming a fire hazard.


5.610 Fire Chief Determination – Notice.

Upon the determination of the Fire Chief that a fire hazard exists, and upon written notification to the owner and the occupant of the premises that such fire hazard does exist, it shall be required that the owner or occupant cut and remove all vegetation lying within 100 feet of any building or structure whether such building or structure lies on the property of the owner or occupant or on the property of another. Such vegetation shall be kept clean and free from said premises throughout the dry seasons of the year.


5.615 Removal by City.

In the event that the owner or occupant of the premises fails or refuses to cut and remove such vegetation within five days of notification to do so, or in the event the owner or occupant cannot be located, the City may cause such clearing and removal of vegetation to be done and assess the cost thereof as a lien against the property.


EXPLOSIVES


5.650 Purpose.

It is the intention of the Council that Sections 5.650 to 5.725 shall supplement and shall be uniformly interpreted with the laws and regulations of the United States and the State, so far as possible, to avoid an undue burden on commerce.


5.655 Definitions.

As used in Sections 5.650 to 5.725, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words mean:

Explosives. Chemical compounds, mixtures, or devices, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion with substantially instantaneous release of gas or heat, including but not limited to Class A and Class B explosives as classified by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nitrocarbonitrates and fireworks as defined by ORS 480.110, but excluding dangerous articles such as flammable liquids, flammable solids, compressed flammable or nonflammable gases, oxidizing material, corrosive liquids, poisonous liquids or gases, radioactive materials, and small arms ammunition.

The Interstate Commerce Commission classifies explosives as follows:

(1)    Class A: Explosives having detonating or otherwise maximum hazard such as dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide, fulminate of mercury, black powder, blasting caps, and detonating primers.

(2)    Class B: Explosives having flammable hazard, such as propellant explosives (including some smokeless powders), photographic flash powders, and some special fireworks;

(3)    Class C: Explosives including certain types of manufactured articles which contain Class A or Class B explosives, or both, as components but in restricted quantities, such as small arms ammunition, common fireworks, cordeau detonant, and explosive rivets.


5.660 Applicability.

(1)    Except as Sections 5.650 to 5.725 may conflict with the regulations, laws and Constitution of the United States and the State, it shall apply to the interstate and intrastate commerce.

(2)    Sections 5.650 to 5.725 shall not apply to:

(a)    The armed forces of the United States or the militia of any state.

(b)    The use of explosives.


5.665 Storage – Permit Required.

No person may store any explosives unless a permit is first obtained from the City Manager. A revocable permit valid for one year may be issued by the City Manager.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.670 Storage – Application for Permit.

Written application for a permit or for renewal of a permit to store explosives shall be made to the City Manager on forms provided by the City. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council, which shall be returned to the applicant if the application is denied.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.675 Storage – Consideration of Application.

The City Manager may either grant or deny the application for a permit, taking into consideration:

(1)    The congestion of persons, the type of buildings, the volume of vehicular traffic, and the topography in the vicinity of the storage area;

(2)    The condition and construction of the structure or magazine used or to be used for storage of explosives and the applicable fire zone regulations;

(3)    The adequacy of water supply in the storage area;

(4)    “The American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives,” published by the Institute of Makers of Explosives, September 30, 1955;

(5)    Any other factors relevant to public safety.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.680 Issuance of Storage Permit.

In granting a permit, the City Manager may limit the quantity of explosives which may be stored by the applicant and may prescribe in the permit the terms and conditions the City Manager considers necessary for the protection of the public from the dangers of explosion. The City Manager shall issue the permit.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.685 Overnight Storage Limitations.

No permit may be granted to store or keep over 50 pounds of explosives or over 500 blasting caps any place within the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.690 Revocation of Permit.

The City Manager may revoke a permit if:

(1)    Conditions considered in granting the permit change at the storage area or in the vicinity and the public is endangered by the storage of explosives as authorized by the permit;

(2)    The permittee is convicted of a violation of Sections 5.650 to 5.725;

(3)    The permittee is convicted for violation of Federal or State laws or regulations relating to safety in storing and transporting explosives.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.695 Appeal.

The City Manager shall give written notice of his or her decision to deny or revoke a permit to the applicant or permittee. A decision by the City Manager to deny or revoke a permit may be appealed to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


5.700 Inspections.

It shall be the duty of the fire chief to enforce the provisions of Sections 5.650 to 5.725 relating to storage, and he or she shall regularly inspect buildings where explosives are stored to determine whether storage practices conform to the provisions of Sections 5.650 to 5.725 and the limitations imposed by the permit.


5.705 Transportation – General Applicability.

Every motor vehicle transporting explosives shall be operated in compliance with Sections 5.650 to 5.725 unless federal or state laws and regulations impose a greater affirmative obligation or a greater restraint, or unless compliance would prevent full compliance with Federal or State laws or regulations by persons subject thereto.


5.710 Transportation – Operation of the Vehicle.

Persons shall operate motor vehicles transporting explosives with the highest degree of care to decrease the probability of danger to life and property in the following manner:

(1)    The vehicle shall be driven only upon Highway 212 and Highway 43 passing through the City, except when delivering or receiving explosives off said highways, in which event the vehicle shall be driven upon a route prearranged with the Chief of Police to avoid, whenever possible, congested streets, heavy traffic, bus routes, viaducts, dangerous crossings, and any dwellings, buildings, or places where persons work, congregate, or assemble;

(2)    Except when passing, the vehicle shall be kept at least 300 feet behind other motor vehicles transporting explosives moving in the same direction;

(3)    The vehicle shall not be driven near fires of any kind burning on or near a street until passage can be made safely.


5.715 Transportation – Competent Person to Attend Vehicle.

When transporting explosives the vehicle shall be attended by a competent person whose primary duty is to attend the vehicle. Such person shall be within sight of and in close proximity to the vehicle and shall have on his or her person the appropriate keys for starting the vehicle. Vehicles are deemed unattended when left in care of a person on duty in the regular course of another business such as service station attendants, motel operators, or merchant patrolmen. The police are authorized to move unattended vehicles to a safe place, and to enter premises at any time to remove an unattended vehicle loaded with explosives.


5.720 Transportation – Parking and Stopping Restricted.

(1)    Except as provided in this section, no person may park a vehicle loaded with explosives in the City for any purpose, and no person may stop such a vehicle for any reason except momentarily to comply with moving traffic laws.

(2)    A person may park an attended vehicle for the sole purpose of, and while physically engaged in, loading or unloading explosives from the vehicle, or changing drivers.

(3)    No person may refuel a vehicle within the City except in extreme emergency and then only with enough fuel to enable it to proceed to the first refueling point beyond the City. The engine of the vehicle shall be stopped during refueling.


5.725 Transportation – Disabled Vehicles.

(1)    If a vehicle transporting explosives is disabled, the driver shall immediately cause notice to be given to the Police and Fire Departments.

(2)    The Fire Chief shall determine whether or not the vehicle may be moved, and where it may be repaired when loaded.

(3)    If the disabled vehicle is moved when loaded with explosives, it shall be moved with a police escort to a location where repairs can be made without endangering life or property.

(4)    If transfer of the explosives is imperative, persons making the transfer shall employ adequate safety measures under the supervision of the Fire and Police Departments.


BLASTING


5.750 Permit Required.

It is unlawful for any person, company, or corporation, without first having received a permit from the City Manager as hereafter provided for, to explode or cause to be exploded any gunpowder, dynamite, giant powder, nitroglycerin, or other explosive for the purpose of blasting out rock, gravel, earth, or other substance within the corporate limits of the City.


5.755 Permit Affidavit.

The City Manager, after notifying Mayor and Council, shall have power and authority to issue a permit for blasting but before so doing shall require the person, company, or corporation to whom the permit is to be issued to make application in the form of affidavit and containing the following information:

(1)    The name and address of the person, company, or corporation applying for said permit, and the name and address of the blaster or of the person who will actually supervise the blasting;

(2)    Location where it is desired to use the explosives;

(3)    The maximum quantity and kind of explosives to be used at one time and the length of time over which the blasting will continue;

(4)    The experience and qualifications of the blaster or person who will supervise the blasting operation;

(5)    Facts sufficient to establish the financial responsibility of any individual bondsman or the bonding company who will provide the bond as hereinafter provided for.

(6)    A blasting plan prepared and signed by a certified and licensed blasting consultant.

[Section 5.755, amended by Ordinance No. 1509 adopted 10-06-2004.]


5.758 Notification Required.

The contractor is responsible for providing adequate notification to the affected residents of the City of West Linn.

(1)    The affected area includes all properties located within 1,000 feet of the blasting area.

(2)    The contractor is responsible for notifying all property owners in the affected area.

(3)    The contractor is responsible for notifying all Neighborhood Associations in the affected area and attending a regularly scheduled Neighborhood Association meeting to discuss the blasting plan and answer questions.

(4)    The contractor is responsible for notifying the City, County, and State Police/Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue District and receive their concurrence.

[Section 5.758, added by Ordinance No. 1509 adopted 10-06-2004.]


5.760 Insurance Requirements.

The City Manager, before issuing a permit for blasting, shall require the person, company, or corporation to whom the permit is issued to execute and deliver a certificate of liability insurance to include X,C,U coverage in a form to be approved by the City in an amount not less than $1,000,000, or in such additional amount as may be reasonable under all of the circumstances then existing. Said certificate of insurance shall state on its face that the underlying liability insurance policy includes coverage for indemnification of the City, its officers, agents, and employees and the owners of all property within said City from loss or damage that might result from such blasting and coverage to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officers, agents, and employees in and from any cost, attorney’s fees or judgments incurred or rendered in any and all suits or actions brought against it as a result in whole or in part from said blasting. The certificate shall also state that the insurance company must give the city a minimum of 10 days’ notice of cancellation of the required liability insurance coverage. The City Manager shall have the power and authority to limit the force of the explosions to be made and if it is deemed to be in the public interest, after examining the information contained in the application for a blasting permit and after examining all of the pertinent circumstances surrounding the proposed blasting, may then refuse to issue such permit.


5.765 Revocation of Permit.

The City Manager shall have the power to revoke any permit heretofore or hereafter issued under the provisions hereof for failure to comply with any of the provisions of Sections 5.750 to 5.785, or for any other reasonable cause.


5.770 Appeal.

A decision by the City Manager to deny or revoke a blasting permit may be appealed to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


5.775 Nonliability of City.

By the passage of the ordinance codified in Sections 5.750 to 5.785 or the issuance of any permit hereunder, the City assumes no responsibility for any damage caused by the person, company, or corporation blasting with the said City.


5.780 General Regulations.

All persons blasting in the City pursuant to the permit duly issued by the City Manager or otherwise shall, as a minimum precaution, comply with the following regulations:

(1)    Blasting operations shall not be conducted within the City limits between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., nor at any time on a Sunday or legal holiday.

(2)    All individuals will possess the appropriate State and Federal licenses.

(3)    No person shall handle explosives in connection with blasting operations who is not the person named in the application for permit, either as the blaster or supervisor, except for persons under the direct supervision of said supervisor.

(4)    No person shall handle explosives while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics.

(5)    Persons authorized to prepare explosive charges or conduct blasting operations shall use every reasonable precaution to insure the safety of the general public and workmen.

(6)    When blasting is done in congested areas or in close proximity to a structure, railway, or highway, the blast shall be covered before firing with a mat constructed so that it is capable of preventing fragments from being thrown.

(7)    At least three minutes before firing a blast, warning of a blast shall be given by causing a competent man carrying a red flag to be stationed at a reasonable distance from the blast, at each avenue of approach or point of danger.

(8)    Electric blasting caps only shall be used as the detonating agent for blasting operations in congested districts, or on highways, or adjacent to highways open to traffic.

(9)    No person shall attempt to use dynamite that is frozen.

(10)    When blasting caps are used they shall be securely attached to the safety fuse with a standard cap crimper. All priming shall be done at least 50 feet from any magazine.

(11)    Blasting caps shall be inserted in the explosives only as required for each round of blasting.

(12)    Blasting caps shall not be inserted in the explosives first without first making a hole in the cartridge with a sharpened stick or standard cap crimper.

(13)    All drill holes shall be sufficiently large to freely admit the insertion of the cartridges of explosives.

(14)    Tamping shall be done only with wooden rods without metal parts.

(15)    Holes shall be stemmed with earth or sand. Rock chips, gravel, or similar material shall not be used for tamping the bore holes. No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired at the next round of blasting. After charging, all remaining explosives shall be immediately returned to a safe storage magazine.

(16)    Drilling shall not be started until all remaining butts of old holes are examined with a wooden stick for exploded charges, and if any are found, same shall be re-fired before work proceeds.

(17)    No person shall be allowed to deepen drill holes which have contained explosives.

(18)    Explosives shall not be extracted from a hole that has once been charged or has misfired unless it is impossible to detonate the unexploded charge by insertion of a fresh additional primer or by drilling a hole in close proximity and at a safe distance from the unexploded charge.

(19)    If there are any misfires while using cap and fuse, all persons shall remain away from the charge for at least two hours. If electric blasting caps are used and a misfire occurs, this waiting period may be reduced to 30 minutes. Misfires shall be handled under the direction of the person in charge of the blasting and all wires shall be carefully traced and search made for unexploded charges.

(20)    Blasters, when testing circuit to charged holes, shall use sufficient lead in wires to be at a safe distance and shall use only approved type of testers. No tests of circuits in charged holes shall be made until all persons are at a safe distance.

(21)    The blaster shall cause a sufficient warning to be sounded and shall cause all persons to retreat to a safe shelter before he or she sets off blast and shall also see that none return until he or she reports it safe for them to do so.

(22)    Only the person making wire connections in electrical firing shall fire the shot. All connections should be made from bore hole back to firing machine, and the lead in wires connected to the blasting machine only when the charge is to be fired.

(23)    Empty boxes, which have previously contained high explosives, shall not be used for any purpose, but shall be destroyed by burning in the open air.

(24)    No person shall smoke while handling explosives or in the vicinity thereof.

(25)    No open flame lamp or light shall be used in the vicinity of explosives.

(26)    Containers of explosives shall not be opened in any magazine, or within

50 feet of any magazine. In opening containers, wooden wedges and either wood, fiber, or rubber mallets shall be used. No metal tools except brass shall be used for opening any containers of explosives.

(27)    Explosives shall not be stored overnight or during weekends within the City limits.

[Section 5.780, amended by Ordinance No. 1509 adopted 10-06-2004.]


5.785 Application Fee.

All applications for permits to blast under the provision of Sections 5.750 to 5.785 shall be made in writing and filed with the City Manager and shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council.


Chapter 6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

General Provisions

6.000    Short Title.

6.005    Applicability of State Traffic Laws.

6.010    Definitions.

Administration

6.015    Powers of the Council.

6.020    Duties of the City Manager.

6.025    Public Danger.

6.030    Standards.

6.035    Authority of Police and Fire Officers.

Traffic Control Devices

6.040    Repealed.

6.045    Control Devices – Evidence of Lawful Installation.

6.050    Existing Control Devices.

General Regulations

6.055    Repealed.

6.060    Crossing Private Property.

6.065    Repealed.

6.070    Unlawful Riding.

6.075    Clinging to Vehicles.

6.080    Sled and Skateboard Prohibition.

6.085    Repealed.

6.090    Repealed.

6.095    Removing Glass and Debris.

Parking Regulations

6.100    Parking in a Single Space.

6.105    Prohibited Parking and Standing of Commercial Vehicles and Trailers.

6.110    Prohibited Parking.

6.115    Use of Loading Zone or Alley.

6.120    Repealed.

6.125    Action by Police Officer.

6.130    Repealed.

6.135    Repealed.

6.140    Extension of Parking Time.

6.145    Exemptions.

Bicycles

6.150    Repealed.

6.155    Bicycle Operating Rules.

6.160    Impounding of Bicycles.

Pedestrians

6.165    Use of Sidewalks.

6.170    Right Angles.

6.175    Obedience to Traffic Lights.

Funeral Processions

6.180    Funeral Procession.

Offenses on Other Property Open to Public Travel

6.185    Repealed.

6.190    Repealed.

6.195    Repealed.

6.200    Repealed.

6.205    Repealed.

Parking Citations – Impoundment

6.210    Citation or Towing of Illegally Parked Vehicle.

6.215    Repealed.

6.220    Owner Responsibility.

6.225    Registered Owner Presumption.

6.230    Impoundment of Vehicles.

PROHIBITED PARKING

6.250    Repealed.

6.255    Repealed.

6.260    Repealed.

6.265    Repealed.

6.270    Registration Search – Notice to Owner.

6.275    Claiming Vehicles.

6.280    Portland Avenue Parking Restrictions.

OFF-ROAD VEHICLES

6.300    Definitions.

6.305    Operation of Off-Road Vehicles.

BICYCLE TRAIL AND FOOTPATH REGULATIONS

6.400    Operating Vehicles.

6.405    Parking Vehicles.

RIVER BEACH ACCESS

6.500    Vehicle Access Restrictions.

6.505    Implementation of Policy – Emergency Access Provisions.


UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

General Provisions


6.000 Short Title.

Sections 6.000 to 6.230 may be cited as “West Linn uniform traffic ordinance.”


6.005 Applicability of State Traffic Laws.

A violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code, as constituted in 2015, is an offense against the City.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.010 Definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained in the State laws enumerated in Section 6.005, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:

Loading zone. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours or specified days.

Traffic lane. That area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]

Administration


6.015 Powers of the Council.

(1)    Subject to State laws, the City Council shall, by resolution, exercise all municipal traffic authority for the City except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another ordinance.

(2)    The powers of the Council shall include but not be limited to:

(a)    Designation of through streets;

(b)    Designation of one-way streets;

(c)    Designation of truck routes;

(d)    Designation of parking meter zones;

(e)    Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage;

(f)    Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by State law;

(g)    Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones;

(h)    Revision of speed limits in parks.

(i)    Establishing residential parking zones.

(3)    Residential Parking Zones

(a)    The City Council, pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, may establish residential parking zones. The purpose of residential parking zones is to prohibit parking by nonresidents during specific time periods within specific geographic areas used predominately for residential purposes. The City Council resolution which establishes the residential parking zone shall clearly define the geographic limits of the area affected by the zone and the hours during which the parking by nonresidents will be prohibited. Residents within the parking zones may obtain a permit from the City Manager pursuant to subsection (3)(b) of this section to allow for the parking of vehicles within the zone during the restricted hours.

(b)    The City Manager shall establish procedures and standards for the issuance of permanent and temporary permits to residents that will allow the residents and their guests to park their vehicles within residential parking zones during the restricted hours. At a minimum, the City Manager shall establish rules which establish the criteria for issuance, surrender and revocation of permits, evidence of proof of residence and vehicle ownership, terms of the permit, standards for display of permit, and allow for the issuance of temporary permits to residents for the parking of nonresident vehicles for temporary periods upon a showing of reasonable need for such permits.

(c)    The City Manager may cause to be installed and maintained, pursuant to Section 6.020, official signs for residential parking zones which clearly identify the parking restrictions for nonresidents and the exception to those restrictions for permit holders within the residential parking zones.

(d)    It shall be unlawful for any person to:

(1)    Provide false information in connection with an application for a permanent or temporary permit.

(2)    Fail to surrender a permit, when requested to do so, when the person is no longer entitled to the permit.

(3)    Use a permit when the permit holder is no longer entitled to the permit.

(4)    Use, or allow the use of a permit in conjunction with a vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit was issued.

(5)    Use, or allow the use of a temporary permit in a manner inconsistent with the terms and limitations of the permit.

(e)    The City Manager is authorized to revoke any permit when the permit holder is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section, and, upon written notification thereof, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the City Manager. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section.

(f)    A decision by the City Manager to revoke a permit may be appealed to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[Section 6.015(2)(i) and (3) added by Ordinance No. 1374, adopted 06-12-1995; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


6.020 Duties of the City Manager.

The City Manager shall exercise the following duties:

(1)    Implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the Council and his or her own orders by installing traffic control devices. The City Manager may authorize the placement of traffic control devices. Such installation shall be based on the standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration 2009, and include the Oregon supplements concerning standard practices and interpretations and additional traffic signs as they are now constituted in 2016.

(2)    Establish, maintain, remove, or alter the following classes of traffic controls:

(a)    Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes;

(b)    Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right turns, left turns, or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies;

(c)    Parking areas and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking (e.g., parallel or diagonal);

(3)    Issue oversize or overweight vehicle permits.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.025 Public Danger.

Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the City Manager may install temporary traffic control devices deemed by him or her to be necessary.


6.030 Standards.

The regulations of the City Manager shall be based upon:

(1)    Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;

(2)    Standards, limitations, and rules promulgated by the State Highway Commission;

(3)    Other recognized traffic control standards.


6.035 Authority of Police and Fire Officers.

(1)    It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(2)    In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the Police, Fire or Public Works Department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter.

[Section 6.035 amended by Ordinance No. 1459, adopted 08-28-2000.]

Traffic Control Devices


6.040 Obedience to and Alteration of Control Devices.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.045 Control Devices – Evidence of Lawful Installation.

The existence of a traffic control device shall be prima facie evidence that the device was lawfully authorized and installed.


6.050 Existing Control Devices.

Traffic control devices installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter are lawfully authorized.

General Regulations


6.055 Rules of Road.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.060 Crossing Private Property.

No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services.


6.065 Emerging From Vehicle.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.070 Unlawful Riding.

(1)    No operator shall permit a passenger to ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. 

(2)    No passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers.

(3)    No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion.

(4)    An operator or passenger does not commit the offense described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section if the:

(a)    Passenger is secured with a safety belt or safety harness in the open bed of a motor vehicle;

(b)    Passenger is seated on the floor of the open bed of a motor vehicle in which all available passenger seats are occupied;

(c)    Passenger is an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty of his or her employment; or

(d)    Vehicle is being operated in an organized parade.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.075 Clinging to Vehicles.

The operator of a vehicle upon a street shall not knowingly allow a person riding on a bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or any other devices to attach himself or herself or the device to the operator’s vehicle. The Chief of Police may authorize an exception to this section for a parade or demonstration.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.080 Sled and Skateboard Prohibition.

(1)    No person shall use the streets or bicycle lanes, paths or trails, or public sidewalks for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds, soapbox racers, or similar devices.

(2)    No person shall use the streets or bicycle lanes, paths or trails, or public sidewalks for traveling on skateboards, roller skates (including inline skates), coasters (non-motorized scooters) or similar devices except as described below:

(a)    No person shall operate a skateboard on premises open to the public without wearing protective headgear of a type approved under ORS 815.052 for bicycle helmets. Headgear is recommended on private property. Violation of this subsection is a specific fine violation with a presumptive fine of $25.00.

(b)    The operator of a skateboard, roller skates, and/or coaster must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian using the same sidewalk, trail, or path and/or designated crosswalk and all persons riding a skateboard, roller skates, or coaster must give an audible signal or sound a warning before overtaking or passing such pedestrian.

(c)    No person shall operate skateboards, roller skates, or coasters before sunrise or after sunset without wearing a reflective device on the front and back of the rider.

(d)    No skateboards, roller skates, or coasters shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner which endangers or would be likely to endanger the operator, any other person, or any property other than the operator’s.

(e)    Privately constructed and owned skateboard jumps, ramps, or any similar structure may only be used on private property and no part of the structure may extend to any part of a public sidewalk, public street, bike trail or path, or any other public right-of-way.

(f)    The operator of a skateboard, roller skates, or coaster shall not carry a package, bundle or article which prohibits the operator from having full control of the skateboard, roller skates, or coaster and unhindered vision.

(g)    Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe a skateboard, roller skates, or coaster was or is being used in violation of this code, the skateboard, roller skates, or coaster may be seized as evidence and held until the disposition of any charges.

[Section 6.080 amended by Ordinance No. 1455, adopted 06-26-2000; amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.085 Damaging or Obstructing Public Ways.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.090 Obstructing Streets.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.095 Removing Glass and Debris.

A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street.

Parking Regulations


6.100 Parking in a Single Space.

Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible, within a single marked space.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.105 Prohibited Parking and Standing of Commercial Vehicles and Trailers.

In addition to the state motor vehicle laws prohibiting parking, no person shall park or stand:

(1)    A motor truck as defined by ORS 801.355, a truck tractor as defined by ORS 801.575, and/or a semi-trailer as defined in ORS 801.475, which semi-trailer is equipped with an on board refrigeration device, on a street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day in front or adjacent to a residence, hotel, or other sleeping accommodation;

(2)    A trailer or semi-trailer with a bed or box in excess of five feet in width and eight feet in length upon any residential public street for a period longer than four hours unless it is loading or unloading except with the express written permission of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. This prohibition shall not apply to trailers or semi-trailers owned or operated by governmental units or public or private utility companies;

(3)    An unlicensed motor vehicle or trailer on any public street or right-of-way; or

(4)    An unmounted camper on any public street or right-of-way.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.110 Prohibited Parking.

No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street for the principal purpose of:

(1)    Displaying the vehicle for sale;

(2)    Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;

(3)    Displaying advertising from the vehicle;

(4)    Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.115 Use of Loading Zone or Alley.

No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in an alley or a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case when the hours applicable to the alley or loading zone are in effect shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the alley or loading zone shall not exceed 30 minutes.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.120 Leaving Unattended Vehicle.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.125 Action by Police Officer.

Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle in violation of ORS 811.585, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.130 Standing or Parking of Buses and Taxicabs.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.135 Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.140 Extension of Parking Time.

Where maximum parking limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking.


6.145 Exemptions.

The provisions of Sections 6.100 through 6.140, regulating the parking or standing of vehicles, shall not apply to a vehicle of the city, county or State or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street, or a vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of mail.

Bicycles


6.150 Bicycle Equipment.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.155 Bicycle Operating Rules.

In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this chapter and State law, a rider of a bicycle upon a street shall not:

(1)    Ride upon a sidewalk within a business district;

(2)    Ride abreast of another bicycle or in any manner other than single file, except on designated bicycle paths;

(3)    Operate a bicycle in a careless or reckless manner which endangers or would be likely to endanger himself, herself, another, or any property. Racing or trick riding shall be included in this offense;

(4)    Leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, he or she shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway, or building entrance. Nor shall he or she leave the bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of motor vehicles.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.160 Impounding of Bicycles.

(1)    It is unlawful to leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the property owner.

(2)    In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle parked on public property or in violation of this chapter may be immediately impounded by the police department.

(3)    If a bicycle impounded under this chapter is licensed, or there is some other means of determining the owner, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner.

(4)    A bicycle impounded under this chapter which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the City’s procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]

Pedestrians


6.165 Use of Sidewalks.

A pedestrian shall not use a roadway for travel when a sidewalk is available.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.170 Right Angles.

A pedestrian shall cross a street at right angle, unless crossing within a crosswalk.


6.175 Obedience to Traffic Lights.

At an intersection where a pedestrian control light is in operation, no pedestrian shall start to cross the street except when the walk signal is illuminated. Where only vehicle control lights are in operation, no pedestrian shall start to cross the street except when the green light is illuminated.

Funeral Processions


6.180 Funeral Procession.

(1)    A permit shall not be required to conduct a funeral procession.

(2)    The procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]

Offenses on Other Property Open to Public Travel


6.185 Careless Driving.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.190 Reckless Driving.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.195 Driving Under the Influence of Intoxicants.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.200 Duties at an Accident.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.205 Enforcement.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]

Parking Citations – Impoundment


6.210 Citation or Towing of Illegally Parked Vehicle.

The officer finding an illegally parked vehicle shall take its license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner. The citation shall require the operator to answer to the charge against him or her or pay the penalty imposed at the location specified in the citation by the date and time specified. 

(1)    Citation. If no person is in charge of an illegally parked vehicle, and the vehicle’s location is not hazardous, the police officer may place a citation in or on the vehicle in a conspicuous place. If the vehicle is occupied the citation shall be served upon the occupant.

(2)    Towing and Impounding. A vehicle may be towed and impounded as provided for in Section 6.230 if the vehicle is:

(a)    Parked in a manner that obstructs traffic or constitutes a hazard; or

(b)    Left on any street, avenue, public place, City owned or City operated property indefinitely by reason of wreckage, damage, theft, abandonment or neglect.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.215 Failure to Comply with Traffic Citation.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.220 Owner Responsibility.

The owner of a vehicle parked in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, unless the operator used the vehicle without the owner’s consent. The owner shall have the burden of proving that he or she did not give the operator consent to use the vehicle.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.225 Registered Owner Presumption.

In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that he or she was then the owner in fact.


6.230 Impoundment of Vehicles.

(1)    Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer may cause the vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner’s expense. The owner shall be liable for the costs of towing and storing, notwithstanding that the vehicle was parked by another or that the vehicle was initially parked in a safe manner, but subsequently became an obstruction or hazard.

(2)    The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of State law, relating to impoundment and disposition of vehicles abandoned on the City streets.

(3)    The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this chapter.

(4)    Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner.

(5)    Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle parked in violation of a provision of this chapter, if the vehicle has four or more unpaid parking violations outstanding against it, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle to be impounded. A vehicle so impounded shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this subsection shall be disposed of in the same manner as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

(6)    (a) Whenever a motor vehicle, two wheel trailer, utility trailer, mobile trailer, camper trailer, camper, or recreation vehicle is found to have been parked upon a street within the city for more than 72 consecutive hours, it shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to make diligent inquiry to determine the ownership of said vehicle or trailer.

(b)    If ownership cannot be determined by routine inquiry in the neighborhood where such vehicle or trailer is found, the Police Department shall examine said vehicle or trailer for its license number, motor number, serial number, make and style and any other information which could aid in the identification of the owner of said vehicle or trailer. This information shall be conveyed, for purposes of identifying, to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State for registration of said vehicle or trailer, if any.

(c)    If the owner of such vehicle or trailer is identified, the owner thereof shall be notified by personal service or certified mail that said vehicle or trailer will be impounded by the Police Department 24 hours after the receipt by the owner of said notice unless the vehicle is removed by the owner within that period. It shall be presumed that the owner has received notification when a period of seven days expires from the date of mailing of said notice by certified mail. In addition to said notification by personal service or certified mail, notification shall be placed by the police department on said vehicle or trailer.

(d)    If ownership of such vehicle or trailer cannot be determined after the accomplishment of the steps set out in subsection (6)(c), the Police Department shall place upon said vehicle a notice visible to the public stating that said vehicle or trailer shall be removed and impounded by the City after the expiration of 24 hours from the time of posting of said notice unless said vehicle or trailer is removed.


PROHIBITED PARKING


6.250 Unlawful Parking – Towing Authorized.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.255 Placement of Citations.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.260 Outstanding Warrants – Impound or Arrest.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.265 Illegal Stopping, Standing or Parking.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.270 Registration Search – Notice to Owner.

If within three days after impoundment no one appears to claim the establish ownership or the right to possession of the vehicle, the Police Department shall search the motor vehicle registration records and the vehicle for the name and address of the owner or person entitled to possession and send notice to such person if the name and address are discovered. Notice shall disclose the whereabouts of the vehicle and the reason for its impoundment.


6.275 Claiming Vehicles.

When any vehicle has been towed, the owner or person entitled to possession may obtain possession upon showing adequate evidence of a right to its possession, paying the charges due for towing and storage to the towing company, and any towing fee to the City, as set by resolution. 

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1648, adopted 06-27-2016.]


6.280 Portland Avenue Parking Restrictions.

The parking of motor vehicles is prohibited at all times upon the southwesterly right of way of Portland Avenue (Oregon State Highway Route 43) within the corporate limits of the City, from a point located at mile post 10.52 (directly opposite the intersection of Holmes Street and Highway 43) to mile post 11.12 (directly opposite the intersection of Holly Street and Highway 43).


OFF ROAD VEHICLES


6.300 Definitions.

As used in Sections 6.300 to 6.305, the following words shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

Non-road areas. Any area that is not a road, or a road which is closed to off road vehicles and posted as such; except that areas commonly held open to vehicular use, such as parking lots and race tracks, shall not be considered off road areas.

Off road vehicles. Every self-propelled motor vehicle designed or capable of traversing on or over natural terrain including but not limited to snowmobiles, mini-bikes, motorcycles, four wheel drive trucks, pickups, all-terrain vehicles, jeeps, half tracks, and helicopters. The definition of off road vehicles does not include, unless used for purposes prohibited by Sections 6.300 to 6.305, implements of husbandry; nor does it include military, fire, emergency or law enforcement vehicles used for legal purposes.


6.305 Operation of Off-Road Vehicles.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to operate an off road vehicle on any non-road area which the operator does not own, unless:

(a)    The operator possesses written permission from the owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area; or

(b)    The operator possesses written evidence of membership in a club or association to which the owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area has given written permission and a copy of which has been filed with the Chief of Police; or

(c)    The owner, contract purchaser or lessee of the non-road area has designated the non-road area as open for recreational purposes in accordance with ORS 105.655 to 105.680 by filing such consent and other information necessary to identify the area with the Chief of Police; or

(d)    The owner, contract purchaser or lessee has designated the non-road area as being open to off road vehicle use by posting notice thereof in a form and manner prescribed by the Chief of Police.

(2)    It is unlawful for any person to:

(a)    Falsify the written permission required by subsection (1)(a) of this section;

(b)    Falsify the evidence of club or association membership or the written permission required by subsection (1)(b) of this section;

(c)    Falsify the filing or consent required by subsection (1)(c) of this section;

(d)    Post the notice or remove the posted notice required by subsection (1)(d) of this section without the consent of the owner, contract purchaser or lessee.

(3)    All off road vehicles must be equipped with spark arrestor and muffler system which must be sufficient so as not to create unreasonable noise which will likely interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring properties.


BICYCLE TRAIL AND FOOTPATH REGULATIONS


6.400 Operating Vehicles.

No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon or across a bicycle trail or footpath, except to enter or exit a driveway, intersecting street, or in case of an emergency, State, county, or City workmen repairing, replacing, or improving the streets, or mailmen delivering mail by carrier. No person shall drive a motor vehicle, upon or across except after yielding right-of-way to all bicycles and/or pedestrians in the trail or path.


6.405 Parking Vehicles.

No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle upon a bicycle trail or foot path except in case of an emergency, or except as stated in Section 6.400.


RIVER BEACH ACCESS


6.500 Vehicle Access Restrictions.

Access by wheeled motorized vehicles onto the Willamette and Tualatin River Beach areas except on public boat launch pads, is hereby prohibited.


6.505 Implementation of Policy – Emergency Access Provisions.

Appropriate signage and physical barriers shall be installed to implement this policy, assuring such physical barriers shall provide access for emergency services and where practicable, be handicapped accessible.


Chapter 7 BUSINESS

BUSINESS LICENSES

7.000    Definitions.

7.005    Purpose.

7.010    Licensing Exemptions.

7.015    License Requirements.

7.020    Presumption of Engaging in Business.

7.025    License Required.

7.030    License Application.

7.035    Examination of Business.

7.040    Denial or Revocation of License – Appeal.

7.045    Suspension or Revocation – Effect.

7.050    Issuance of Business License.

7.055    Effect of License Issuance.

7.060    Separate License for Separate Locations.

7.065    Display of Business License.

7.070    Business License Year, Fee Schedule, and Delinquency Charges.

7.075    Characteristics of Business License.

7.080    Penalty.

ADULT BUSINESSES

7.100    Purpose.

7.105    Definitions.

7.110    Permits Required.

7.115    Fees.

7.120    Application for Adult Business Permit.

7.125    Application to Entertain in or Be Employed by an Adult Business.

7.130    Issuance and Renewal of Adult Business Permit.

7.135    Issuance and Renewal of Permit to Entertain in or Be Employed by an Adult Business.

7.140    Revocation or Suspension of Permit.

7.145    Appeals.

7.150    Duties of Adult Business Permit Holder.

7.155    Prohibited Conduct in Adult Business.

7.160    Advertising Restrictions.

7.165    Hours of Operation.

7.170    Exterior Design Restrictions.

7.175    Maintenance of Premises in Violation Declared a Nuisance – Abatement.

7.180    Inspection of Premises.

7.185    Penalty.

ALARM SYSTEMS

7.200    Purpose and Scope.

7.205    Definitions.

7.210    Alarm User’s Permit Required.

7.215    User Instructions.

7.220    Automatic Dialing Device – Certain Interconnections Prohibited.

7.225    False Alarms – Permit Revocation – Appeal.

7.230    False Alarm – Fee.

7.235    Confidentiality Statistics.

7.240    Allocation of Revenues and Expenses.

7.245    City Liability.

7.250    Enforcement.

HANDGUN PURCHASE BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION FEE

7.275    Processing Fee.

7.280    Fee Classification.

7.285    Penalty.

REGULATING DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS

7.300    Purpose.

7.305    Definition.

7.310    Prohibited Acts, Penalties.

7.315    Consent to Enter Onto Real Property, Exemption.

7.335    “No Solicitation” Sign.

SOCIAL GAMING

7.375    Prohibited Gaming.

7.380    Exceptions.

7.385    Definitions.

MARIJUANA ENTITY BAN

7.390    Definitions.

7.392    Ban Declared.

7.394    Exception.

MARIJUANA TAX

7.400    Purpose.

7.402    Definitions.

7.405    Tax Imposed.

7.410    Amount and Payment, Deductions.

7.412    Seller Responsible for Payment of Tax.

7.415    Penalties and Interest.

7.420    Failure to Report and Remit Tax – Determination of Tax by City Manager.

7.425    Appeal.

7.430    Refunds.

7.435    Actions to Collect.

7.440    Violation.

7.445    Confidentiality.

7.447    Audit of Books, Records, or Persons.

7.449    Forms and Regulations.

TRANSIENT LODGING TAX

7.450    Definitions.

7.452    Tax Imposed.

7.455    Collection of Tax by Operator, Rules for Collection.

7.457    Operator’s Duties.

7.460    Exemptions.

7.462    Registration of Operator.

7.465    Due Date, Returns, and Payments.

7.467    Penalties and Interest.

7.470    Deficiencies.

7.472    Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion.

7.475    Operator Delay.

7.478    Redeterminations.

7.480    Refunds.

7.482    Security for Collection of Tax.

7.485    Administration.

7.488    Appeals.

7.490    Violations.

7.492    Transient Lodging Tax Account.

PUBLIC UTILITIES PRIVILEGE TAX

7.500    Authority.

7.505    Tax Imposed.

7.510    Methodology for Calculation.

7.515    Tax Collection.

7.520    Effective Date.

7.525    Classification of Tax.

CABLE TELEVISION – FRANCHISE REGULATIONS

7.600    Definitions.

7.605    Authority.

7.610    Grant of Franchise, Renewal.

7.615    Administration of Cable Communications Provisions and Franchise.

7.620    Intergovernmental Agreements.

7.625    Violation and Penalties.

7.630    Cumulative Remedies.

7.635    Injunctive Relief.

LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW

7.700    Purpose.

7.705    Scope of Provisions.

7.710    Definitions.

7.715    Notice of Application Required.

7.717    Renewal Fee.

7.720    City Manager’s Duties.

7.725    Hearing Procedure.

7.730    Applicant Notice.

7.735    Public Notice.

7.740    Standards and Criteria.

PUBLIC TELEPHONE BOOTHS

7.750    Permit Grant.

7.755    Indemnification of City.

7.760    Filing of Acceptance.

SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS

7.800    Definitions.

7.810    Permit Required.

7.820    Action on Application.

7.830    Grounds for Denial of Application for a Fairs, Festivals and Special Event Permit – Imposition of Conditions.

7.840    Permit Conditions.

7.850    Permit Issuance.

7.860    Appeal Procedure.

7.870    Cleanup Deposits for Certain Special Events.

CITY SPONSORSHIP OF EVENTS

7.900    City Sponsorship of Events.

7.910    Support by City of Sponsored Events.

7.920    Sponsorship Policy and Agreements.

SIDEWALK CAFÉ PROGRAM

7.950    Purpose.

7.951    Definitions.

7.952    Eligibility.

7.953    Permit Provisions.

7.954    Exemptions.

7.955    Sidewalk Café Standards.

7.956    Material Requirements.

7.957    Application Process.

7.958    Noncompliance.

7.959    Disclaimers.


BUSINESS LICENSES


7.000 Definitions.

As used in Sections 7.000 to 7.080, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

(1)    Business. Any trade, profession, occupation or pursuit of every kind conducted in the City for gain or livelihood, including, but not limited to, nonprofit organizations, the rental of commercial or residential property, and those working as independent contractors.

(2)    Employee. An individual who performs service for another individual or organization. For purposes of this chapter, employee also means a licensed real estate salesperson or associate real estate broker who engages in professional real estate activities only as an agent of a real estate broker or organization.

(3)    Rental unit. A property, part of a property, structure, part of a structure, or residential unit for which the property owner receives payment from another for use or occupation of the property.

(4)    Residential unit. A structure or part of a structure used as a home, residence, or sleeping unit by a single person or household unit, and includes, without limitation, units in apartment complexes, boarding houses, rooming houses, mobile home parks, and single and multifamily dwellings; units being rented as part of the lessor’s primary residence are not considered residential units.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.005 Purpose.

The business license provisions are enacted primarily for the purpose of regulating businesses and collecting revenues. The public’s interest is served by ensuring that businesses will be regulated in a manner that promotes compliance with applicable Federal, State, and municipal laws, and encourages businesses to engage in activities in a manner which does not detract from the public health, safety, and welfare. It is necessary to collect license fees to secure revenue to regulate and defray the cost of police protection, fire protection, and costs of other municipal services.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.010 Licensing Exemptions.

The following persons are exempt from the licensing requirements imposed by this chapter:

(1)    Persons whom the City is prohibited from licensing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, the Constitution or laws of the State of Oregon, or the City Charter.

(2)    A warehouse used in connection with a business, but maintained at a separate location within the City, as long as the business which owns the warehouse maintains a valid business license.

(3)    The sale of personal property acquired for household or other personal use by the seller (e.g., garage or yard sales); provided, that the total length of all sales combined is fewer than eight days in any one calendar year.

(4)    A person whose business consists of renting out less than two rental units within the City.

(5)    An individual hired or employed primarily for the performance of domestic duties or chores including child care, the maintenance of a residence and the care, comfort and convenience of members of the residential household.

(6)    Individuals who are employed by a business which is required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter.

(7)    Any unincorporated business activity performed by individuals under the age of 18.

(8)    Residential builders as defined by ORS 701.026 who have a valid builder’s business license issued by the Metropolitan Service District and who:

(a)    Do not have an office within the City; and

(b)    Have not derived gross receipts of $100,000 or more from business conducted within the City.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.015 License Requirements.

In addition to any other requirements of Sections 7.000 to 7.080, a licensee shall:

(1)    Abide by all Federal, State, and local laws, zoning regulations, and provisions of this chapter.

(2)    Maintain and preserve, for a period of not less than three years, such books and records as will accurately reflect the number of employees for each license year.

(3)    Advertise for business using only the name for which a license is held.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.020 Presumption of Engaging in Business.

A person is presumed to be conducting business in the City and subject to Sections 7.000 to 7.080 if engaged in any of the following activities:

(1)    Advertising or otherwise holding himself or herself out to the public as engaged in any business within the City;

(2)    Providing goods and/or services to customers within the City;

(3)    Owning, leasing or renting personal property or rental units within the City;

(4)    Engaging in any transaction involving the production of income from holding property or the gain from the sale of property; or

(5)    Engaging in any activity with the intent to realize a profit.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.025 License Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on any business within the City without first obtaining a license and maintaining compliance with the provisions of Sections 7.000 to 7.080.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.030 License Application.

(1)    On or before July 1st, all persons engaging in business within the City shall file an application for annual renewal of the license required by Sections 7.000 to 7.080. Any new business that is not in operation on or before July 1st which desires to conduct business within the City shall make application for a license before engaging in any business activity.

(2)    Application for a business license shall be made upon forms provided by the City.

(3)    The application for a business license shall include advance payment of the appropriate license fee and delinquency charges, if any.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.035 Examination of Business.

(1)    By signing and submitting an application for a business license, the applicant consents to an investigation by the City to determine whether the business is in compliance with applicable Federal, State, and local laws. At the request of the City, the applicant shall submit additional documentation or information needed to determine compliance. The City may examine, or cause to be examined, by an agent or representative designated by it, any books, papers, payroll records, State or Federal payroll reports to ascertain the correctness of any license application or to determine the appropriate fee.

(2)    The City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Marshal, Building Official, and/or their designees are authorized to investigate and examine all places of business licensed or subject to license under the terms of Sections 7.000 to 7.080 at any time and all reasonable times for the purpose of determining whether such place of business is safe, sanitary and suitable for the business requesting a license. However, before entering upon private property, the City official shall obtain the consent of an occupant or an administrative search warrant.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.040 Denial or Revocation of License – Appeal.

(1)    The City may deny or revoke a license upon finding that:

(a)    The applicant fails to meet the requirements of Sections 7.000 to 7.080, or is doing business in violation of this chapter, zoning regulations, or applicable Federal, State, County, or local law.

(b)    The applicant has provided false or misleading information, or has omitted disclosure of a material fact on the business license application, related materials, or license.

(c)    The information supplied for review of the business license application does not indicate that the applicant has the special knowledge or skill required to perform the licensed activity.

(d)    The licensed activity would constitute a public nuisance, endanger property, or endanger the public health, safety, or welfare.

(e)    The applicable business license fee has not been paid by the due date.

(2)    The City Manager shall provide written notice to the applicant of a denial or revocation. The notice shall state the reason for denial or revocation and shall inform the applicant of the right to appeal pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

(3)    Notices of revocation shall be given at least 30 days before the revocation becomes effective. If the violation ends within the 30 days, the City may discontinue the revocation proceedings.

(4)    A person whose application for any business license has been denied or whose license has been revoked may, after 90 days from the date of denial or revocation, apply for a license upon payment of the application fee and submission of an application form and required attachments.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


7.045 Suspension or Revocation – Effect.

If a business license is suspended or revoked, the concerned business shall immediately cease conducting any and all businesses within the City. Any business which continues to conduct business within the City subsequent to action by the City Council to suspend or revoke the City license for such business shall be subject to the same fine and penalties as if such a business had never obtained a City business license and was carrying on business within the City without such a business license.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


7.050 Issuance of Business License.

A business license shall be issued by the City after the application is evaluated and the applicant is found to meet all requirements of Sections 7.000 to 7.080.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014. Formerly 7.055.]


7.055 Effect of License Issuance.

The issuing of a license pursuant to Sections 7.000 to 7.080 or the collection of a fee shall not permit any person to engage in any unlawful business. The license fee levied and fixed by Sections 7.000 to 7.080 shall be in addition to the general ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied pursuant to law. All ordinances of the City in force on the effective date of the ordinance codified in Sections 7.000 to 7.080 pertaining to or covering any business, pursuit or occupation, and providing a license or condition for its operation, shall remain in full force and effect; and in the event of a conflict or duplication of a license fee, then such other ordinance shall have precedence over the provisions of Sections 7.000 to 7.080, to the extent that there will be no duplication of license fees for the same business, occupation, profession or pursuit.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014. Formerly 7.060.]


7.060 Separate License for Separate Locations.

If any person operates a business in the City in more than one location, each location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of Sections 7.000 to 7.080, except warehouses exempt pursuant to Section 7.010.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014. Formerly 7.065.]


7.065 Display of Business License.

(1)    All licenses issued in accordance with Sections 7.000 to 7.080 shall be openly:

(a)    Displayed in the place of business; or

(b)    Kept on the person(s) or in the vehicle(s) when business is being conducted in any place other than the business address in the application.

(2)    Any person or employee conducting business at a place other than the business license address in the application shall immediately produce the business license for inspection to the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Marshal, and/or their designees when requested.

(3)    Failure to carry such license or produce the same on request shall be a Class C violation.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014. Formerly 7.070.]


7.070 Business License Year, Fee Schedule, and Delinquency Charges.

(1)    The business license year shall be the City’s fiscal year, July 1st through June 30th.

(2)    License fees, and all other fees and charges required by Sections 7.000 to 7.080, shall be set by resolution of the Council.

(3)    The business license fee shall be paid annually in advance of the business license year. However, the fee may be prorated or refunded in accordance with the resolution set by Council if the business is discontinued.

(4)    The business license fee shall be considered delinquent if not paid by August 1st of the business license year. If a person begins engaging in business after the start of the business license year, the fee shall be considered delinquent if the fee is not paid within 30 days after commencement of the business activity. The date that the business license fee is received by the City or the date of the postmark, if remittance is made by mail, shall be used in determining when the business license fee is paid.

(5)    If the business license fee is not paid on or before the delinquency date, a delinquency charge will be assessed.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014. Formerly 7.050.]


7.075 Characteristics of Business License.

(1)    Nontransferable. No transfer or assignment of any business license issued shall be valid or permitted, unless transferred in accordance with this section.

(a)    Sale or Transfer of Business. If a person licensed to do business within the City sells or transfers the business to another, the business license may also be transferred to the purchaser of the business upon written notification to the City of the transfer as long as the principal purpose of the business does not change and the business does not have any delinquent fees.

(b)    Change of Location. If the location of a business changes, but the principal purpose of the business is unchanged, the license may be transferred to the new location upon written notification to the City.

(2)    Renewable. Unless otherwise provided, a license issued pursuant to Section 7.055 is renewable. Annual licenses issued remain effective from July 1st of the license year, or the date of issuance, whichever is later, until June 30th of the following year.

(3)    Revocable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked as provided in Section 7.040.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014. Formerly 7.080.]


7.080 Penalty.

Any violation of the requirements of Sections 7.000 to 7.075 that are not addressed above shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment, not to exceed 30 days, or a combination thereof.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]


ADULT BUSINESSES


7.100 Purpose.

The purpose of Sections 7.100 to 7.185 is to provide for the regulation of certain types of adult business activities that the Council finds present an extraordinary risk of being utilized to facilitate and conceal criminal conduct including offenses involving prostitution, controlled substances, theft, gambling, fraud, obscenity and often involving organized, systematic criminal activities. Therefore, Sections 7.100 to 7.185 are intended to minimize such risk by providing for the strict regulation of such business activities and by prohibiting those persons who have previously been involved in such criminal conduct from participating in such business activities. In making this determination, the Council has specifically considered the impact that such regulations will have upon the competitive nature of such business activities, and finds that the need for such regulations outweighs such impact.


7.105 Definitions.

For the purpose of Sections 7.100 to 7.185, the following definitions shall apply:

Adult business. The operation of any establishment(s), irregardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served or not, to which the public has access, whether or not by purchase of an admission ticket or membership, and which is (are) utilized to present, as a substantial or significant portion of its entertainment, live performances that involve nudity.

Nudity or nude. Being devoid of a covering for the male or female genitalia consisting of an opaque material which does not simulate the organ covered, and, in the case of a female, exposing to view one or both breasts without a circular covering, centered on the nipple, that is at least three inches in diameter and does not simulate the organ covered.


7.110 Permits Required.

(1)    It is a violation of this code for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City, the operation of any adult business unless a permit for such business has first been obtained from the City Manager.

(2)    It is a violation of this code for any person to entertain in any adult business or to be employed by any adult business unless a permit for such entertainment or employment has first been obtained from the City Manager.


7.115 Fees.

(1)    Every applicant for a permit to own, maintain, operate or conduct an adult business shall file an application with the City Manager and pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution.

(2)    Every applicant for a permit to entertain or be employed by any adult business shall file an application with the City Manager and pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution.


7.120 Application for Adult Business Permit.

(1)    An application for such an adult business permit shall set forth the following:

(a)    Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

(b)    Business occupation, or employment for the three years immediately preceding the date of application;

(c)    The business license and permit history of the person in operating a business identical to or similar to those regulated by Sections 7.100 to 7.185;

(d)    Whether such person, previously operating such business in this or any other city or state under any license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason(s) therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the person subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

(e)    The name, address, telephone number, birth date and principal occupation of the applicant and managing agent;

(f)    The name, address, and telephone number of business or proposed business and a description of the nature of the business to be operated;

(g)    Whether the business or proposed business is the undertaking of a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation. If a partnership, the application shall set forth the names, birth dates, addresses, telephone numbers, principal occupations and respective ownership shares of each partner, whether general, limited, or silent. If a corporation, the application shall set forth the corporate name, a copy of the articles of incorporation, and the name, addresses, birth dates, telephone numbers and principal occupations of every officer, director and shareholder (having more than five percent of the outstanding shares) and the number of shares held by each;

(h)    Any criminal convictions, or arrests relating to theft, controlled substances, gambling, prostitution, obscenity, fraud, tax evasion, or racketeering as defined in ORS Chapter 166, of each applicant and natural person enumerated in subsections (1)(a) through (g) of this section;

(i)    All residence addresses for the past three years of each natural person enumerated in subsections (1)(a) through (g) of this section;

(j)    A personal financial statement of each natural person enumerated in subsections (1)(a) through (g) of this section, including the location of all of such persons’ bank accounts, the amounts respectively deposited therein, and a complete listing of all outstanding debts and loans.

(2)    Each applicant and natural person enumerated in subsection (1) of this section shall personally appear before the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, for fingerprinting and the taking of photographs.

(3)    The application form required pursuant to this section, which contains personal and business information, shall remain confidential to the maximum extent permitted by law.


7.125 Application to Entertain in or be Employed by an Adult Business.

(1)    An application for a permit to entertain or work in an adult business shall set forth the following:

(a)    Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

(b)    The name, address, telephone number, birth date and principal occupation of the applicant;

(c)    The Social Security number of the applicant;

(d)    The name of the business and the business address of the adult business(es) where the applicant intends to entertain or work, if known;

(e)    The business, occupation, or employment history of applicant for the three years immediately preceding date of application;

(f)    Any arrests or criminal convictions relating to theft, controlled substances, gambling, obscenity, prostitution, fraud, tax evasion, or racketeering as defined in ORS Chapter 166; and, in the case of any person who will carry out any work relating to security or maintaining order in an adult business, such as “bouncer”, any arrests or convictions relating to harassment, assault, menacing or the use or possession of weapons as defined in State law.

(2)    Each applicant shall personally appear before the Chief of Police or his or her designee for fingerprinting and the taking of photographs.

(3)    The application form required by this section, which contains personal information, shall remain confidential to the maximum extent permitted by law.


7.130 Issuance and Renewal of Adult Business Permit.

(1)    Upon the filing of an application for and payment of the required fee, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and the City Manager shall issue such permit if no cause for denial as noted in Sections 7.100 to 7.185 exists.

(2)    The application for a business permit shall be denied if:

(a)    The applicant, or any other person who will be directly engaged in the management or operation of the business, or any person who owns five percent or more interest in the business, has previously owned or operated a business regulated by Sections 7.100 to 7.185 and the license or permit for such business has been revoked for cause which would be grounds for revocation pursuant to Sections 7.100 to 7.185, or if such business has been found to constitute a public nuisance and abatement has been ordered; or if such person has been convicted of or evidence exists that supports a finding by the preponderance of the evidence the applicant or such other person has committed any criminal offense noted in Section 7.120;

(b)    The operation as proposed by the applicant would not comply with all applicable requirements of this code including but not limited to the building, health, planning, zoning and fire codes of the City;

(c)    Any statement in the application is found to be false or any required information is withheld;

(d)    Any employee is found to have committed any criminal offense noted in Section 7.125, and such violation either occurred on the premises of the establishment subject to the permit, or was connected in such time and manner with the operation of the establishment, so that the person(s) in charge of the adult business knew, or should reasonably have known, that such violation(s) would occur.

(3)    For the purpose of Sections 7.100 to 7.185, the offenses listed in this section shall be considered to be defined by the statutes of the State unless otherwise specified. Any arrest or conviction for conduct other than that denoted by the statutes of the State or ordinances of the city specified in Sections 7.100 to 7.185 shall be considered to be equivalent to one of such offenses if the elements of such offense for which the person was arrested or convicted would have constituted one of the above offenses under the applicable Oregon statutes or West Linn ordinance provisions.

(4)    Notwithstanding the mandatory direction of subsection (2) of this section, the City Manager may grant a permit, with the concurrence of the Chief of Police, despite the presence of one or more of the factors enumerated, if he or she concludes that the applicant has established to his or her satisfaction that the behavior evidenced by such factor is not likely to recur, or is remote in time, or occurred under circumstances which diminish the seriousness of the factor as it relates to the purpose of Sections 7.100 to 7.185.

(5)    The permit shall be for a term of one year, shall be nontransferable, shall expire on the first anniversary of its issuance, shall be valid only for a single location, and shall be displayed on such premises so as to be visible to patrons. When the business location is changed, the address of the new location shall be provided in writing to the City Manager for approval at least 10 days prior to such change.

(6)    Denial of a permit may be appealed to the City Council by filing written notice of an appeal with the City Manager within 10 days of the date of denial.


7.135 Issuance and Renewal of Permit to Entertain in or be Employed by an Adult Business.

(1)    Upon receipt of an application to entertain in or be employed by an adult business, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and the City Manager shall issue such permit if no cause for denial as noted in Sections 7.100 to 7.185 exists.

(2)    Application for a permit shall be denied if:

(a)    The applicant has been convicted of or evidence exists that supports a finding by the preponderance of the evidence that the applicant has committed any criminal offense noted in Section 7.125;

(b)    Any statement in the application in found to be false.

(3)    For the purpose of Sections 7.100 to 7.185, the offenses listed in this section shall be considered to be defined by the statutes of the State unless otherwise specified. Any arrest or conviction for conduct other than that denoted by the statutes of the State or ordinances of the City specified in Sections 7.100 to 7.185 shall be considered to be equivalent to one of such offenses if the elements of such offense for which the person was arrested or convicted would have constituted one of the above offenses under the applicable Oregon statutes or West Linn ordinance provisions.

(4)    Notwithstanding the mandatory direction of subsection (2) of this section, the City Manager may grant a permit, with the concurrence of the Chief of Police, despite the presence of one or more of the factors enumerated, if he or she concludes that the applicant has established to his or her satisfaction that the behavior evidenced by such factor is not likely to recur, or is remote in time, or occurred under circumstances which diminish the seriousness of the factor as it relates to the purpose of Sections 7.100 to 7.185.

(5)    The permit shall be for a term of one year, shall be nontransferable, shall expire on the first anniversary of its issuance and shall be available for inspection at such premises in which the permittee is entertaining or employed.

(6)    Denial of a permit may be appealed to the City Council by filing written notice of an appeal with the City Manager within 10 days of the date of denial.


7.140 Revocation or Suspension of Permit.

(1)    Any permit issued for an adult business pursuant to Sections 7.100 to 7.185 may be revoked or suspended by the City Manager, with the concurrence of the Chief of Police, for any cause which would be grounds for denial of a permit or where investigation reveals that any violation of the provisions of Sections 7.100 to 7.185 or any offense noted in Section 7.125 has been committed by any person who entertains or is employed on the premises and such offense is connected in time and manner with the operation of the establishment so that the person(s) in charge of such establishment knew, or should reasonably have known, that such violations would occur, or that such violations have been permitted to occur on the premises by the permit holder or any employee, or that a lawful inspection has been refused, or that such adult business activities cause significant litter, noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion, or other locational problems in the area around such premises.

(2)    Any permit issued to any person to entertain or work in an adult business may be revoked or suspended by the City Manager for any cause which would be grounds for denial of a permit.

(3)    Any permit shall be revoked or suspended if any statement contained in the application therefor is found to have been false.

(4)    The City Manager, upon revocation or suspension of any permit issued pursuant to Sections 7.100 to 7.185, shall give the permittee written notice of such revocation or suspension by causing notice to be served upon the permit holder at the business or residence address listed on the permit application. Service of such notice shall be accomplished either by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or at the option of the City Manager, by personal service in the same manner as a summons served in an action at law. When notice is sent by certified mail and is returned, receipt unsigned, service of notice shall be accomplished by personal service in the same manner as a summons is served in an action at law. Refusal of the service by the person whose permit is suspended or revoked is prima facie evidence of receipt of the notice. Provided further, that service of notice upon the person in charge of a business during its hours of operation shall constitute prima facie evidence of notice to the person holding the permit to operate the business. Suspension or revocation shall be effective and final 10 days after the giving of such notice, unless such suspension or revocation is appealed by filing a written notice of appeal to the City Council with the City Manager of the City.


7.145 Appeals.

The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. The filing of an appeal of a revocation or suspension of a permit under Sections 7.100 to 7.185 shall stay the effectiveness of such suspension or revocation until the appeal is determined by the Hearings Officer.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.150 Duties of Adult Business Permit Holder.

(1)    No person who has been issued a permit to operate a business regulated under Sections 7.100 to 7.185 shall permit any person to engage in any conduct for which a permit is required by Section 7.110(2) unless:

(a)    Such person has a valid permit issued by the City Manager to perform such act; and

(b)    Written notice has been given to the City Manager that such person will engage in such activity on the premises; and

(c)    The name and current residence address of such person has been placed on file with the City Manager.

(2)    Upon termination of the employment of any such person, the business permit holder shall give written notice of such termination to the City Manager within 10 days of such termination. Further, the adult business permit holder shall, within 10 days thereof, inform in writing the City Manager of any change in the information required by Section 7.120.

(3)    A current, complete copy of all financial records required to be kept by an adult business permit holder for Oregon State and Federal tax purposes regarding the operation of such business shall be maintained on such business premises. Such records shall be subject to inspection pursuant to Section 7.180.

(4)    No nude entertaining shall occur closer than 10 feet from any patron.

(5)    All nude entertaining shall only occur on a stage which is raised at least two feet from the level of the main floor in the adult business, and shall only be provided by persons who have a valid permit when required by Sections 7.100 to 7.185.

(6)    No person shall be admitted to an adult business as a patron or customer unless such person is 18 years of age or older or accompanied by parent or guardian.

(7)    No person under the age of 18 shall entertain in or be employed by an adult business.

(8)    No person employed by an adult business shall engage in any activity on any property in the vicinity of any adult business for the purpose of soliciting, beckoning, requesting, or suggesting to any person(s) to enter such premises as a patron.


7.155 Prohibited Conduct in Adult Business.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person while engaging in nude entertaining in an adult business to come into physical contact with any patron.

(2)    It is unlawful for any person while engaging in nude entertaining in an adult business to directly or indirectly accept any gratuity.

(3)    It is unlawful for any person who performs nude entertainment in an adult business, while not entertaining, to come into physical contact with any patrons or to appear in any area to which patrons have access, while in a state of nudity.


7.160 Advertising Restrictions.

No adult business regulated under Sections 7.100 to 7.185 shall cause to be placed or maintained, in such a location as can be viewed by persons in any public street, any sign(s), photographic, pictorial or other graphic representation(s) that depict in whole or in part, or any page, poster or other printed matter bearing a verbal description or narrative account of, the following:

(1)    Sadomasochistic abuse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement, as defined in ORS 167.060; or

(2)    Nudity.


7.165 Hours of Operation.

No nude entertainment shall occur in an adult business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.


7.170 Exterior Design Restrictions.

No adult business shall have a window or door on the exterior wall which permits an interior view of the premises from the street or sidewalk.


7.175 Maintenance of Premises in Violation Declared a Nuisance – Abatement.

Any establishment maintained in violation of the provisions of Sections 7.100 to 7.185 is declared to be a public nuisance. The city attorney is authorized to bring any action or suit to abate such nuisance by seeking injunctive or any other appropriate relief in any appropriate forum when he or she has reasonable cause to believe a nuisance under this section exists, regardless of whether or not any individual has been convicted of a violation of Sections 7.100 to 7.185.


7.180 Inspection of Premises.

A police officer or other City employee designated by the City Manager may, during the hours the establishment is open for business, upon presentation of proper identification, inspect those portions of any premises in which an adult business regulated under Sections 7.100 to 7.185 is conducted that are open to or frequented by patrons and the records kept on the premises as required by Section 7.150. Such inspection shall be limited in scope to that necessary to determine compliance with the regulatory provisions of Sections 7.100 to 7.185. Except when an emergency exits, the police officer or City employee shall obtain the consent of the person on the premises who is in charge of the establishment before entering the establishment. Failure to permit the inspection shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the permit required by Sections 7.100 to 7.185. If the inspection is not permitted, the police officer or City employee may obtain a warrant of the municipal court authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection.

(2)    No warrant shall be issued under the terms of Sections 7.100 to 7.185 until an affidavit has been filed with the Municipal Court, showing probable cause for the inspection, by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing Sections 7.100 to 7.185 as the basis for the inspection, whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint, and other specific or general information concerning the business in question.

(3)    No person shall interfere with or attempt to prevent a police officer or City employee from entering upon private premises and inspecting any business when an emergency exists or the police officer or City employee exhibits a warrant authorizing entry.


7.185 Penalty.

(1)    The violation of any provision of Sections 7.100 to 7.185 shall subject the violator to suspension or revocation of the involved permit pursuant to Section 7.140 as well as judicial proceedings as noted in Section 7.175.

(2)    Violation of any provision of Section 7.155 is punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.


ALARM SYSTEMS


7.200 Purpose and Scope.

(1)    The purpose of Sections 7.200 to 7.250 is to protect the emergency services of the City from misuse.

(2)    Sections 7.200 to 7.250 govern emergency alarm systems, require permits, establish fees, provide for allocation of revenues and deficits, provide for revocation of permits, provide for punishment of violations and establish a system of administration.


7.205 Definitions.

As used in Sections 7.200 to 7.250, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

Alarm business. The business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

Alarm center. Any location, other than the communications center where alarms are received from sites within the City and from which emergency response is requested.

Alarm system. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an emergency requiring urgent attention and to which police, fire, or emergency medical personnel are expected to respond.

Alarm user. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.

Automatic dialing device. A device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

Burglary alarm system. An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system.

Chief of Police. Director of police services for the City or his or her designated representative.

Communications center. The City facility used to receive emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to City emergency services.

Coordinator. The individuals designated by the Chief of Police to issue permits and enforce the provisions of Sections 7.200 to 7.250.

Emergency medical alarm system. A system to indicate a health emergency within an area protected by the system.

False alarm. An alarm signal or request eliciting a response by emergency personnel when a situation requiring a response by emergency personnel does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary events not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.

Fire alarm system. An alarm system signaling temperature, humidity, smoke, or other evidences of fire within an area protected by the system.

Interconnect. To connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.

Primary trunk line. A telephone line servicing the City communication center that is designated to receive emergency calls.

Robbery alarm system. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery.


7.210 Alarm User’s Permit Required.

(1)    Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user’s permit for each system from the coordinator’s office upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in Sections 7.200 to 7.250 or prior to use of an alarm system. Users of systems using robbery, burglary, fire, and emergency medical alarm capabilities shall obtain separate permits for each function. Application for each of said alarm user’s permit and a fee for each shall be filed with the coordinator’s office each year. Each permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police and be for a one-year period. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his or her authorized designee. The fee for an emergency alarm users permit shall be set by resolution of the Council.

(2)    A revoked user’s permit shall be obtained from the coordinator’s office by filing an application and paying a fee set by resolution of the Council.

(3)    Each permit shall bear the signature of the Chief of Police and shall bear the same expiration date as the revoked permit. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative.

(4)    If a residential alarm user is over the age of 65 and is the primary resident of the residence and if no business is conducted in the residence, an initial user’s permit may be obtained from the coordinator’s office according to subsection (1) of this section without the payment of a fee. Revoked user’s permits shall require the fee set forth in Sections 7.200 to 7.250.

(5)    In addition to the fee provided in subsection (1) an additional fee set by Council resolution will be imposed on a user who fails to obtain a permit within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in Sections 7.200 to 7.250, or who is more than 60 days delinquent in renewing a permit.

(6)    An alarm user required by Federal, State, County, or municipal statute, regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to Sections 7.200 to 7.250 and may be issued a special alarm user’s permit.

(7)    An alarm user which is a governmental political unit shall be subject to Sections 7.200 to 7.250, but a permit shall be issued without payment of a fee.


7.215 User Instructions.

(1)    Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on premises located in the area subject to Sections 7.200 to 7.250 shall furnish the user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system at any time.

(2)    Standard form instructions shall be submitted by every alarm business to the Chief of Police within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in Sections 7.200 to 7.250. If he or she reasonably finds such instructions to be incomplete, unclear or inadequate, he or she may require the alarm business to revise the instructions to comply with this section and then to distribute the revised instructions to its alarm users.


7.220 Automatic Dialing Device – Certain Interconnections Prohibited.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within twelve hours of receipt of written notice from the coordinator that it is so programmed.

(2)    Within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in Sections 7.200 to 7.250, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or disconnected.

(3)    It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any telephone line assigned to the City; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the coordinator that an automatic dialing device is so programmed.


7.225 False Alarms – Permit Revocation – Appeal.

(1)    Any alarm system which has 10 or more false alarms within a permit year shall be subject to permit revocation as provided herein.

(2)    If the communications center records ten or more false alarms within a permit year for any alarm system:

(a)    The Chief of Police shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business providing service or inspection to the user by certified mail of such fact and direct that the user submit a report to the Chief of Police within 10 days of receipt of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms.

(b)    If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Chief of Police shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the occurrence of false alarms; if he or she determines that the action will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, he or she shall notify the alarm user and the relevant alarm business in writing that the permit will not be revoked at that time and that if one more false alarm occurs within the permit year, the permit will be summarily revoked.

(c)    If no report is submitted, or if the Chief of Police determines that the actions taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall give notice by certified mail to the user that the permit will be revoked without further notice on the tenth day after the date of the notice, and notifying the user of their right to appeal pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

(d)    An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a revoked user’s permit as provided in Section 7.210(2). The Chief of Police shall not be required to issue a revoked user’s permit, unless he or she is satisfied that the user’s system has been properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The Chief of Police may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the user, before issuing a revoked user’s permit, which restrictions and conditions shall be written on the permit and shall provide for summary revocation on the occurrence of 10 false alarms in the permit year.

(e)    In situations permitting summary revocation under subsections (2)(b) and (c) of this section, revocations shall be effective on the fifth day following the mailing by certified mail by the Chief of Police of a notice of revocation. 

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


7.230 False Alarm – Fee.

(1)    The special alarm user permit shall be as defined in Section 7.210(6), and shall be subject to the following regulations:

(a)    Special alarm permits shall not be subject to revocation due to false alarms.

(b)    For each false alarm over two in a permit year, upon written demand thereof by the Chief of Police, the holder of a special user’s permit shall pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution.

(2)    The governmental political unit shall be as defined in Section 7.210(7), and shall be subject to the following regulations:

(a)    Shall not be subject to revocation due to false alarms.

(b)    For each false alarm over two in a permit year, for each location, and upon written demand thereof by the Chief of Police, the holder of the alarm user’s permit shall pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution.

(3)    All other alarm permits shall, for each false alarm over two in a permit year, for each location, and upon written demand by the Chief of Police, pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution.

(4)    The payment of any fee provided for in this section shall not be deemed to extend the term alarms of the permit.

(5)    Nonpermit user’s false alarms shall be subject to the following regulations:

(a)    Alarm requests from alarm centers, as defined in Section 7.205, shall be subject to false alarm fees.

(b)    For each false alarm request over two in a calendar year, for each location, and upon written demand thereof by the Chief of Police, the resident, tenant, or owner shall pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1575, adopted 09-22-2008.]


7.235 Confidentiality Statistics.

(1)    All information submitted in compliance with Sections 7.200 to 7.250 shall be held in the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from disclosure pursuant to State statute; and any violation of confidentiality shall be deemed a violation of Sections 7.200 to 7.250. The coordinator shall be charged with the sole responsibility for the maintenance of all records of any kind whatsoever under Sections 7.200 to 7.250.

(2)    Subject to the requirements of confidentiality, the coordinator shall develop and maintain statistics having the purpose of assisting alarm system evaluation for use by members of the public.


7.240 Allocation of Revenues and Expenses.

All fees, fines and forfeitures of bail collected pursuant to Sections 7.200 to 7.250 shall be general fund revenue of the City.


7.245 City Liability.

The City shall incur no liability or costs as a result of personnel or system malfunctions of private alarm systems or the installation or maintenance of said systems.


7.250 Enforcement.

(1)    Enforcement of Sections 7.200 to 7.250 may be by civil action as provided in ORS 30.315.

(2)    Violation of Sections 7.200 to 7.250 shall be punished upon a conviction as set out in Sections 1.205 to 1.260.

(3)    The failure or omission to comply with provision of Sections 7.200 to 7.250, shall be deemed a violation and may be so prosecuted, subject to the penalty provided in subsection (2) of this section.


HANDGUN PURCHASE BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION FEE


7.275 Processing Fee.

A processing fee shall be charged for each handgun purchaser background investigation performed pursuant to ORS 166.420(3)(a). The fee shall be submitted to the Police Department with the background inspection request by the dealer. Failure to submit the proper fee with the request shall be grounds for rejection of the application.


7.280 Fee Classification.

The City Council finds that the processing fee authorized by Section 7.275 is not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11B, of the Oregon Constitution.


7.285 Penalty.

Failure to remit the processing fee for any background investigation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 per occurrence.


REGULATING DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATIONS


7.300 Purpose.

The City Council finds it necessary and desirable to regulate solicitation in order to provide an effective opportunity for the occupants of residential property to protect themselves from the unwanted disruption of the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of their property and right to privacy caused by solicitors, and to provide a means by which those solicitors who choose to intrude upon and disrupt that quiet enjoyment of property can be held accountable for such violations.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1494, adopted 03-19-2003.]


7.305 Definition.

For the purposes of Sections 7.300 to 7.335, the terms “solicit” and “solicitation” shall mean the entry onto real property used for residential purposes by a person for the purpose of communicating with an occupant of the property, whether the communication is verbal, visual or in writing.


7.310 Prohibited Acts, Penalties.

(1)    It is unlawful for any person to:

(a)    Solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., local time, without the consent of the occupant to do so;

(b)    Allow, suffer or permit any person soliciting on their behalf or under their direction to commit any act prohibited by this section;

(c)    Leave written materials upon real property where a sign conforming to the requirements of Section 7.335 is posted, without the consent of the occupant to do so;

(d)    Solicit upon real property where a sign conforming to the requirements of Section 7.335 is posted;

(2)    Violation of this section is punishable as a Class A violation.

[Section 7.310 amended by Ordinance No. 1494, adopted 03-19-2003; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.315 Consent to Enter Onto Real Property, Exemption.

(1)    It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Section 7.310 that the person charged with the violation or crime had received actual or constructive consent of the occupant prior to entering the real property. Constructive consent to enter real property may be implied from the circumstances of each instance, the relationship of the parties and actual or implied contractual relationships.

(2)    The occupant of real property shall be considered to have given constructive consent to enter real property for the purpose of solicitation between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., local time, if they have not posted a “No Solicitation” sign, pursuant to Section 7.335.

(3)    Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the entry into a structure located on real property. The right to enter any structure must be otherwise provided for by law.

(4)    Officers, employees or agents of a governmental entity while performing activities within the scope of their office, employment or agency are exempt from the requirements of Sections 7.300 to 7.335.


7.335 “No Solicitation” Sign.

(1)    If an occupant of real property chooses to prohibit solicitors from entering onto the property, the occupant may post a “No Solicitation” sign pursuant to this section. The effect of the posting of such a sign is to express the refusal of the occupant to grant consent to any person to enter their real property to solicit, except to those persons exempt from these provisions by Section 7.315(4).

(2)    Signs posted pursuant to this section shall be clearly visible and posted on or near the boundaries of the property at the normal points of entry, and contain the words “No Solicitation,” or similar verbiage, in characters no less than one-half inch in height.

(3)    For real property possessing no apparent barriers to entry at the boundaries of the property which limit access to the primary entrance of a structure located on the property, placement of the sign at the primary entrance to the structure constitutes compliance with this section. If the “No Solicitation” sign is placed at the primary entrance to the structure, it shall not be a violation to enter the property to approach the primary entrance; provided, that the person entering does not seek to gain entry to the structure or communicate with someone inside the structure.

[Section 7.335 amended by Ordinance No. 1494, adopted 03-19-2003; amended by Ordinance No. 1619, adopted 03-17-2014.]

[Note: Under “Regulating Door-to-Door Solicitations” the following sections were repealed by Ordinance No. 1494, adopted 03-19-2003: Section 7.320 – Registration Statement; Section 7.325 – Issuance of Certificate of Registration, Revocation; Section 7.330 – Form of Certificate of Registration, Term; and Section 7.340 – Evidentiary Matters.]




SOCIAL GAMING


7.375 Prohibited Gaming.

Except as provided in Section 7.380, no person shall engage in social games or gambling within the City.


7.380 Exceptions.

(1)    Charitable, fraternal, nonprofit civic associations and religious organizations may engage in social games where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house income from the operation of the social games.

(2)    Charitable, fraternal and religious organizations may operate bingo, lotto or raffles in compliance with ORS 167.118 and when licensed to operate such games pursuant to ORS 167.118, 464.250 to 464.380, 464.420 and 464.450 to 464.530.


7.385 Definitions.

The definitions in ORS 167.117 are applicable to Sections 7.375 and 7.380.


MARIJUANA ENTITY BAN


7.390 Definitions.

Marijuana. The plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. 

Marijuana processing site. An entity registered with the Oregon Health Authority to process marijuana. 

Marijuana processor. An entity licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to process marijuana. 

Marijuana producer. An entity licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow or harvest marijuana. 

Marijuana retailer. An entity licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to sell marijuana items to a consumer in this state. 

Marijuana wholesaler. An entity licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to purchase items in this State for resale to a person other than a consumer.

Medical marijuana dispensary. An entity registered with the Oregon Health Authority to transfer marijuana. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1644, adopted 1-11-2016.]


7.392 Ban Declared.

In accordance with Section 134 of House Bill 3400 (2015), the following establishments are prohibited in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the City of West Linn: 

(1)    Marijuana processing sites;

(2)    Medical marijuana dispensaries;

(3)    Marijuana producers;

(4)    Marijuana processors;

(5)    Marijuana wholesalers; and

(6)    Marijuana retailers.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1644, adopted 1-11-2016.]


7.394 Exception.

The prohibition in Section 7.392 does not apply to a marijuana processing site or medical marijuana dispensary that meets the conditions set out in any of the following sections of House Bill 3400 (2015): Section 134(6), Section 134(7), Section 135, or Section 136.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1644, adopted 1-11-2016.]


MARIJUANA TAX


7.400 Purpose.

For the purposes of this subchapter, every person who sells marijuana, medical marijuana or marijuana-infused products in the City of West Linn is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this subchapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana, medical marijuana, and marijuana-infused products.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.402 Definitions.

The following words and phrases used in this subchapter have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(1)    “Gross sales” means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter.

(2)    “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

(3)    “Oregon Medical Marijuana Program” means the office within the Oregon Health Authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto.

(4)    “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the State of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(5)    “Purchase or sale” means the acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana or marijuana-infused product within the City.

(6)    “Registry identification cardholder” means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority.

(7)    “Retail sale” means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration.

(8)    “Seller” means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the State of Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

(9)    “Tax” means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this subchapter.

(10)    “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the City Manager for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this subchapter.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.405 Tax Imposed.

A tax is hereby levied and shall be paid by every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this subchapter. The City Manager is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection, and administration of the marijuana tax.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.410 Amount and Payment, Deductions.

(1)    In addition to any fees or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every seller engaged in the sale of marijuana and marijuana-infused products shall pay a tax as follows:

(a)    Five percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller by a registry identification cardholder.

(b)    Ten percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by individuals who are not registry identification cardholders purchasing marijuana or marijuana-infused products under the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program.

(2)    The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana or marijuana-infused products:

(a)    Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser;

(b)    Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.412 Seller Responsible for Payment of Tax.

(1)    Every seller shall, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the City Manager, on forms provided by the City, specifying the total sales subject to the tax and the amount of tax collected under this subchapter. The seller may request or the City Manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or City Manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and the City Manager may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the City Manager.

(2)    At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Manager. Payments received by the City Manager for application against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the City. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the statute of limitations for a period or periods.

(3)    Nondesignated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the City Manager, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the City in a particular tax or factual situation, the City Manager may order such a change. The City Manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the City Manager deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The City Manager also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this subchapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment is made to the City Manager. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

(4)    Every seller required to remit the tax imposed in this subchapter shall be entitled to retain five percent of all taxes due to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance.

(5)    Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the City Manager records of all sales made by the dispensary and such other books or accounts as may be required by the City Manager. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The City Manager shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.415 Penalties and Interest.

(1)    Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this subchapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2)    Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 60 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

(3)    If the City Manager determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this subchapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(4)    In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(5)    Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid.

(6)    All sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in subsections (1) and (3) of this section shall be distributed to the City of West Linn General Fund to offset the costs of auditing and enforcement of this tax.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.420 Failure to Report and Remit Tax – Determination of Tax by City Manager.

If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this subchapter, any report of the tax required by this subchapter, the City Manager shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the City Manager shall procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this subchapter and payable by any seller, the City Manager shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this subchapter. In case such determination is made, the City Manager shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller so assessed at the last known place of address. Such seller may make an appeal of such determination as provided in Section 7.425. If no appeal is filed, the City Manager’s determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.425 Appeal.

Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal pursuant to Section 1.400. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.430 Refunds.

(1)    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the City under this subchapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsection (2) of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Manager within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the City Manager.

(2)    The City Manager shall have 20 calendar days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the claim. The City Manager shall notify the claimant in writing of the City Manager’s determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the City Manager to be a valid claim, in a manner prescribed by the City Manager a seller may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or received. The seller shall notify the City Manager of claimant’s choice no later than 15 days following the date the City Manager mailed the determination. In the event claimant has not notified the City Manager of claimant’s choice within the 15-day period and the seller is still in business, a credit will be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the seller is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the claim form.

(3)    Any credit for erroneous overpayment of tax made by a seller taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a seller must be so taken or filed within three years after the date on which the overpayment was made to the City. 

(4)    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the City Manager acknowledged the validity of the claim.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.435 Actions to Collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the City. Any such tax collected by a seller, which has not been paid to the City, shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of West Linn for the recovery of such amount. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the City of West Linn, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the City of West Linn has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, in the event the City turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of $50.00 or 50 percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.440 Violation.

Violation of this subchapter shall constitute a violation pursuant to Section 1.205, Penalty Designated. It is a violation of this subchapter for any seller or other person to:

(1)    Fail or refuse to comply with this subchapter;

(2)    Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;

(3)    Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;

(4)    Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City Manager;

(5)    Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or

(6)    Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the City by the due date.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.445 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the City, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the City under the terms of this subchapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

(1)    The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana or marijuana-infused products are sold or provided; or 

(2)    The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

(3)    Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the City Manager or an appeal from the City Manager for amount due the City under this subchapter; or

(4)    The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

(5)    The disclosure of records related to a business’ failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The City Council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5).

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.447 Audit of Books, Records, or Persons.

(1)    The City, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the City for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s State and Federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the City limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the City Manager or an authorized agent of the City Manager. 

(2)    If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of sellers filed with the City Manager pursuant to the requirements of this subchapter have shown incorrectly the amount of tax accruing, the City Manager may make such changes in subsequent reports and payments, or make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigations.

(3)    The seller shall reimburse the City for reasonable costs of the examination or investigation if the action disclosed that the seller paid 95 percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the City, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of nine percent per year from the date the original tax payment was due.

(4)    If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the City Manager may immediately seek a subpoena from the West Linn Municipal Court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination.

(5)    Every seller shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the City Manager of all sales of marijuana and marijuana-infused products. The records shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the City Manager or authorized officers or agents of the City Manager.

Every seller shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of marijuana and marijuana-infused products sold. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


7.449 Forms and Regulations.

The City Manager is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this subchapter, to provide for:

(1)    A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors.

(2)    The records which sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this subchapter.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1631, adopted 10-01-2014.]


TRANSIENT LODGING TAX


7.450 Definitions. 

(1)    “Accrual accounting” means the operator enters the rent due from a transient on the operator’s records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

(2)    “Bed and breakfast home” means overnight accommodations in a dwelling unit provided to transient guests for compensation.

(3)    “Cash accounting” means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on the operator’s records until rent is paid.

(4)    “City Manager” means the City Manager of West Linn or the Manager’s designee.

(5)    “Hotel” means any establishment primarily engaged in the provision of lodging services on a temporary basis with incidental food, drink, and other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests.

(6)    “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel.

(7)    “Operator” means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs operational functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this code, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this code by either the principal or managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

(8)    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(9)    “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction, including any consideration allocated or assigned for meals or other incidental services.

(10)    “Tax” means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which the operator is required to report collections.

(11)    “Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of a hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than 30 consecutive days.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.452 Tax Imposed.

For the privilege of occupancy of any hotel in the City, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of four percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City, which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on the operator’s records when rent is collected if the operator keeps records on the cash accounting basis, and when earned if the operator keeps records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. The tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to all hotels located within the corporate limits of the City.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.455 Collection of Tax by Operator, Rules for Collection. 

(1)    Every operator renting rooms in this City, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owed by the operator to the City.

(2)    In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payment is made.

(3)    For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted.

(4)    The City Manager shall enforce Sections 7.450 through 7.492 and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with Sections 7.450 through 7.492 as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement. Prior to adoption of rules and regulations, the City Manager shall give public notice of intent to adopt rules and regulations, provide copies of the proposed rules and regulations to interested parties, and conduct a public hearing on the proposed rules and regulations. Public notice shall be given when rules and regulations have been finally adopted. Copies of current rules and regulations shall be made available to the public upon request. It is a violation of Sections 7.450 through 7.492 to violate rules and regulations duly adopted by the City Manager.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.457 Operator’s Duties.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax, or any part of the tax, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.460 Exemptions.

No tax under this chapter shall be imposed upon:

(1)    Any person for more than 30 successive calendar days (a person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient);

(2)    Any person whose rent is of a value of less than $10.00 per day;

(3)    Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who personally rents such facilities incidentally to his or her own use thereof, except bed and breakfast homes which rent three or more rooms;

(4)    Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home, or home for aged people; or

(5)    Employees, officials, or agents of the U.S. government occupying a hotel in the course of official business.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.462 Registration of Operator.

(1)    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the City shall register with the City Manager on a form provided by the City Manager. Operators must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration.

(2)    Registration shall set forth the name under which an operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his or her place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the City Manager may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator.

(3)    The City Manager shall, within 10 days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the City Manager upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

(4)    Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(a)    The name of the operator;

(b)    The address of the hotel;

(c)    The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

(d)    The following language:

THIS TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the TRANSIENT LODGING TAX ORDINANCE of West Linn, Oregon, by registration with the tax administrator for the purposes of collection from transients the lodgings tax imposed by said City and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all of the local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City of West Linn. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.465 Due Date, Returns, and Payments.

(1)    The transient shall pay the tax imposed by this chapter to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the City Manager on a monthly basis on the fifteenth day of the month for the preceding month and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. If the last day of the month falls on a holiday or weekend, amounts are delinquent at the close of the first business day that follows. 

(2)    On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each month of collection, a return for the preceding month’s tax collections shall be filed with the City Manager. The return shall be filed in such form as the City Manager may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.

(3)    Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The City Manager may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of the operator for such period, and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

(4)    The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of tax due, to the City Manager at West Linn City Hall, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

(5)    For good cause, the City Manager may extend for up to one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the City Council. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed and the tax and interest due are not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described in Section 7.467.

(6)    The operator shall be permitted to deduct as collection expense five percent of the amount of the taxes collected, including any interest or penalties, as shown on the return mentioned in subsection (3) of this section.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.467 Penalties and Interest.

(1)    Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency, shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2)    Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for the remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due, plus the amount of the tax due plus the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

(3)    Fraud. If the City Manager determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax due shall be added thereto, in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

(4)    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, for the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(5)    Penalties and Interest Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter shall be merged and become a part of the tax required to be paid.

(6)    Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax levied within the time stated shall pay the penalties stated. The operator may petition the City Manager for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof, and the City Manager may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.470 Deficiencies.

(1)    If the City Manager determines that the returns are incorrect, the City Manager may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the City Manager’s possession, or that may come into the City Manager’s possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided, after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in Section 7.467.

(2)    In making a determination, the City Manager may offset any overpayments which may have been previously made for a period or periods against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 7.467.

(3)    The City Manager shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of the City Manager’s determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at the operator’s address as it appears on the records of the City Manager. In case of service by mail or any notice required by these sections, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

(4)    Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this code or authorized rules and regulations, each deficiency determination shall be made and notice mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after return is filed, whichever period expires later.

(5)    Any determination shall become due and payable upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the City Manager has given notice. The operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.472 Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion.

If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax or to make any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this code, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this code, the City Manager shall proceed in such manner as the City Manager deems best to obtain facts and information upon which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the City Manager has determined the tax due that is imposed by this code from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, the City Manager shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided by this code. In case such determination is made, the City Manager shall give notice pursuant to Section 7.470(3) of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the City Manager of any fraud, intent to evade, or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file a return. A determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice, and shall become final within 10 days after the City Manager has given notice. The operator may, however, petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.475 Operator Delay.

If the City Manager believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the City will be jeopardized by delay, or any determination will be jeopardized by delay, the City Manager shall make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount determined shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the City Manager after service of notice. The operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.478 Redeterminations.

(1)    Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 7.470, 7.472, or 7.475 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in these sections. If the petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required by Section 7.470, 7.472, or 7.475, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(2)    If the petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the City Manager shall reconsider the determination, and if the person has so requested in the petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give the person 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The City Manager may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

(3)    The City Manager may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing, and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

(4)    The order or decision of the City Manager upon a petition for redemption or redetermination and refund becomes final 10 days after service upon the petitioner of notice, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

(5)    No petition or appeal shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.480 Refunds.

(1)    Refunds by City to Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City Manager under this chapter, it may be refunded; provided, that a verified claim in writing, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Manager within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the City Manager. If the claim is approved by the City Manager, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such operator, or the operator’s administrators, executors, or assignees.

(2)    Refunds to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and deposited by the operator with the City Manager and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected from the transient and received by the City Manager, it may be refunded by the City Manager to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Manager within three years from the date of payment.

(3)    Refunds to Tenant. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupies the hotel for a period exceeding 30 days without interruption, the operator shall refund to such tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from the tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for such collection and refund to the City Manager. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to refund or credit to the tenant, the operator shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.482 Security for Collection of Tax.

(1)    The City Manager, after delinquencies or whenever the City Manager deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator to deposit with the City Manager such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the City Manager may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the City Manager but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average monthly liability for the period for which the operator files returns, determined in such manner as the City Manager deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the City Manager subject to the limitations herein provided.

(2)    At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the City Manager may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the City to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.485 Administration.

(1)    Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.

(2)    The City Manager may examine during normal business hours the books, papers, and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator, after notification to the operator, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.

(3)    It shall be unlawful for the City Manager or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this code to make known in any manner whatever any financial or business information submitted or disclosed to the City Manager under the terms of Sections 7.450 through 7.492; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:

(a)    The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another City official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purposes of administrating or enforcing any provision of this code, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder.

(b)    The disclosure, after a filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax, or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves each such disclosure and that the City Manager may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in the City Manager’s opinion the public interest would suffer thereby.

(c)    The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued.

(d)    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


7.488 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the City Manager may appeal to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.490 Violations.

Any operator or other person who shall fail or refuse to register as required herein, or who shall fail or refuse to furnish a return, supplemental return, or other data required herein or by the City Manager, or, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due hereunder, shall make, render, sign, or verify any false or fraudulent report, or shall otherwise violate the terms of Sections 7.450 to 7.492, commits a Class A violation. The City shall institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of Sections 7.450 through 7.492. These rights shall be in addition to any other remedies allowed by law.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.492 Transient Lodging Tax Account.

(1)    There is hereby created the transient lodging tax account.

(2)    The City Manager shall place all monies received pursuant to this code in the transient lodging tax account.

(3)    The City shall budget and distribute funds from the transient lodging tax account in a manner consistent with the requirements of ORS 320.300 through 320.350.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1571-A, adopted 07-14-2008.]


PUBLIC UTILITIES PRIVILEGE TAX


7.500 Authority.

The privilege tax for use and occupancy of City streets covered by Sections 7.500 to 7.525 is enacted pursuant to the authority of the City under Oregon law, including the authority to impose privilege taxes on public utilities.


7.505 Tax Imposed.

A tax for the privilege of occupying and using streets and other facilities within the City of one and one-half percent is imposed on the gross revenue received by any supplier of electrical energy to consumers within the City that has received a franchise from the City.

[Section 7.505 amended by Ordinance No. 1477 adopted 11-28-2001.]


7.510 Methodology for Calculation.

The term “gross revenue” shall have the same meaning as set forth in the franchise ordinance granting a franchise to the Portland General Electric Company, or if that franchise ordinance does not define the term, in the franchise agreement with Portland General Electric Company. The methodology for calculating tax shall be identical to the methodology for calculating Portland General Electric Company’s franchise fee.

[Section 7.510 amended by Ordinance No. 1477 adopted 11-28-2001.]


7.515 Tax Collection.

The tax imposed by Sections 7.500 to 7.525 shall be due semi-annually for the preceding six-month period. The tax shall be due as follows:

(1)    On or before April 1st, the tax for part or all of the six-month period extending from July 1st through December 31st, inclusive of both dates, of the preceding calendar year; and

(2)    On or before October 1st, the tax for part or all of the six-month period extending from January 1st, through June 30th, inclusive of both dates, of the same calendar year.


7.520 Effective Date.

The tax for the privilege of occupying and using streets and other facilities shall become effective as of May 1, 1993, for gross revenues from energy consumption within the city on and after that date.


7.525 Classification of Tax.

The city council determines that the tax imposed by Sections 7.500 to 7.525 is not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.




CABLE TELEVISION – FRANCHISE REGULATIONS


7.600 Definitions.

For purposes of sections 7.600 to 7.635, unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean:

Access. The availability for use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups and individuals in the community, including the city and its designees, of the cable communications system to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under the franchisee’s editorial control, including, but not limited to public, educational and government programming.

Cable service. Programming, in any combination, provided on the cable communications system to subscribers.

Cable Communications System. A system of plant, facilities, equipment, and closed signal transmission paths, including, without limitation, antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, studios, real and personal property, and any and all other conductors, home terminals, converters, remote control units, and all associated equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purposes of distributing cable service to subscribers and of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing audio, video, voice, digital, analog or other forms of electronic or optical signals, whether processed by or owned, rented, leased, leased-purchased or otherwise controlled by or within the responsibility of the franchisee.

Franchise. The privilege conferred upon a person, firm or organization by the city to operate a cable communications system under the terms and provisions of sections 7.600 to 7.635.

Franchisee. The person, firm or organization to which a franchise is granted to operate a cable communications system pursuant to the authority of sections 7.600 to 7.635.

Leased Access Channel. Any channel or portion of a channel commercially available for programming for persons other than the franchisee for a fee or charge, or other considerations to be paid by those persons to the franchisee.

Programming. The process of causing television programs or other patterns of signals in video, voice or data formats to be transmitted on the cable communications system, and includes all programs or patterns of signals transmitted or capable of being transmitted, on the cable communications system.

Public Right-of-Way. The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, alley, highway, dedicated way, local access road or road easement used or intended to be used by the general public for motor vehicles, and any utility easement within the city, to the extent the city has the right to allow the franchisee to use them.


7.605 Authority.

The city council of the city of West Linn recognizes, declares and establishes the authority to regulate the construction, operation and maintenance of cable communications systems (hereinafter “systems”) for the area located with the city limits and to exercise all powers necessary for that purpose, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1)    To grant by resolution, nonexclusive franchises for the development and operation of a system or systems.

(2)    To impose different franchise requirements based on reasonable classifications.

(3)    To contract, jointly agree or otherwise provide with other local or regional governments, counties or special districts for the development, operation, and/or regulation of systems, or franchises therefor, notwithstanding the fact that the systems extend beyond the jurisdiction of the city.

(4)    To purchase, hire, construct, own, maintain, operate or lease a system and to acquire property necessary for any such purpose.

(5)    To regulate and supervise all facets of a system, including but not limited to:

(a)    Consumer service, consumer protection and privacy standards.

(b)    Disputes among the city, franchisees, and subscribers.

(c)    Franchisee fair employment practices.

(d)    The development, management and control of access channels.

(e)    Programming, channel capacity and system interconnections.

(f)    Rates and review of finances for rate adjustments.

(g)    Construction timetables, standards, and service extension policies.

(h)    Modernization and upgrade of technical aspects.

(i)    Leased access channels.

(j)    Ensuring adherence to federal, state and local regulations.

(k)    Franchise transfer and transfer of control of ownership.

(l)    Franchise renewal.

(m)    Franchise revocation.

(n)    Enforcement of buy-back, lease-back or option-to-purchase provisions.

(o)    Receivership and foreclosure procedures.

(p)    Compliance with city standards for public rights-of-way.

(q)    Regulate telecommunications utilities which operate a cable communications system.

(6)    Reserve the power to exercise this grant of authority to the fullest extent allowed by law, and in a manner that is consistent with superior law.


7.610 Grant of Franchise, Renewal.

(1)    In the event that the council finds it in the best interests of the city to consider granting a franchise for a system, the procedures set forth in sections 7.600 to 7.635 shall be followed.

(2)    By resolution of the council, the city manager shall be directed to prepare a request for proposal (hereafter referred to as an “RFP”) containing at least the following:

(a)    Information and instructions relating to the preparation and filing of bid proposals.

(b)    Requirements regarding the development, operation and regulation of a system, including but not limited to the following:

(i)    The length, renewal and transfer or assignment of the franchise, including foreclosure and receivership provisions,

(ii)    A description of the franchise territory and the extension of service,

(iii)    Access requirements,

(iv)    The system design,

(v)    Technical performance standards,

(vi)    Fees, records and reporting,

(vii)    Indemnification, insurance, and liability for damages, and

(viii)    Provision of an option for the city to acquire the system upon revocation or expiration of the franchise.

(c)    Criteria to be used in evaluating applicant proposals.

(3)    When a person is operating an existing system without a franchise, by resolution of the council, the city manager shall be directed to prepare a proposed franchise, containing at least the requirements listed in (2)(b) above, for presentation to the operator.

(4)    The council, by resolution, may:

(a)    Approve the RFP, or proposed franchise, as proposed, or modify or otherwise make amendments thereto as it deems necessary;

(b)    Authorize the city manager to seek bids for a system pursuant to the RFP, or enter discussions with a current operator on the award of a franchise.

(5)    The council may award a franchise only after a public hearing on the proposed franchise, notice of which shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The potential franchisee shall be notified by mail of the public hearing; provided, however, that no defect in the notice or failure to notify shall invalidate the franchise awarded. The Council may award the franchise, modify the proposed franchise and award or take no action.

(6)    No franchise or award thereof shall be deemed final until adoption of a resolution containing the terms and conditions thereof. The franchisee shall bear the costs of all publications and notices given in connection with the award of the franchise, and the costs incurred by the City in evaluating the proposed franchise.

(7)    A request for renewal of a franchise will be considered and processed in conformance with federal law. The Council may, by resolution, adopt procedures to be followed in the consideration of a renewal request.


7.615 Administration of Cable Communications Provisions and Franchise.

The Council shall have the power to carry out any or all of the following functions:

(1)    Employ the service of a technical consultant, to assist in the analysis of any matter related to any franchise, RFP or proposed franchise under Sections 7.600 to 7.635;

(2)    Act on applications for franchises;

(3)    Act on matters which might constitute grounds for revocation or termination of a franchise pursuant to its terms;

(4)    Resolve disagreements among franchisees and public and private users of the system;

(5)    Consider requests for rate settings or adjustments;

(6)    Coordinate and facilitate the use of access channels;

(7)    Act in intergovernmental matters relating to systems, cooperate with regulators and operators of other systems, and supervise interconnection of systems;

(8)    Review all franchisee records required by the franchise and, in the Council’s discretion, require the preparation and filing of information additional to that required by the franchise;

(9)    Conduct evaluations of the system and the franchisee’s compliance with franchise requirements at least every three years;

(10)    Adopt and amend regulations and procedures necessary to enforce franchises and to clarify terms thereof;

(11)    Appoint an advisory committee to assist the Council in exercising its authority pursuant to Sections 7.600 to 7.635;

(12)    Any other actions the Council deems necessary to carry out the purpose of Sections 7.600 to 7.635.


7.620 Intergovernmental Agreements.

The Council may enter into intergovernmental agreements as authorized by Oregon law, with any other jurisdiction to provide for the cooperative regulation and control of any aspect of a cable communications system. Such agreements may provide for the delegation of any and all powers of the Council to an entity provided for in the intergovernmental agreement, except for the powers to enter into or revoke a franchise agreement.


7.625 Violation and Penalties.

(1)    Any person, firm or corporation, other than the City, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any provision of Sections 7.600 to 7.635 or performing any of the acts or functions itemized under Section 7.600, which defines a cable communications system, without having been awarded a franchise to perform said acts or functions pursuant to the terms of Sections 7.600 to 7.635 shall be deemed to have committed a violation.

(2)    Violation by a franchisee of any provision of a franchise granted pursuant to Sections 7.600 to 7.635 is an violation.

(3)    Each violation occurring on a separate day is considered a separate violation of Sections 7.600 to 7.635.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.630 Cumulative Remedies.

The rights, remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and not mutually exclusive and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the City under any other chapter or law.


7.635 Injunctive Relief.

Upon authorization by the Council, the City Attorney may commence an action in the circuit court or other appropriate court to enjoin the continued violation of any provision of Sections 7.600 to 7.635.


LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW


7.700 Purpose.

The purpose of Sections 7.700 to 7.740 is to provide administrative procedures and criteria for the City’s review of liquor license applications. The City Manager shall make a recommendation to the Commission concerning all applications for premises within the city. The recommendation may be to grant, grant with restrictions, or deny the application.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.705 Scope of Provisions.

Sections 7.700 to 7.740 shall govern the procedures and criteria for consideration of liquor license applications and City recommendation to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.710 Definitions.

For the purpose of Sections 7.700 to 7.740 the following mean:

Applicant. The person or entity who submits an application to the Commission.

Application. The written request to the Commission to grant or renew a liquor license for premises within the City limits.

Commission. The Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

Liquor License. A license to sell liquor issued by the Commission.

Notice of Application. The notice provided by an applicant to the City of an application for a new liquor license as required by Section 7.715.

Notice of Renewal. The notice provided by the Commission to the City under OAR 845-005-0304 listing liquor licenses within the City that are scheduled for renewal.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.715 Notice of Application Required.

(1)    An applicant shall provide the City Manager with a notice of application for any new liquor license in a form approved by the City Manager. The notice shall include:

(a)    A copy of the application;

(b)    A request that the City issue a written recommendation to the Commission concerning the application;

(c)    The type of license applied for and a description of the nature of the business for which the application is made;

(d)    The name of the applicant, with address; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the business is a corporation, the name and address of the home office, and the name and address of the designated agent in the state; if a foreign corporation, the name and address of the local agent or representative of the business in the City;

(e)    The address of the location where the business will be located in the City;

(f)    Any other relevant information the City Manager deems necessary for review;

(g)    The signature of the applicant or the agent making the application.

Subsections (1)(c) through (e) of this section do not have to be separately stated if included in the copy of the application provided to the City.

(2)    At the time of submission of the notice of application, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount set by Council resolution and consistent with applicable statutes.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]




7.717 Renewal Fee.

Any holder of a liquor license for premises located within the City shall submit a renewal fee to the City prior to the date on which the license is to be renewed. A copy of the renewal application must accompany the fee.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.720 City Manager’s Duties.

(1)    The City Manager shall maintain a record of all notices of application and all notices of renewal received. The City Manager shall notify the affected neighborhood association in a timely manner of the application.

(2)    The City Manager may require an applicant to supply any relevant additional information to determine the qualifications of the applicant.

(3)    The City Manager shall review the application and make a recommendation to the Commission within 25 days of the receipt of notice of a new application, and within 40 days of the receipt of notice of an application renewal.

(4)    If the recommendation is for denial or approval with restrictions, the City Manager shall mail notice to the applicant as is provided by Section 7.730. If the applicant requests a public hearing on the application, or the City Manager determines to hold a public hearing, or the City Manager refers the application to the City Council for a public hearing, the City Manager shall request an extension of time from the Commission to submit the City’s recommendation to the Commission. If the Commission does not grant a time extension, the City Manager shall deny the request for a hearing and shall submit the City’s recommendation to the Commission. If the Commission grants the time extension, the City Manager shall schedule a public hearing either before the City Manager or before the City Council on the application. The final recommendation by the City must be submitted within 90 days of the notice of new application if an extension is granted, and within 105 days of the notice of application renewal if an extension is granted, or such other time as determined by the Commission.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.725 Hearing Procedure.

(1)    Upon adverse recommendation by the City Manager, request by the applicant for a public hearing, determination by the City Manager to hold his or her own public hearing, or referral of the application by the City Manager to the City Council for a public hearing, and agreement from the Commission to an extension of time, a public hearing before the City Manager or the City Council will be scheduled and notice given pursuant to Section 7.730.

(2)    The applicant may be represented by legal counsel, but legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense.

(3)    Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

(4)    Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

(5)    After due consideration of all pertinent information and testimony, the City Manager or City Council shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based upon the criteria established by state law and shall be final. In the case of a recommendation of an unfavorable determination, the specific reasons for the recommendation shall be announced at the meeting and set out in the City Manager’s or City Council’s minutes. A copy of the minutes shall be provided to the Commission.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.730 Applicant Notice.

Before the City Manager recommends denial or approval with restrictions of a liquor license application to the Commission, notice of the decision must be given to the applicant either personally or by registered or certified mail postmarked not later than 10 days prior to the decision date. The notice shall contain:

(1)    A statement of the time of decision;

(2)    A statement from the City Manager of the matter(s) asserted or charged supporting the adverse recommendation;

(3)    A statement that the applicant may request a public hearing on the recommendation within five days of mailing or receipt of the notice of decision to recommend denial, and that the applicant must not object to a request by the City to the Commission for an extension of time to provide a City recommendation;

(4)    A statement that the applicant may be represented by legal counsel at the hearing, but legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense;

(5)    A statement that a copy of Sections 7.700 to 7.740 may be obtained at the City Manager’s office.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.735 Public Notice.

[Repealed by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


7.740 Standards and Criteria.

The City Manager or the City Council shall make a recommendation for approval, denial or approval with restrictions of the liquor license application based on the City Manager’s or Council’s evaluation of the relevant standards and criteria. The City Manager or Council shall apply the standards and criteria established by state law. The recommendation shall be based upon grounds allowed by state law and the administrative rules of the Commission and shall be supported by reliable factual information.

[Amended by Ordinance No. 1478, adopted 11-28-2001; amended by Ordinance No. 1570, adopted 06-23-2008.]


PUBLIC TELEPHONE BOOTHS


7.750 Permit Grant.

A revocable permit is granted to the Pacific Northwest Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns to install, maintain and operate public telephone booths at various locations on City property and City streets on the following terms:

(1)    Location of Booths. Sites for the location or relocation of telephone booths shall be selected by the permittee, subject to approval of the City.

(2)    Installation and Maintenance. The permittee shall bear the entire cost of installation, maintenance, relocation and removal of every telephone booth installed under this permit.

(3)    Commissions. The permittee shall pay to the City a commission equal to 15 percent of the net contents of the coin box of each public telephone installed hereunder, after deduction for applicable excise taxes. After this permit becomes effective, such commissions shall be paid to the City semiannually.

(4)    Electricity. With approval of the City, the permittee, where feasible, may interconnect with electric service furnished to the City.

(5)    Removal of Booths. Upon 30 days’ notice, the City, for cause, may require the permittee to remove or relocate any telephone booth installed hereunder. The permittee on its own initiative may remove any telephone booth at any time but shall restore the surface to good condition, and safe for public use, considering the nature and location of the property.

(6)    Termination of Permit. This permit may be discontinued voluntarily by the permittee, only after 30 days’ notice. In event of such termination, the permittee shall remove all installations hereunder within 90 days and in compliance with provisions of subsection (5) of this section.


7.755 Indemnification of City.

The permit granted by Sections 7.750 to 7.760 is subject to the condition that permittee, its successors and assigns, forever will indemnify, and save the City, its officers, agents and employees harmless from and against any and all liability, loss, cost, damage and expense, and any and all claims for injury or death to persons and damage to property, directly or indirectly arising from the installation, maintenance, or operation of telephone booths under this permit. The City shall promptly notify the permittee upon receipt of any claim or demand against which it is, or may be held harmless by the permittee under this indemnification. As evidenced by its written acceptance of the terms and conditions as provided in Section 7.760, the permittee understands and agrees that the permit is granted only upon, and constitutes consideration for, this indemnification.


7.760 Filing of Acceptance.

Sections 7.750 to 7.760 are not operative until the permittee has filed with the City manager a written acceptance of all terms and conditions contained herein, signed by an authorized official of said corporation and approved as to form by the city attorney.


SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS


7.800 Definitions.

As used in Sections 7.800 to 7.880, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this section:

Applicant. Any person or organization who seeks a special event permit from the City Manager to conduct a special event governed by this chapter. An applicant who is an individual must be 18 years of age or older.

Athletic Event. An occasion in which a group of persons collectively engage in a sport or other form of physical exercise on a City street, sidewalk, alley or the street right-of-way, which obstructs, delays, or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic or does not comply with traffic laws and controls. Athletic events include bicycle and foot races within City rights-of-way.

Block Party. A festive gathering on a residential or commercial street or area requiring a closure of a street, or a portion thereof, to vehicular traffic and use of the street for the festivity.

Carnival. The exhibiting or conducting of a traveling show or of entertainment open to the public, including any caravan, museum, menagerie, animal collection, circus, sideshow, rodeo, carnival, animal exhibition, feats of horsemanship, acrobatic performance, “wild west” show, or any other show or entertainment similar in character.

City Manager. The City Manager or, in the Manager’s absence, the Acting City Manager.

Special Events. Carnivals, community celebrations, outdoor festivals, athletic events, block parties, parades, fairs, animal races, and similar public gatherings that take place on City property or rights-of-way or that require the closure of any portion of a City street.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.810 Permit Required.

(1)    Permit Required. Any person intending to conduct a special event in the City of West Linn shall first obtain a special event permit from the City Manager.

(2)    Exemptions. A special event permit is not required for the following:

Funeral processions

Garage sales

(3)    Application Procedure.

Application. Any person desiring to conduct a special event not exempted herein shall apply for a special event permit by filing an application with the City Manager on a form supplied by the City Manager. All applications shall be submitted not less than 30 days nor more than six months before the event date.

Late Application. The City Manager may consider an application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application and obtain police services for the event, if good cause for late submission is received. Good cause shall be deemed demonstrated if the application shows that the circumstances which gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the participants to file an application within the time prescribed by this chapter.

Application Fee. An application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit application fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.820 Action on Application.

The City Manager shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application on the grounds specified in Section 7.830(A)(1) through (9). Such action shall be taken within 15 days from time of application submittal. If the application is denied or approved on conditions other than those accepted by the applicant, the City Manager shall inform the applicant of the grounds for denial in writing, or the reason for the conditions imposed, simultaneously with notice of the decision, and shall further inform the applicant of the right of appeal. If the City Manager relied on information about the event other than that contained in the application, the City

Manager shall inform the applicant of additional information considered. The applicant shall be notified of any permit conditions at the time the application is approved and of the applicant’s right to appeal the permit conditions. If the City Manager refuses to consider a late application, the City Manager shall inform the applicant of that fact within 48 hours and shall inform applicant of the applicant’s right of appeal.

[New Section 7.820 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05- 2003.]


7.830 Grounds for Denial of Application for a Fairs, Festivals and Special Event Permit – Imposition of Conditions.

(1)    Considerations. The City Manager shall deny an application for a special event permit only if the City Manager determines from a consideration of the application and other pertinent information that one or more of the following exists:

(a)    Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be materially false or misleading;

(b)    The applicant fails to complete the application after having been notified of the additional information or documents requested;

(c)    The City Manager has earlier received an application to hold another event at the same time and place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the Police Department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both events;

(d)    The time, route, or size of the event is reasonably likely to substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion;

(e)    The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around the event, is reasonably likely to prevent proper police, fire, or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the event;

(f)    The size of the event is reasonably likely to require diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to ensure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the event, or to protect participants in the event, as to prevent normal protection to the rest of the City. Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others, if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed to allow for adequate protection of event participants with the number of police officers available to police the event.

(g)    The parade, or other event moving along a route, is not reasonably likely to move from its point of origin to its point of termination in four hours or less;

(h)    The location of the event is reasonably likely to substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work previously granted an encroachment permit or create a risk to event participants from such construction or maintenance work;

(i)    The event is reasonably likely to occur at a time when a school is in session, at a route or location adjacent to the school, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school;

(2)    Conditional Approvals. When the grounds for denial of an application for a permit specified in subsections (1)(d) through (i) of this section can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route or location of the event, the City Manager, instead of denying the application, shall conditionally approve the application pursuant to Section 7.840. The conditions imposed shall provide for only such modification of the applicant’s proposed event as are necessary to achieve compliance with subsections (1)(d) through (i) of this section and shall be consistent with rules and regulations established by the City Manager.

[New Section 7.830 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.840 Permit Conditions.

(1)    The City Manager may condition the issuance of a special events permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner of the event, and any additional requirements necessary to protect the safety of persons and property or to provide for adequate control of traffic. Conditions may include, but need not be limited to the following:

(a)    Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on the event application;

(b)    Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parade or other events occurring along a route;

(c)    Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street;

(d)    Requirements for street closure and/or traffic control in accordance with a City-approved traffic control plan. If public works personnel are involved, suitable prior arrangements must be made in advance with the City Manager for reimbursement of time and materials expended.

(e)    Requirements for provision of first aid, sanitary or emergency facilities;

(f)    Requirements for use of event monitors and some method for providing notice of permit conditions to event participants;

(g)    Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures at the event, and inspection and approval of, but not limited to floats, structures and decorated vehicles for fire safety by the TVF&R District;

(h)    Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;

(i)    Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of City property;

(j)    Restrictions on use of amplified sound;

(k)    Compliance with any relevant ordinance, law or adopted City policies in obtaining any legally required permit or license;

(l)    Restrictions on the sale of alcoholic beverages;

(m)    Conditions concerning issuance of liability protection;

(n)    Conditions concerning adequate security. It is the applicant’s responsibility to provide adequate security forces. If City police are involved, suitable prior arrangements must be made in advance with the City Manager for reimbursement of time and materials expended.

(2)    An application for a special event permit to conduct a block party may be conditioned on notice and approval by fifty percent of the owners or tenants or dwellings or businesses along the affected street(s);

[New Section 7.840 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.850 Permit Issuance.

The City Manager shall issue the special event permit once the application has been approved, the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, the application fee and any required deposits have been paid, and all of the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

[New Section 7.850 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.860 Appeal Procedure.

The applicant shall have the right to appeal (1) denial of a permit, (2) a permit condition, (3) a determination not to act on a late application, and (4) a refusal to issue a permit based on a determination that the applicant’s insurance policy does not satisfy a condition imposed under Section 7.840. A notice of appeal stating the grounds of appeal with specificity, in addition to the requirements in Section 1.410(2)(b), shall be filed with the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. 

[New Section 7.860 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


7.870 Cleanup Deposits for Certain Special Events.

(1)    Cleanup Deposit. The applicant for an event (including but not limited to) involving the sale of food or beverages, erection of structures, participation of horses or other large animals, or use of water aid stations, shall be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the issuance of a special event permit. The cleanup deposit shall be in an amount established by the City Council by resolution.

(2)    Refund. The cleanup deposit shall be returned after the event if the area used for the permitted event has been cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event. If the actual cost for cleanup is less than the estimated cost, the applicant will be refunded the difference. Should the amount of the bill exceed the cleanup deposit, the difference shall become due and payable to the City upon the applicant’s receipt of the bill.

(3)    Appeals. The applicant may dispute and appeal the cleanup charge by filing an appeal with the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. 

[New Section 7.870 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


CITY SPONSORSHIP OF EVENTS


7.900 City Sponsorship of Events.

The City recognizes that private events may contribute to public interest, to West Linn’s citizens and to neighborhoods by providing entertainment, amusement, education and other benefits. In recognition of the benefits to the City, its neighborhoods, and its citizens, the City may choose to sponsor private events held within the City that are determined to be in the public interest. A decision by the City Council to sponsor an event shall be made by the City Council by resolution.

[New Section 7.900 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.910 Support by City of Sponsored Events.

City sponsorship may include City support (cash payments, in-kind services, fee waivers, and/or access to City facilities or insurance) as identified in the sponsoring resolution. If City sponsorship includes cash payments, the sponsoring resolution will identify a targeted funding amount. A target amount may be adjusted, however, during the City’s annual budget process. City sponsorship may include coverage by the City’s insurance policies only with the written approval of the City Manager and Risk Manager.

[New Section 7.910 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


7.920 Sponsorship Policy and Agreements.

The City Council shall adopt a sponsorship policy and a form sponsorship agreement by resolution. Notwithstanding adoption of a form sponsorship agreement, each individual sponsorship agreement must be approved by resolution of the Council.

[New Section 7.920 added by Ordinance No. 1493, adopted 02-05-2003.]


SIDEWALK CAFÉ PROGRAM


7.950 Purpose.

Sections 7.950 through 7.959 set forth the applicable standards and processes by which the City will administer the sidewalk café program. The sidewalk café program is intended to allow businesses the opportunity to install outdoor seating areas for dining and beverage purposes. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.951 Definitions.

Sections 7.950 through 7.959 utilize the following terms and associated definitions:

Applicant means the person or entity who submits an application to the City for review.

Application means the written request to grant or renew a sidewalk café permit on a form established and provided by the City.

Overhead cover means temporary furnishings, such as umbrellas and strung lights, which are installed by a business owner above a sidewalk café. Any permanently affixed building furnishings, such as awnings or light fixtures, are exempt from this definition and are not subject to the overhead clearance standards established in Section 7.955(2)(c).

Sidewalk café means outdoor tables, seating, and associated furnishings installed by a business owner to provide additional seating capacity for beverage and dining purposes.

Sidewalk café permit means the permit necessary to operate a sidewalk café within the City. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.952 Eligibility.

A business must satisfy the following standards to be eligible to apply for a sidewalk café permit:

(1)    The business must be legally established within the City;

(2)    The business must be located within a commercial or mixed-use zoning designation; and

(3)    The business must be adjacent to a City right-of-way with a sidewalk that is at least seven and one-half feet wide and has permanent surfacing. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.953 Permit Provisions.

A sidewalk café permit is required for a business to install temporary outdoor furnishings such as tables, chairs, benches, overhead cover, and related amenities in the public sidewalk right-of-way for the purpose of providing dining and/or beverage services, unless excepted in Section 7.954. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.954 Exemptions.

The following uses are exempt from obtaining a sidewalk café permit; provided, that the ADA-compliant pedestrian path is maintained on the sidewalk at all times per the requirement established in Section 7.955(2)(a).

(1)    Retail sales and service displays.

(2)    Seating and tables for up to four seats per business adjacent to the building façade that encroach no more than three feet in width onto the sidewalk.

(3)    Retail and/or dining furnishings installed for temporary community-sponsored events as approved by the City Manager or designee. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.955 Sidewalk Café Standards.

An application for a sidewalk café permit may be approved; provided, that the applicant demonstrates compliance with the followings standards. Any abnormal circumstances/orientations that could result in conflicts with pedestrians and sidewalk café patrons will require approval from the City Manager or designee prior to installation.

(1)    Dimensional Standards.

(a)    A minimum of four-foot-wide, visually clear, ADA-compliant pedestrian access shall be maintained along the sidewalk at all times.

(b)    A two-foot clear zone shall be maintained on both sides of any business entrance/exit door, crosswalk access, bicycle parking rack, fire hydrant, loading area, alley, street, driveway, bus stop, or any other similar permanent street fixture designated by the City.

(c)    Any overhead cover extending into the required ADA-compliant pedestrian access established in subsection (1)(a) of this section must provide a minimum height clearance of 11 feet.

(2)    Locational Standards. Subject to dimensional standards:

(a)    Properties with One Street Façade. A sidewalk café may be located within the public sidewalk right-of-way, excepting any intervening driveways or other accessways.

(b)    Corner Lots. A corner lot may have a sidewalk café located within the public sidewalk right-of-way on both frontages, excepting any intervening driveways or other accessways.

(c)    Use of Sidewalk Abutting Adjacent Property. With the written permission of the adjacent property owner(s) to be submitted with the permit application, a sidewalk café may be located within the public sidewalk right-of-way abutting an adjacent property. The adjacent property owner(s) may revoke written permission at its discretion at any time. If permission is revoked, the business operating the sidewalk café shall have up to 30 days to terminate café operations and remove all café-related structures from the sidewalk area abutting the adjacent property.

(3)    Material Standards.

(a)    The following items are permitted to be used for sidewalk café furnishings:

(i)    Removable tables, chairs, benches, picnic tables, and comparable furnishings;

(ii)    Removable self-supporting railings or barriers;

(iii)    Portable heaters, umbrellas, and other temporary overhead cover;

(iv)    Tree, shrubs, and plants; and

(v)    Lighting; provided, that any cords meet the vertical clearance standard established in subsection (1)(c) of this section if installed overhead and do not pose a tripping hazard.

(b)    All items shall be made of weather-resistant materials, such as but not limited to durable plastics, wrought iron, treated wood, or metal. All materials shall be in good condition subject to City review and approval.

(c)    If a perimeter barrier is used to physically delineate the sidewalk café area, it shall comply with the following standards:

(i)    All of the components of the barrier (fencing, base, posts, planters, etc.) shall remain within the approved sidewalk café area;

(ii)    Materials shall be weather-resistant;

(iii)    Materials shall be removable; and

(iv)    No materials can exceed three feet, six inches in height, as measured vertically from the surface of the sidewalk where the material is placed.

(d)    No changes to the sidewalk surface or subsurface are permitted, nor shall any sidewalk café furnishings be physically attached to the sidewalk. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.956 Material Requirements.

In addition to the requirements of Sections 3.350 to 3.395, any business operating a sidewalk café is responsible for performing the following maintenance:

(1)    Maintaining landscaping and other plant materials associated with the sidewalk café;

(2)    Collecting and properly disposing of any waste produced by the sidewalk café operations, to include any waste that encroaches onto the adjacent sidewalk or other properties;

(3)    Ensuring that there are no tripping hazards or impediments, such as electrical cords, planters, or chairs, located within the pedestrian path; and

(4)    Maintaining all sidewalk café furnishings in good repair as determined by the City.

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.957 Application Process.

Sidewalk café permits are valid for one year. This section establishes the processes by which businesses can apply for an initial sidewalk café permit and subsequent permit renewals.

(1)    New Permits. Subsections (1)(a) through (d) of this section establish the sidewalk café permitting process for new or significantly altered sidewalk cafés. Business owners shall submit an application to the City. All applications require the following materials:

(a)     Application fee as established in the City’s master fee schedule;

(b)    Completed sidewalk café application form provided by the City and signed by the property owner, applicant/business owner, and adjacent property owner(s) if the proposal includes the use of the public sidewalk right-of-way fronting an adjacent property;

(c)    Copy of valid West Linn business license; and

(d)    If serving alcohol, copy of valid OLCC permit for outdoor sales and service.

(2)    Permit Renewals. This subsection establishes the sidewalk café permit renewal process for existing sidewalk café permits in good standing. To be eligible for the sidewalk café renewal process, the application shall verify the following renewal conditions are satisfied:

(a)    The previously approved sidewalk café area will not increase by more than 10 square feet;

(b)    All applicable standards established in Section 7.955 remain satisfied;

(c)    There are no current nuisance code violations associated with the sidewalk café permit; and

(d)    There is no new encroachment onto adjacent property frontage.

Provided the permit renewal conditions in this section are satisfied, the applicant is eligible for the permit renewal process and shall submit the following items at least 30 days prior to expiration of the current permit. If a permit renewal is submitted less than 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the current permit, a new permit application will need to be submitted.

(a)    Renewal fee as established in the City master fee schedule;

(b)    Completed sidewalk café application form provided by the City and signed by the applicant/business owner;

(c)    Copy of valid West Linn business license; and

(d)    If serving alcohol, copy of valid OLCC permit for outdoor sales and service.

Upon receipt of the fee and permit renewal application materials, City will review and, if all requirements continue to be satisfied, issue a renewed sidewalk café permit. The City may conduct a site inspection as part of review. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.958 Noncompliance. 

If a sidewalk café is installed without a valid sidewalk café permit or violates the sidewalk café standards or the maintenance requirements set forth in Sections 7.950 through 7.957, the City will utilize the enforcements process for Class A violations and nuisances established in Chapter 5, Public Protection, Section 5.495. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


7.959 Disclaimers.

The following disclaimers apply to all active sidewalk cafés:

(1)    The City Manager or designee reserves ultimate approval authority of sidewalk café permit applications.

(2)    The City Manager or designee may request the immediate removal of any previously approved sidewalk café for noncompliance as provided in Section 7.958.

(3)    Should multiple businesses located at one eligible property seek permits for the use of the same sidewalk area, the City will consider only the first complete application.

(4)    The property owner reserves the right to request removal of a sidewalk café installed abutting their property at their discretion. 

[Added by Ordinance No. 1708, adopted May 11, 2020.]


Chapter 8 BUILDING

BUILDING CODE

8.000    Administration and Enforcement.

8.005    Title.

8.010    Purpose.

8.015    Scope.

8.020    Definitions.

8.025    Alternate Materials and Methods.

8.030    Modifications.

8.035    Tests.

8.040    Powers and Duties of Building Official.

8.045    Appeals.

8.047    Unpaid Penalties.

8.050    Plans and Permits.

BUILDING CODE STANDARDS

8.055    Structural Code.

8.060    Mechanical Code.

8.065    Plumbing Code.

8.070    Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

8.071    Energy Efficiency Code.

8.072    Solar Installation Code.

8.075    Manufactured Home Installations.

8.080    Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Regulations.

8.085    Dangerous Buildings Code.

8.090    Fees.

8.095    Severability.

8.100    Penalties.

8.105    Building Permittee Responsible for Erosion Prevention/Sediment Control.

8.110    Cleanup Deposit.

8.115    Prevention of Debris Accumulation on Adjacent Sites.

FIRE CODE

8.175    Adoption and Enforcement of Fire Code.

MOVING BUILDINGS

8.200    Permit Required.

8.205    Building Classes.

8.210    Permit Application – Contents.

8.215    Application Approval.

8.220    Safety Considerations.

8.225    Inspection of Building.

8.230    Engineering Considerations.

8.235    Insurance.

8.240    Unlawful to Leave Building on Streets.

8.245    Presence of Engineer.

8.250    Moving at Night.

8.255    Permit Fees.

HOUSE NUMBERING

8.275    Structures to be Numbered.

8.280    Map on File.

8.285    House Numbers – Furnished by City Manager.

8.290    House Numbers – Definition.

8.295    Posting Numbers Required.

ELECTRIC AND BARBWIRE FENCES

8.300    Barbwire and Electric Fences Prohibited.

8.305    Existing Fences.

8.310    Exception Procedure.

8.315    Permit Required.

COMMUNITY TREE ORDINANCE

8.500    Purpose.

8.510    Definitions.

8.520    Permit Authority.

8.530    City Approval Required.

8.535    Business License Required.

8.540    Fees.

8.560    Exemptions.

8.570    Development Review and Building Permit Process.

TREE REMOVAL

8.610    Contents of Application for Tree Removal.

8.620    Permit Process.

8.630    Tree Removal Permit Criteria.

8.640    Appeal.

8.650    Time Limits.

8.710    Heritage Trees.

8.720    Street Trees.

8.730    Emergency Permit Process.

8.740    Non-Compliance, Penalty, and Enforcement.

8.745    Tree-Topping Prohibited.

8.750    Abatement.

8.760    Tree Canopy Replacement Account

8.795    Fees/Classification of Fees and Costs

8.797    Disclaimer of Liability.

8.798    General Provisions.


BUILDING CODE


8.000 Administration and Enforcement.

(1)    The City shall provide for the administration of all plan checking, permit, and inspection programs that have been delegated by the State. The City program is applicable to public building, including State building, as well as private building.

(2)    As modified by Sections 8.000 to 8.115. The standards applicable to buildings shall be as listed in Sections 8.055 through 8.085.

[Section 8.000 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.005 Title.

These regulations shall be known as the City of West Linn Building Code, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”

[Section 8.005 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.010 Purpose.

This code will establish uniform performance standards providing safeguards for health, safety, welfare, comfort and security of these occupants and users of buildings in the City of West Linn and for the use of modern methods, devices, materials, techniques and practicable maximum energy conservation.

[Section 8.010 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.015 Scope.

This code shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, maintenance and work associated with any building or structure except those located in a public way.

Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall control.

[Section 8.015 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of the code, the following definition shall apply:

Building Official is the duly appointed officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, and includes the Building Official’s duly authorized deputies, officers, and inspectors.

[Section 8.020 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.025 Alternate Materials and Methods.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided such alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the Building Official.

The Building Official may approve any such alternate material, design or method, provided the Building Official specifically finds the proposed material, design or method complies with the provisions of this code and that is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation.

The Building Official shall require that evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the alternate materials, designs or methods. The details of any approval of any alternate material, design or method shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Agency.

[Section 8.025 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.030 Modifications.

When there are practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of this code, the Building Official may grant modifications provided the Building Official finds the modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code and that said modification does not lessen any fire-protection requirements nor the structural integrity of the building involved. Any action granting modification shall be recorded in the files of the Code Enforcement Agency.

[Section 8.030 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.035 Tests.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or that any material, method or design does not conform to the requirements of this code, the Building Official may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at no expense to the City of West Linn.

Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other recognized test standards. If there are no recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the Building Official shall have the sole and exclusive authority to determine appropriate test procedures. All tests shall be made by an approved testing agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Building Official for the period required for the retention of similar public records.

[Section 8.035 renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.040 Powers and Duties of Building Official.

(1)    General. There is hereby established a Code Enforcement Agency which shall be under the administrative and operational control of the Building Official.

The Building Official is authorized to enforce all the provisions of this code.

The Building Official shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions.

(2)    Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the City, the Building Official may appoint technical officers and inspectors and other employees to carry out the functions of the code enforcement agency. The Building Official may request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction, so far as is required in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance.

(3)    Liability Limitation. The Building Official charged with the enforcement of this code, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the Building Official or employee because of such act or omission performed by the Building Official or employee in the enforcement of any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by the City of West Linn until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the City of West Linn.

This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or the City of West Linn be held assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any permit or certificates issued under this code.

(4)    Repealed by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.

(5)    Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code (or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through its enforcement), the Building Official may order the work stopped by giving notice in writing in accordance with Section 1.235 and the provisions of Sections 1.300 to 1.350 shall apply. Such person(s) shall stop any and all such work until specifically authorized or released by the Building Official to proceed herewith.

(6)    Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies. The Building Official or the Building Official’s authorized deputy shall have the authority to disconnect fuel-gas utility service, and/or other energy supplies to a building, structure, premises or equipment regulated by this code when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or premises of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or premises in writing of such disconnection within 24 hours thereafter.

(7)    Authority to Abate Hazardous Equipment. When the Building Official ascertains that equipment, or any portion thereof, regulated by this code has become or is hazardous to life, health or property, the Building Official shall order the equipment either removed from its location or restored to a safe and/or sanitary condition, as appropriate. The notice shall be in writing and contain a fixed time limit for compliance. Persons shall not use the equipment after receiving said notice, until authorized to do so by the Building Official.

When equipment (or an installation) is to be disconnected, written notice of the disconnection (and causes therefor) shall be given within 24 hours to the involved utility, the owner and/or occupant of the building, structure or premises. When equipment is used or maintained in violation of this code and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the Building Official may institute such action as he/she deems necessary to prevent, restrain, correct or abate said use or maintenance.

(8)    Connection after Order to Disconnect. No person shall make a connection to or from an energy, fuel or power supply to any equipment regulated by this code which has been disconnected or ordered disconnected or discontinued by the Building Official until the Building Official specifically authorized the reconnection and/or use of such equipment.

(9)    Maintenance. All buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. To determine compliance with this section, the Building Official may cause a structure to be reinspected.

(10)    Occupancy Violations. Whenever any building, structure or equipment therein regulated by this code is used contrary to the provisions of this code, the Building Official may order such use discontinued and the structure (or portion thereof) vacated. All persons using the structure (or portion thereof) shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Building Official in his or her notice and make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code.

(11)    Administrative Civil Penalty.

(a)    Upon a determination by the Building Official that any person, firm, corporation or other entity has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the Building Official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided for by this section. For the purposes of this subsection, the term “responsible person” includes the violator and, if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurred, the owner.

(b)    Prior to issuing a notice of civil violation and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the Building Official shall issue an order to correct the violation to one or more of the responsible persons and specify the date and time by which the correction must occur. The date and time specified for correction shall be not less than five calendar days, except where the Building Official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare.

(c)    If the Building Official determines that the violation was the result of a knowing or intentional action or a repeat of a similar violation by the responsible party, the Building Official may forego the order to correct the violation and issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty.

(d)     If the required correction has not been completed by the date and time specified in the correction order issued under subsection (11)(b) of this section, the Building Official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty on the responsible person(s) to whom the correction order was issued. The amount of the administrative civil penalty may not exceed the maximum amount authorized for an equivalent specialty code violation under ORS 455.895. When imposing an administrative civil penalty authorized by this section, the Building Official shall consider:

(i)     The person’s past history in attempting to correct the violation;

(ii)     Any prior violations of the municipal code, orders, or permits;

(iii)    The gravity, magnitude and impact of the violation;

(iv)    Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;

(v)    Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, the result of negligence or an intentional act; and

(vi)     Any relevant regulations.

(e)    Every notice of a civil violation that imposes an administrative civil penalty under this section shall include:

(i)     A short and plain description of the alleged violation and reference to all of the code provisions involved;

(ii)    A statement indicating that the City intends to assess an administrative civil penalty and the amount of the administrative civil penalty;

(iii)    The date the correction order was issued and date and time by which correction was required to be made and, if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection (11)(c) of this section, a statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; and

(iv)     A statement of the person’s right to appeal the administrative civil penalty to the City Manager by a certain date and a description of the requirements and process provided in Section 8.045.

(f)     Any notice of a civil violation that imposes an administrative civil penalty under this section shall either be served by personal service or sent to the responsible person both by registered or certified first class mail and by regular first class mail. Any such notice served by mail shall be deemed received for purposes of any time computations hereunder three days after the date mailed if to an address within Oregon, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside of Oregon.

(g)    An administrative civil penalty imposed hereunder shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, unless the responsible person appeals the penalty to the City Manager, pursuant to and within the time limits established by Section 8.045.

(h)     Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

(i)     The administrative civil penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the City in investigating, seeking injunctive relief, remediation, cleanup, or abatement, and any other actions authorized by law.

[Section 8.040 amended by Ordinance No. 1382, adopted 10-23-95; renamed and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 8-26-96; amended by Ordinance No. 1601, adopted 2-28-11; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


8.045 Appeals.

Persons may request reconsideration of the Building Official’s decisions and appeal the Building Official’s decisions as follows:

(1)     Requests for reconsideration of the Building Official’s decision relating to the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction or interpretation of the Building Code which do not involve an administrative civil penalty shall be submitted in writing to the Building Official and shall be processed as follows:

(a)     The Building Official shall issue a written determination pertaining to matter(s) under reconsideration within 15 calendar days.

(b)     The Building Official’s determination following reconsideration may be appealed to the appropriate State of Oregon Building Codes Division Program Chief in conformance with procedures provided in ORS 455.475.

(2)     Building Official decisions imposing an administrative civil penalty pursuant to Section 8.040(11) may be appealed to the City Manager as follows:

(a)    Persons may, within 15 days after the date the notice was issued, consistent with Section 8.040(11)(e), appeal the decision of the Building Official in writing to the City Manager. Appeals pursuant to this subsection shall be solely for the purpose of review of the Building Official’s decision to impose an administrative civil penalty. No request for a waiver or a modification of the Building Code or its regulations shall be allowed. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the City Council and shall include:

(i)     The name and address of the appellant;

(ii)    The nature of the determination being appealed;

(iii)    The reason the determination is incorrect; and

(iv)    The requested determination and rationale.

(b)    Unless the appellant and the City agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the City Manager within 30 days of the City’s receipt of the appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the City shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant.

(c)    The City Manager shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement, the Building Official’s determination, and any additional evidence the City Manager deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant or their representative may present testimony and oral argument. The burden of proof shall be on the Building Official.

(d)    The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 15 calendar days of the hearing date. The decision may affirm, modify, or reverse the Building Official’s decision. The written decision of the City Manager is final.

(e)    The City Manager, at his or her sole discretion, may refund all or a portion of the appeal fee if he or she does not substantially uphold the determination of the Building Official.

[Section 8.045 amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96; amended by Ordinance No. 1601, adopted 02-28-11.]


8.047 Unpaid Penalties.

(1)    Failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code within 30 days after the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The Building Official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection (2) of this section, other provisions of this code, or State statutes.

(2)    If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 60 days after such penalty becomes final, the Building Official shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien in the City lien docket. At the time such an assessment is made, the Building Official shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the City lien docket. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as all City liens. Interest shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(3)     In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy.

[Section 8.047 added by Ordinance No. 1601, adopted 02-28-11.]


8.050 Plans and Permits.

(1)    Issuance. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official. Such plans may be reviewed by other West Linn departments to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the Building Official finds that the work described in application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees have been paid, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.

When the Building Official issues the permit where plans are required, the Building Official shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications APPROVED. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the Building Official, and all work regulated by this code shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.

The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of a partial permit shall proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted.

(2)    Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less than 90 days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, with said set being kept at the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.

(3)    Validity of Permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction or any other federal, state, or local law, statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance.

The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of the City of West Linn.

(4)    Expiration of Plan Reviews. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of the application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days on request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

(5)    Permit Expiration, Extension and Reinstatement. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized is not commenced within the time limitations set forth in this section.

Every permit issued by the Building Official shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. The work shall not be considered suspended or abandoned where the permittee has pursued activities deemed by the Building Official to indicate the intent to start and complete the project. The Building Official may require the permittee to document these activities.

Every permit issued by the Building Official shall expire by limitation and become null and void 24 months after the date of permit issuance. If the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval prior to the permit expiration date, all work shall stop until a new permit is obtained for the value of the work remaining unfinished.

EXCEPTION: At the time of permit issuance, the Building Official may approve a period exceeding 24 months for completion of work when the permittee can demonstrate that the complexity or size of the project makes completing the project within 24 months unreasonable.

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work is to be completed under that permit when the permittee is unable to complete work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days or written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented work from being completed. No permit shall be extended more than once. When a permit has expired, the permit can be reinstated and the work authorized by the original permit can be recommenced, provided the following are met:

(a)    The Building Code under which the original permit was issued and other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency have not been amended in any manner which affects the work authorized by the original permit.

(b)    No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work.

(c)    The original permit expired less than one year from the request to reinstate.

The fee for a reinstated permit shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit. Where the request for reinstatement does not comply with the preceding criteria, a new permit, at full permit fees, shall be required.

(6)    Work Without a Permit/Investigation Fees. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

(7)    Not Transferable. A permit issued to one person or firm is not transferable and shall not permit any other person or firm to perform any work thereunder.

(8)    Suspension/Revocation. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or if its issuance (or activity thereunder) is in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any other provisions of the City code.

(9)    Inspections. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or authorized agent to request all inspections that may be necessary or otherwise required in a timely manner, provide access to the site, and to provide all equipment as may be deemed necessary or appropriate by the Building Official. The permit holder shall not proceed with construction activity until authorized to do so by the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Any expense incurred by the permit holder to remove or replace any material required for proper inspection shall be the responsibility of the permit holder or his or her agent.

Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder has posted or otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the Building Official to conveniently make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained available by the permit holder until final approval has been granted by the Building Official.

[Section 8.050 repealed by Ordinance No. 1382, adopted 10-23-1995; amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


BUILDING CODE STANDARDS


8.055 Structural Code.

(1)    Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-460-0010 through 918-460-0015, including the following optional provisions, is adopted and enforced as part of this code:

(A)    Appendix Chapter G Flood-Resistant Construction.

(B)    Appendix Chapter J Grading.

(C)    Appendix Chapter K Fire-Extinguishing Systems.

[Section 8.055 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996; amended by Ordinance No. 1481, adopted 01-09-2002. Section 8.055(3) Excavation and Grading/Erosion Control is repealed by Ordinance No. 1481, adopted 01-09-2002; Section 8.055 amended by Ordinance No. 1530 adopted 01-30-2006.]


8.060 Mechanical Code.

(1)    Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-440-0010 through 918-440-0040, is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.060 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996; Section 8.060 amended by Ordinance No. 1530 adopted 01-30-2006.]


8.065 Plumbing Code.

(1)    Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by 918-750-0110, is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.065 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996; Section 8.065 amended by Ordinance No. 1530 adopted 01-30-2006.]


8.070 Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

(1)    Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-480-0005 and 918-480-0010, is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.070 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96; Section 8.070 amended by Ordinance No. 1530, adopted 01-30-06.]


8.071 Energy Efficiency Code.

(1)    Adoption and Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-460-0500 through 918-460-0510, is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.071 added by Ordinance No. 1600, adopted 02-28-11.]


8.072 Solar Installation Code.

(1)    Adoption and Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Solar Installation Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-800-0020 through 918-800-0040, is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.072 added by Ordinance No. 1600, adopted 02-28-11.]


8.075 Manufactured Home Installations.

(1)    Enforcement of State Rules. The manufactured dwelling rules, as adopted by OAR 918-500-0000 through 918-500-470 and OAR 918-520-0010 through 918-520-0020, are enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.075 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96; Section 8.075 amended by Ordinance No. 1530, adopted 01-30-06.]


8.080 Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Regulations.

(1)    Enforcement of State Rules. The recreational park and organizational camp rules adopted by OAR 918-650-0000 through 918-650-0080, are enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.080 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96; Section 8.080 amended by Ordinance No. 1530, adopted 01-30-06.]


8.085 Dangerous Buildings Code.

(1)    Unsafe Buildings. All buildings or structures regulated by this code which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in this code are hereby designated as unsafe building appendages.

All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Dangerous Buildings Code or such alternate procedures as may have been or as may be adopted by the City of West Linn. As an alternative, the Building Official, or another employee or official of the City of West Linn, as designated by the governing body, may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.

(2)    Adoption of Uniform Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The current ICBO Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is adopted as part hereof, except as modified by the City of West Linn.

[Section 8.085 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96]


8.090 Fees.

The City Council shall by resolution establish fees for permits and inspections under this chapter. Any permit or inspection fee previously established by ordinance shall remain in effect until a new fee is established by resolution. For permit or inspection fees regulated by the state of Oregon for which no fee is set by resolution, the fee amount shall be the maximum allowed by the state. For any permit or inspection fee not established by resolution but for which an amount is set by a code adopted under this chapter, the fee shall be the amount set in the adopted code.

The Building Official may authorize the refunding of fees paid in accordance with the refund policy in effect in the jurisdiction.

The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code shall be made by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.

[Section 8.090 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96; Section 8.090 amended by Ordinance No. 1530, adopted 01-30-06.]


8.095 Severability.

If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, or provisions of this code shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate, or nullify the remainder of the code, but the effect thereof shall be confined to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, or provision immediately involved in the controversy in which such judgment or decree shall be rendered, it being the intent of the governing body to enact the remainder of this code notwithstanding the parts to be declared unconstitutional and invalid.

[Section 8.095 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96]


8.100 Penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions herein for which a special penalty has not been expressly provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense.

[Section 8.100 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-96]


8.105 Building Permittee Responsible for Erosion Prevention/Sediment Control.

(1)    Before a building permit may be issued for any project that will disturb vegetation or soil, the applicant shall obtain an erosion control permit.

(2)    The applicant for a building permit, or if no building permit is applied for, the owner of the property, shall at all times be responsible for:

(a)    The implementation, construction, maintenance, replacement and upgrading of all necessary erosion and sediment control measures consistent with the Clackamas County Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan – Technical Guidance Handbook. The applicant or owner is responsible to ensure that no visible or measurable sediment leaves the permitted site;

(b)    Preventing debris, dirt, and foreign material from entering the public right-of-way, other public property, or the City’s surface water drainage system either by direct or indirect deposit, discharge, or erosion; and

(c)    Removing all debris and excess dirt from the development or project. Dirt may be stored for future use/fill if the storage does not create a risk of erosion or sedimentation, but all excess dirt must be removed prior to completion and final inspection.

The applicant shall remain responsible for compliance with these standards until final inspection and approval, including issuance of a certificate of occupancy, if applicable.

(3)    The City Building Official, the City Engineer, or their delegates may issue a stop work order for any violation of this section and shall not permit any work to proceed until required erosion and sediment control measures are in place.

(4)    The City may at any time take action to prevent the entry of sediment, dirt, debris or foreign materials onto the public right-of-way, public property, or into the City’s drainage system.

(5)    If the City is forced to take action to prevent the entry of sediment, dirt, debris, or foreign materials onto the public right-of-way, public property, or into the City’s drainage system as a result of a violation of subsection (2) of this section, the responsible applicant or owner shall reimburse the City for the full cost of the City’s actions, including administrative and legal costs. If the City hires a subcontractor, the full cost shall include any amount paid to the contractor plus any additional costs of administration. The following procedure shall be used:

(a)    The City Manager, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the owner of the property and applicant if any, a notice stating:

(i)    The total cost of the City’s action, including the administrative overhead;

(ii)    That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice unless a notice of objection is filed;

(iii)    That if the owner or person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the City’s action as indicated, he or she may file a notice of objection and request for hearing with the City Manager not more than 10 days from the date of notice.

(b)    The Council shall consider any objection and determine the amount to be paid at its first regularly scheduled meeting more than two days after the objection is filed.

(c)    If the costs of the City’s action are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice if no objection is filed, or 10 days from the date of hearing if an objection is filed, the costs as stated in the notice or as determined by the Council shall be entered in the docket of City liens and, upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property where the violation occurred.

(d)    The lien shall be enforced in the same manner and have the same priority as liens for street improvements and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Such interest shall commence to run from date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(e)    An error in the name of the owner or person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property.

6.    The applicant shall provide the City with information where a responsible contact person can be reached at all times to ensure immediate response to any threatened or actual erosion or sedimentation.

7.    Under emergency situations, the City may enter into the permitted property to prevent erosion or sedimentation that presents a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.

8.    Violation of subsection (2) or (6) of this section shall be a Class A violation.

[Section 8.105 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996; amended by Ordinance No. 1453, adopted 06-12-2000; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-2014.]


8.110 Cleanup Deposit.

In the event there are three or more occasions within a calendar year when the City is forced to clean up debris, dirt or foreign material on sidewalks or roadways from an individual building site, the applicant for the building permit shall deposit with the City a sum in an amount set by Council resolution which shall be retained by the City as a fund to utilize for street-cleaning purposes pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8.000 to 8.115. Failure of the building permit applicant to maintain said sum for a period of over 10 days shall result in the issuance of a stop work order, which shall remain in effect until the fund is restored by the applicant for the building permit.

[Section 8.110 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.115 Prevention of Debris Accumulation on Adjacent Sites.

Before a building permit shall be issued for the purposes set forth in Section 8.110, the applicant for the building permit shall agree that, if required by the City, he/she will deposit rock and gravel to the specifications of the City in such locations and quantity adjacent to and on the building site so as to help prevent the deposit of debris, dirt, or other foreign material from the building site upon adjacent sidewalks and roadways.

[Section 8.115 added by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


FIRE CODE


8.175 Adoption and Enforcement of Fire Code. 

For the purposes of prescribing regulations and governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the 2014 Oregon Fire Code based on the 2012 International Fire Code as amended by the Oregon Fire Marshal’s Office and Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

[Section 8.075 renumbered to 8.175 by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996; amended by Ordinance No. 1438, adopted 06-28-1999 and effective 07-1-1999; amended by Ordinance No. 1530, adopted 01-30-2006; amended by Ordinance No. 1560, adopted 02-11-2008; amended by Ordinance No. 1600, adopted 02-28-2011; amended by Ordinance No. 1632, adopted 11-10-2014.]


MOVING BUILDINGS


8.200 Permit Required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any building or structure upon, over, or along with any public street, alley or highway within the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer. The provisions of Sections 8.200 to 8.255 shall not apply to the moving or hauling of any building or structure loaded upon a truck when such building or structure is of a size and weight not exceeding the maximum width, length, height, or weight of a truck load that may be lawfully moved over a public highway without a special permit from the Oregon Department of Transportation or any other public authority.

[Section 8.100 renumbered to 8.200 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.205 Building Classes.

For the purpose of Sections 8.200 to 8.255, buildings and structures to which the provisions herein are applicable shall be separated into three classes, namely:

(1)    Class One. Frame buildings only, having an overall width not exceeding 14 feet and an overall length not exceeding 22 feet, when moved as a load upon a motor truck;

(2)    Class Two. Frame buildings only, having an overall width at least two feet less than the width of the most narrow street, measured from curb to curb, along the route over which any such building or structure is to be moved, the moving of which will be done on pneumatic dollies; and

(3)    Class Three. All buildings or structures for the moving of which a permit is required, and not included in Classes One and Two, having an overall width of at least two feet less than the width of the most narrow street, measured from curb to curb, along the route over which any such building or structure is to be moved.

[Section 8.105 renumbered to 8.205 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.210 Permit Application – Contents.

(1)    Application for a permit to move any building or structure upon, over, or along any public street, alley, or highway shall be made in writing at the office of the City Engineer upon a form provided by the Engineer. The application, which shall be signed by the owner of the building or structure to be moved or by the person, firm, or corporation engaged to move the same, shall contain the following information:

(a)    The name and address of the owner of the building or structure;

(b)    The location of the building before moving;

(c)    The location where the building is proposed to be set or reestablished;

(d)    The type, age, width, length, and height of the building;

(e)    The use or purpose for which the building was designed;

(f)    The use or occupancy to be made of the building at its new location;

(g)    The name and address of the person, firm, or corporation engaged to move the building;

(h)    The means or manner the building is to be moved and type of equipment used therefor;

(i)    The route over or along which the buildings are to be moved;

(j)    The time that will be required to move the building including the day and hour when any part thereof will enter any street and the approximate date and hour every part of the building will be off of every street, alley, or highway, and the time that will be required to complete the reestablishment and relocation of the building upon its new site; and

(k)    Such other information as the City Engineer may deem necessary.

(2)    Where the building is to be moved outside of the corporate limits of the City the information required by subsections (1)(e) and (1)(f) of this section need not be given.

(3)    Except as to Class One buildings, less than 14 feet in height, there shall be attached to the application signed written statements from each person, firm, or corporation owning or operating any public utility maintaining any wires, conduits, cables, poles, or other appliances, or appurtenances thereto, along, over, or across any street, alley, or highway along the route over which the building or structure is to be moved by or for the applicant, which statements shall state or set forth that the moving of such building will not molest, damage, or interfere with, or interrupt the service of, any such wires, conduits, cables, poles, or other appliances, or appurtenances or that the applicant has made appropriate arrangements for clearing the same at the time the building is to be moved.

(4)    Any such application shall also contain a statement or agreement to the effect that the applicant will not damage any real or personal property upon, along, or adjacent to any street, alley, or highway while moving any building and that in case any damage is so caused, that the applicant will pay therefor.

(5)    The application for the moving of a building shall be accompanied by plans and specifications drawn upon substantial paper which shall indicate the nature and extent of the exterior work proposed in connection with the relocation and reestablishment of the building, and such other data as may be required by the City Engineer.

[Section 8.110 renumbered 8.210 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 80-26-1996.]


8.215 Application Approval.

No permit shall be issued by the City Engineer until the application therefor is approved by the Chief of Police, the Building Inspector, the City Engineer, and, in case of Class Three buildings, and houses or buildings of any class moved within or into the most restricted residential district as such districts are classified by the West Linn zoning ordinance, by the City Council, and will not then unless the person, firm, or corporation who will move the building has furnished a bond or insurance as provided in Sections 8.200 to 8.255.

[Section 8.115 renumbered 8.215 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.220 Safety Considerations.

The Chief of Police shall consider the probable effect of the proposed moving on the public safety, and he or she shall not approve the application for moving permit except where such moving will not jeopardize the public safety and the route proposed to be followed is the one least dangerous to the citizens of the City and the general public.

[Section 8.120 renumbered 8.220 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.225 Inspection of Building.

The Building Inspector shall inspect the building to be moved, and, if he or she finds that the building is of substantial construction and in condition that it may be moved without collapsing or falling apart and without endangering any person upon, along, or adjacent to any public street, and further finds that the building is designed and adaptable for the purpose, use or occupancy to which it is proposed to put the same at the new location and that it conforms to the requirements of the fire zone of the new location, then he or she shall approve the application.

[Section 8.125 renumbered 8.225 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.230 Engineering Considerations.

The City Engineer, before approving an application for a permit to move any building or structure, shall determine the size and dimensions of the building, and shall not approve an application for the moving of any building of a greater size than permitted under Sections 8.100 to 8.155. The City Engineer shall further determine that the mover has safe and sufficient equipment and facilities for moving the building or structure within the time allowed by the engineer for such moving, and that the mover has sufficient and adequate barricades, lights, flags and personnel for warning the public both day and night, and for the safe direction of traffic and that the streets and the bridges in the streets, along the route to be traversed by the moving are of sufficient width and strength and in condition to bear the moving of the building or structure described in the application, and that such moving will not endanger any trees, shrubs, or improvements in, upon, or adjacent to any street. In addition to the matters in this section enumerated, the Engineer shall require compliance of all provisions of Sections 8.100 to 8.155 which are a prerequisite to the granting of a moving permit.

[Section 8.130 renumbered 8.230 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.235 Insurance.

No permit to move a building or structure shall be granted unless the movers shall furnish a certificate of public liability insurance which shall be approved by the City Attorney as follows:

(1)    For the moving of a building or structure in Classes One, Two or Three as hereinabove set forth, the mover shall furnish a certificate of public liability insurance with the following coverage limits: $500,000 property damage, $100,000 personal injury for any one person, and $500,000 personal injury for any one occurrence. Said certificate shall provide that the mover shall be responsible for any injuries or for the death of any person or persons and any damage to any property or any person, and damages to streets, bridges, and other public property owned or maintained by the City, or any other public corporation, on account or by reason of any of the operations of the mover while engaged in the moving of any building or structure, including injuries or damages occasioned by the falling or collapsing of, or the weight of, or collisions with any such building or structure.

(2)    Before issuing any permit, the City Manager shall also require the owner of the building to provide a bond or cash security in an amount approved by the City Engineer to be filed in the office of the City Manager, and to be conditioned that in the relocation and the reestablishment of any building that is moved, the principal will make and complete such relocation and reestablishment in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted with the application, as provided in Section 8.210, and in substantial accordance with the regulations and provisions contained in Sections 8.200 to 8.255 or any other ordinance of the City, and that in case the principal fails to do so, make and complete such relocation and reestablishment, then the surety upon such bond will be liable to the City and have cash security to be deposited in lieu of a surety bond, then the Council may forfeit all or a portion of such deposit in case the applicant or owner of the building fails to complete the relocation thereof in accordance with the plans and specifications set forth.

[Section 8.135 renumbered 8.235 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.240 Unlawful to Leave Building on Streets.

After a building or any part thereof extends over or into or is upon any part of any street, alley, or highway, by virtue of the moving thereof, the person, firm, or corporation moving the same shall diligently and continuously employ himself, herself, his, her, their or its agents, employees and facilities in the moving of such building until the same reaches its destination, or is removed from any and all streets, alleys, or highways, and, except when the mover shall have the permission of the City Engineer, it is unlawful for any such mover to leave standing or abandon the moving of such building while the same or any part thereof is in or upon any part of any street, alley, or highway.

[Section 8.140 renumbered 8.240 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.245 Presence of Engineer.

The City Engineer, or his or her deputy or such inspector or inspectors as the Engineer may designate, shall be present and about any building or structure being moved at all times the same is within any street.

[Section 8.145 renumbered 8.245 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.250 Moving at Night.

In case any building is moved at night, the mover shall provide such barricades, lights, flares, and watchmen as may be necessary to safeguard the traffic and persons using the street.

[Section 8.150 renumbered 8.250 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.255 Permit Fees.

When application is made for a permit under Sections 8.200 to 8.255, the applicant shall pay permit fees in an amount set by Council resolution.

[Section 8.155 renumbered 8.255 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


HOUSE NUMBERING


8.275 Structures to be Numbered.

The City shall be laid out into certain areas, and structures within these areas shall be given numbers as a means of facilitating identification of said structures.

[Section 8.175 renumbered 8.275 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.280 Map on File.

There shall be on file with the City Manager a map or similar means of furnishing to applicants who reside within the City limits of West Linn a “house number” and said number is to be the identification for a structure at a certain location on a street.

[Section 8.180 renumbered 8.280 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.285 House Numbers – Furnished by City Manager.

House numbers shall be furnished to applicants by the City Manager free of any cost to the applicant.

[Section 8.185 renumbered 8.285 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.290 House Numbers – Definition.

By “house numbers”, it shall be understood to be an identification only that is given to the applicant.

[Section 8.190 renumbered 8.290 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.295 Posting Numbers Required.

All residential, commercial, and industrial structures for which a house number has been designated by the City, shall bear upon the front thereof or upon a post or standard at or near the street, house numbers which are clearly legible from the street. House number designations in Roman numerals shall be prohibited. No new residential, commercial, or industrial structure may be issued an occupancy permit by the City without complying with this section. Upon issuance of a building permit for the new construction of a structure which will require marking by permanent house number after the completion thereof, there shall be posted upon the premises or upon a post or standard near the street, temporary house numbers clearly legible from the street.

[Section 8.195 renumbered 8.295 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


ELECTRIC AND BARBWIRE FENCES


8.300 Barbwire and Electric Fences Prohibited.

No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, or maintain any barbwire or electric fence within the City unless the requirements of Section 8.310 are met, or unless it is erected with the purpose of containing livestock upon a lot of a minimum of one acre in area; provided further, that in said one acre lot at least 20,000 square feet must be present per head of livestock. In addition to the above requirements, no barbwire or electric fence may be erected, constructed, or maintained within five feet of the right-of-way of any public street, alley, pedestrian way, bike way, hiking trail, or other public way; and further provided, that no such fence may be located within 100 feet of a residence other than a dwelling upon the same lot, except that an electric fence may be located within 100 feet of a residence other than a dwelling upon the same lot if the requirements of Section 8.310 are met.

[Section 8.200 renumbered 8.300 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.305 Existing Fences.

The owner, occupant, or custodian of the premises upon which there is situated a barbwire or electric fence existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in Sections 8.300 to 8.315 which is in violation of the requirements set forth herein, shall be notified by the City Manager by certified or registered mail of the existence of said violation. The notice shall provide that such existing fence must be removed within 30 days of receipt of said notice. Failure to remove a violating barbwire or electric fence within said 30-day period shall constitute a violation of Sections 8.300 to 8.315.

[Section 8.205 renumbered 8.305 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.310 Exception Procedure.

The City Manager shall have the authority to authorize issuance of permits for the erection, construction, or maintenance of electric fences other than electric fences for the containment of livestock as set forth in Section 8.300 if he or she finds that all of the following requirements are met:

(1)    That the electric fence is located within an entirely fenced and/or enclosed area in which appropriate and suitable measures have been taken to render the area secure from children other than children of the owners, occupants, or custodians of the premises.

(2)    That the electric fence shall be utilized for the sole purpose of preventing damage to property of the owner, occupant or custodian of the premises by wild animals, such as raccoons, opossums, or deer. Substantial evidence of the presence of a threat of such damage and that there are no other reasonable methods of control must be established to the satisfaction of the City Manager.

(3)    Appeal of any decision of the City Manager pursuant to the terms of Sections 8.300 to 8.315 may be made by any interested party to the city council within 15 days of the date of the City Manager’s decision.

[Section 8.210 renumbered 8.310 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


8.315 Permit Required.

Prior to erecting or constructing any barbwire or electric fence pursuant to Sections 8.300 or 8.310, the person, firm or corporation erecting such fence or desiring to erect the same shall first obtain a permit from the City. The application for such permit shall be accompanied by an accurate scale drawing which shall indicate the location of such fence with reference to any public way, property line and structure. No fee shall be charged for such a permit.

[Section 8.215 renumbered 8.315 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]

[Sections 8.400 to 8.495 (Street Trees) repealed by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004, adding new Sections 8.500 to 8.798.]

[Section 8.395 renumbered 8.495 and amended by Ordinance No. 1399, adopted 08-26-1996.]


COMMUNITY TREE ORDINANCE


8.500 Purpose.

The purpose of Sections 8.500 to 8.798 is to ensure that the City and any areas that may become part of the City of West Linn will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest, and to establish a process and standards which will minimize uncontrolled cutting or destruction of trees or wooded areas within West Linn. It is the intent of Sections 8.500 to 8.798 to establish, maintain, and increase the quality of tree cover on public and private lands within the City; maintain City trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through good arboricultural practices; and to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest. Sections 8.500 to 8.798 also recognize the value of the urban forest for its effect enhancement of the urban environment in the following ways:

1.    Healthy, well-maintained trees enhance business and residential environmental and property values.



2.    Trees reduce air pollution by trapping dust on their leaves and in their bark, while also absorbing gaseous and liquid pollutants in their leaves and roots and returning oxygen to the atmosphere.

3.    Tree roots stabilize the soil and impede erosion.

4.    Trees reduce summer heat by blocking direct sunlight and glare. Evaporation of moisture from the leaves cools the surrounding air and moderates temperatures. Trees preserve and enhance water quality in streams and rivers.

5.    Trees soften the geometric rigidity and hard surfaces of streets and buildings.

6.    Trees muffle and buffer city noises.

7.    Trees are recognized by a majority of residents as an essential component to community livability and quality of life. Trees foster a sense of connection to the natural environment and are widely considered to be a key component to the overall aesthetics of a community.

It is the goal of the City of West Linn, through implementation of this ordinance and through other measures designed to encourage and promote tree conservation and planting on both public and private lands, to maintain and increase tree canopy coverage within the City. In addition to and separate from this ordinance are standards concerning trees and tree protection in the Community Development Code (CDC).

[Section 8.500 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004]


8.510 Definitions.

Basal Flare: That portion of a tree where there is a rapid increase in diameter at the confluence of the trunk and root crown.

Building footprint: The two-dimensional configuration of an existing building’s perimeter boundaries as measured on a horizontal plane at ground level.

Business Days: Monday through Friday - exempting any holidays.

Calendar Days: All days as noted on a calendar, inclusive of weekends and holidays.

Certified Arborist: An individual who has either obtained certification as an arborist from the International Society of Arboriculture, or who is a member of the American Society of Consulting Arborists.

City Arborist: The person designated as such by the City Manager.

City Manager: The City Manager or his/her designee.

City Right of Way: Land that is not owned by a private individual or company that has been either deeded or dedicated to the City for a public purpose. As referred to with a road, the area of the road and area adjacent to the road in City ownership.

DBH: Diameter at Breast Height is a tree’s diameter (circumference) at 4-1/2 feet or 54 inches above the highest natural ground level. DBH measured in this fashion is considered the accepted method for measuring the size of a tree, by both industry and scientific standards.

Dead Tree: A tree that is dead or has been damaged beyond repair or is in an advanced state of decline (where an insufficient amount of live tissue, green leaves, limbs, or branches exists to sustain life) and has been determined to be such by a certified arborist.

Disturbance: All of the various activities from construction or development that may damage trees.

Drip line area: The area under the tree’s canopy as defined by an imaginary vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of a tree’s natural length branches to the ground.

Erosion: Detachment and movement of soil, rock fragments, mulch, fill, or sediment.

Excessive pruning: Removal of more than one-third of the functioning leaf, stem, or root area of a tree in any twelve-month period, or removal of foliage so as to cause the unbalancing of a tree. Removal of more than one-third of functioning leaf, stem, or root area is considered a tree removal.

Groves: A group of two or more trees with meeting or overlapping canopies. The trees need not be the same species.

Hazard tree: Any tree with a structural defect and/or disease which makes it subject to a high probability of failure, and which threatens persons or property, including other trees.

Hazardous Growth Habit: The development of a tree that, due to a combination of structural defect, disease, or existing disturbance, is subject to a high probability of failure; and such failure would result in a threat to persons or improved property.

Heritage Tree: A tree designated by the City Council as having significant historic or community value to the City of West Linn.

ISA: International Society of Arboriculture.

Injury: A wound resulting from any activity, including but not limited to excessive pruning, cutting, trenching, excavating, altering the grade, or paving/compaction within the tree protection zone of a tree. Injury shall include bruising, scarring, tearing or breaking of roots, bark, trunk branches or foliage, herbicide or poisoning, or any other action foreseeably leading to the death or permanent damage to tree health.

Permit Fee: A fee for tree removal permits shall be established by Council resolution.

Protected Tree: All trees that are specifically designated to be saved on private property pursuant to an approved development permit, or for which the City Manager has not issued a tree removal permit. Protected trees are to be indicated on building permit or development plans submitted for approval.

Protected Tree Fencing: A temporary enclosure erected around a tree to be protected at the boundary of the tree protection zone. The fence serves three primary functions: 1) to keep the foliage crown, branch structure and trunk clear from direct contact and damage by equipment, materials, or disturbances; 2) to preserve roots and soil in an intact and non-compacted state; and 3) to identify the tree protection zone in which no soil disturbance is permitted and activities are restricted.

Soil Compaction: The compression of soil particles that may result from the movement of heavy machinery and trucks, storage of construction materials, structures, paving, etc., within the tree protection zone. Soil compaction can result in atrophy of roots and potential death of the tree, with symptoms often taking years to manifest.

Street Tree: Any tree planted by the City or authorized to be planted by another party in a Right of Way and designated as such. Street Trees do not include existing native or non-native trees or new plantings that are not authorized by the City.

Topping: The severe cutting back of a tree’s limbs within the tree’s crown so as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree.

Tree: For the purposes of determining whether a tree removal permit is required, the following definition of Tree is used. Only those trees that meet or exceed the size standards stipulated in this definition require permits to be removed. It is to be explicitly understood, however, that within this Ordinance there are some references to “Tree” or “Trees” (such as with street trees or replacement trees) where the term “Tree” is used (because it would be cumbersome to invent a different term) but to which the size requirements do not apply.

Any woody, perennial plant, deciduous, evergreen, or coniferous, having a main stem or trunk of a minimum of 6 inch DBH for Oregon white oak, Pacific madrone, and Pacific dogwood, and 12 inch DBH for all other tree species. Trees with multiple trunks will be measured at the 54-inch standard and computed as a total DBH. Plants that otherwise meet the above description but are typically grown as shrubs will not be considered trees. Some typical examples of these we see commonly are hazelnut, photinia, and laurel.

(Note: Also see Exemptions - Section 8.560)

Tree Appraisal: A method of determining the monetary value of a tree as it relates to the real estate value of the property, neighborhood, or community. When required, a certified arborist determines the appraisal by adjusting a tree’s basic value by its condition, location, and species using the most recent edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.

Tree Canopy: For the purposes of determining tree removal, it is the sum total of the branch and leaf structure of a tree including the trunk and/or trunks. When referred to as the City tree canopy, it refers to the total ground area that is shielded by tree foliage as would be determined from an aerial view of the City.

Tree Protection and Preservation Plan: A plan prepared by a certified arborist that outlines measures to preserve protected trees on a project site. This plan shall include requirements for pre-construction, treatments during demolition and/or construction, establishment of a tree protection zone for each tree, tree monitoring and inspection schedule, and provide for continuing maintenance of those trees after construction according to the requirements in this Manual.

Tree Protection Zone (TPZ): Unless otherwise specified by a project arborist or City Arborist, the area of temporary fenced tree enclosure. The Tree Protection Zone is a restricted activity zone where no soil disturbance is permitted, unless otherwise approved. The TPZ will normally be measured at ¾ foot radius per caliper inch for any given tree.

Tree Removal: Any of the following: (1) Complete removal, such as cutting to the ground or extraction, of a tree; (2) Taking any action foreseeably leading to the death of a tree or permanent damage to its health; including but not limited to excessive pruning, cutting, girdling, poisoning, over watering, unauthorized relocation or transportation of a tree, or trenching, excavating, altering the grade, compacting the soil or paving within the drip line area of a tree; (3) removal of more than one-third of functioning leaf and stem area of a tree in any 12-month period, or removal of foliage so as to cause the unbalancing of a tree is considered as removal for purposes of this ordinance. For fruit-bearing trees, see Section 8.560.

Visually Prominent: Visible from 1000 feet of the tree. Removal of a visually prominent tree would result in a marked difference in a view from an adjacent property or from a public right-of-way.

[Section 8.510 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004; Section 8.510 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted November 27, 2006.]


8.520 Permit Authority.

The City Manager, or designee, shall have the authority to issue tree removal permits. In the absence of the City Manager, the City Council shall delegate this authority to another City employee.

[Section 8.520 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004]


8.530 City Approval Required.

Unless specifically exempted, any removal of a tree as defined by this ordinance within the City of West Linn on public or private lands shall require a tree removal permit.

[Section 8.530 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004]


8.535 Business License Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business, occupation or profession of tree pruning or removal within the corporate limits of the City of West Linn without first obtaining a business license therefore as provided in sections 7.000 to 7.080 of this code.

[Section 8.535 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004]


8.540 Fees.

The City Council shall have the authority to set a tree removal permit fee schedule, and approve appropriate permit application forms. Such fees shall be adopted by Ordinance of the City Council. The fee for a tree removal permit shall be zero.

[Section 8.540 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004]


8.560 Exemptions.

ORCHARD TREES, TREE FARMS, AND COMMERCIAL NURSERIES EXEMPTION: The City shall not require a permit for removal of trees that are being grown for orchard trees, tree farms and commercial nurseries.

FRUIT BEARING TREES, NON-COMMER-CIAL, EXEMPTION: Recognizing that the generally accepted pruning of some trees, such as fruit-bearing trees, requires significantly more pruning without damage to the trees, such pruning shall be exempt from the permitting process.

[Section 8.560 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004]


8.570 Development Review and Building Permit Process.

A.    Development Review

1.    Any tree which has been approved for removal through the development review process (governed by the Community Development Code, or CDC), either as part of the provision of public improvements or as part of the ultimate development of the site, shall not require an additional tree-removal permit. However, any tree not approved for removal through the development review process, but later is found to require removal during the public improvement or grading review process, shall require approval of a tree removal permit by the City. In such cases, in addition to the findings in Section 8.630, the City may consider whether alternative public improvements or grading plans are feasible and can result in saving the threatened tree.

2.    Non-compliance with CDC governed trees shall result in enforcement in accordance with section 8.740 of this code, in addition to any penalties set forth in the CDC.

B.    Building Permits

1.    Trees that are within the otherwise approved footprint of a project requiring a building permit will not need an additional permit for removal.

2.    The City may require the applicant to make minor modifications to a building plan to save significant trees on the property, provided other City mandated regulations, such as lot setback distances, are met. Minor modifications include but are not limited to moving the footprint to a different location on the lot and changes to the driveway shape and location.

C.    Details and specifications regarding tree protection and removal for trees governed by the CDC and building permits can be found in the City’s Tree Technical Manual.

[Section 8.570 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004; Section 8.570 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted November 27, 2006.]


TREE REMOVAL


8.610 Contents of Application for Tree Removal.

A permit shall be required to remove any tree in West Linn unless such permit is waived by the City Manager. For the purposes of this ordinance, only trees meeting the criteria set forth in the definitions section (8.510) and Street Trees section (8.720) are required to get a permit. Trees of smaller diameter than the standards stipulated in WLMC 8.510 do not require a permit to be removed.

The application shall include:

1.    A completed Tree Removal Permit Application. This includes the following information:

a.    The owner’s name, address, and phone number;

b.    The site address for the tree removal;

c.    The number, diameter, and species of trees requested to be removed;

d.    Reasons justifying the removal, referencing the criteria in section 8.630;

e.    The owner’s signature and date.

2.    A site plan of the property upon which the tree proposed for removal is located. Applicants may use maps available through the City’s GIS mapping system. The site plan should show the following:

a.    The location of the tree(s) to be removed;

b.    The location of any existing building footprint(s);

c.    The location of any new or planned building expansion(s). (This applies to construction that is exempt from permitting under the Building Code.);

d.    The location of any paved or concreted areas on the property.

3.    After clearly marking the tree(s) on the property with brightly colored tape, the applicant shall take and include with the application photograph(s) of the tree(s) to be removed and the surrounding area.

4.    The applicant may, at their discretion, submit a report by an arborist on the health and structure of the tree(s) to be removed and the impact of such removal upon surrounding trees. In no way should this be construed to mean that the City requires such a report, except as noted below. Reports from other professionals (engineers, appraisers, etc.) may also be included in the application but are not required.

a.    If the application is being made on the criteria in Section 8.630 A-2 “damaged root structure that will lead to death,” then a formal report from an arborist is required.

[Section 8.610 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004; Section 8.610 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted November 27, 2006.]


8.620 Permit Process.

Upon receipt of a permit request for tree removal, the City Manager shall take the following steps:

Upon receipt of an application for a Tree Removal Permit, the City Arborist shall take the following steps:

1.    Determine if the application is complete. A complete application shall include all information requested on the application and as defined in Section 8.610 - Contents of Application for Tree Removal.

If the application is incomplete, notify the applicant within 10 business days of the deficiencies and information necessary to complete the application.

2.    Once the application is complete:

a.    The City will visit the site to identify and verify the specific tree(s) requested for removal and will note the following:

(1)    The accuracy of the application, including the location of the tree(s);

(2)    That the tree(s) are visibly identified with brightly colored tape;

(3)    The diameter and species of the tree(s).

b.    The City will determine the level of notification needed based on the approval criteria in section 8.630.

(1)    If approval criteria A.1.a. through d. apply, then no notification is needed.

(2)    If approval criteria A.1.a. through d. and denial criteria A.2.a. and c. do not apply the City shall erect a sign on the right of way on the subject property, clearly visible from the public right-of-way, giving notice of the proposed tree cutting, including the same or similar information as provided on the property owner notice below. The sign shall be placed on the property at least 10 days prior to the issuance of a decision on the permit. If the property has no frontage on a public right-of-way, a second sign shall be placed on the nearest such right-of-way directing individuals to the property.

(3)    For all other trees the City shall, in addition to the sign notification described above, notify all property owners within 500 feet of the property for which the permit is being requested. The notice shall be sent via US Mail at least 10 business days prior to the issuance of a decision, and shall include the following:

(a)    The address (or legal description) of the property

(b)    A copy of the applicant’s site plan

(c)    A description of the trees to be removed including the diameter and species

(d)    The reasons stated by the property owner justifying the removal

(e)    The expected City Manager’s decision date

(f)    How to request a copy of the decision on the application

(g)    The appeal rights and process (see Section 8.640)

(h)    The address and contact information of the City staff person for questions and comments

3.    Within 20 business days of completion of the application, issue a decision on the permit request, using the decision-making criteria defined in Section 8.630. The City shall mail a copy of the decision to the applicant and any other individual or organization requesting a copy of the decision within two business days of the decision. Upon special request, additional information may be included with the mailed decision, including, but not limited to the appeal rights and process, public comments received by the City, and comments on how the decision criteria in section 8.630 were applied.

4.    Final Decision date and Issuance of permit: A decision of the City Arborist becomes final 10 business days after it (the decision) is issued. If the decision is to grant the permit, the permit shall be issued only after the decision becomes final. If there is no appeal filed, the decision of the City Arborist becomes final 10 business days after it (the decision) is issued. The permit to remove the tree(s) will not be issued until the decision becomes final.

[Section 8.620 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004; Section 8.620 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted November 27, 2006.]


8.630 Tree Removal Permit Criteria.

A.    In making a determination whether to grant a permit, the City shall consider the criteria listed below. The decision shall include findings that cite each of these criteria. These criteria are meant to be guides, and the varying importance or weight of each in determining the appropriateness of tree removal shall be as expressed in the findings:

1.    Any of the following criteria shall be considered as aspects likely to warrant approval of a tree removal permit:

(a)    The tree is determined to be dead, or dying and not recoverable.

(b)    The tree is determined to have a significantly damaged root structure that will adversely impact the health and stability of the tree. Such a determination shall be based upon a report provided by the applicant. The report shall be reviewed and verified by the City Arborist.

(c)    The tree is determined to exhibit a hazardous growth habit.

(d)    The tree is interfering with utility service in such a manner that full restoration or maintenance of service requires removal of the tree.

(e)    The tree encroaches in the public right-of-way so as to cause damage to improvements within the public right-of-way such as street pavement and sidewalks.

(f)    The tree is causing structural damage that includes, but is not limited to, foundations, water lines and sewer lines.

(g)    The basal flare of the tree is within 10 feet of an existing building footprint.

(h)    An existing building footprint lies within the drip line of the tree.

(i)    Trees that have been maintained in the applicant’s property for the purpose of growing fruit which are no longer bearing fruit or have suffered a significant reduction in fruit bearing.

(j)    Removal of trees is being done for thinning purposes to enhance the health of other trees.

(k)    In the absence of denial criteria listed below, removal is for the owner’s landscape improvement but does not jeopardize the aesthetics of the neighborhood.

(l)    The removal would allow solar access for an otherwise extremely shaded property.

2.    Any of the following criteria shall be considered as aspects likely to warrant denial of a tree removal permit:

(a)    The tree is visually prominent.

(b)    The tree is generally healthy and of sound structure.

(c)    The tree is of significant size.

(d)    The tree is part of a larger grove or grouping of trees, and its removal will adversely affect the health and safety of the remaining trees within the grove or grouping.

(e)    The tree is on land that is sloped, and removal of the tree may exacerbate erosion or soil slumping in the vicinity of the tree.

(f)    The tree acts as a privacy barrier for adjacent properties.

(g)    Tree removal is solely to improve a view.

B.    The City shall deny a tree removal permit if any of the following criteria is met:

1.    The tree is designated by the City of West Linn as a heritage tree, unless one of the criteria in subsections (A)(1)(a) through (d) of this section applies and the hearing is followed, as noted in Section 8.710.

2.    The tree is located within an open space drainageway, drainageway transition area, wetland, wetland transition area, Willamette River Greenway area, or Tualatin River protection zone as defined by the West Linn Community Development Code, unless one of the criteria in subsections (1)(a) through (d) of this section apply.

3.    The tree is protected by an existing tree conservation easement, unless criterion in subsections (1)(a) through (d) of this section apply.

C.    It is encouraged, but not mandated, that the property owner replace a tree that is removed.

[Section 8.630 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.630 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.640 Appeal.

Any decision of the City Arborist regarding a tree removal permit may be appealed to the Hearings Officer pursuant to the administrative appeals process in Section 1.400 et seq. In addition to the notice requirements in Section 1.410(2)(b), the written notice of appeal shall include a statement from the appellant listing the errors the appellant believes the City Arborist has made in issuing the decision. 

[Section 8.640 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.640 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


8.650 Time Limits.

If the City Arborist does not issue a decision within 20 business days from the submittal of a complete tree cutting application, or the City Council does not consider an appeal of the City Manager’s decision within 30 business days of the filing of such appeal, the permit shall be deemed to be approved.

An approved tree-removal permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance.

[Section 8.650 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.650 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.710 Heritage Trees.

1.    Heritage trees shall be those trees designated by the City Council following review of a nomination form submitted by a citizen and accepted, in writing, by the property owner. If a proposed Heritage Tree is on private property, the property owner must give written consent to the Heritage Tree Application before such application can proceed. The written consent of the property owner shall include provisions for the City to have reasonable access to the tree for maintenance and such necessary pruning as is required. It shall also be expressly understood that the Heritage Tree designation, once approved by the City Council, shall be an encumbrance on the property containing the heritage tree and shall be listed as a deed restriction. Such legal costs associated with this provision shall be borne by the City.

2.    The following criteria shall be used:

Minimum circumference at five feet above ground level = point value 5

Rapid growing (Douglas Fir, Giant Sequoia, etc.) – 138"

Moderate growing (Oregon White Oak, Scarlet Oak) – 107"

Slow and smaller growing (Ginkgo, Madrone) – 86"

Location factor point values:

	6	Commercial areas

	5	Yard adjacent to street

	4	Side yard

	3	Wooded lot within subdivision

	1	Forested area

Condition factor point values:

	5	Excellent – perfect form, little or no dead wood, all limbs have good attachments, no sign of decay

	4	Very good – good form, multi-leaders, but with good attachments, 10% or less large dead wood

	2	Good – unbalanced or incomplete crown, tight limb angles, 15% – 20% larger dead wood

	1	Poor – evidence of some decay, 20% – 30% larger dead wood, history of being topped

	0	Very poor – structurally unsound, extensive decay, dieback, poor form, unbalanced or greatly reduced crown.

Historical factor is determined by the tree’s relative historic significance. Historic significance may be determined by the tree’s association with historic or famous events, the cultural history of the nation, State, community or person or persons who have significantly contributed to the history of the nation, state or community. Local historians may be called upon for research assistance for this category. Point values:

	5	Very significant

	4	Significant

	3	Somewhat significant

	2	Marginally significant

	1	Not significant

Formula: size x location x condition x historical factor = heritage tree points

Trees shall accumulate a minimum off 180 points to receive consideration as a heritage tree.

3.    Upon a tree being designated as a Heritage Tree, a plaque so designating may be placed upon or near said tree. It shall become the obligation of the Parks and Recreation Department to maintain such tree. A Heritage Tree may not be removed without a public hearing at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of removal.

4.    This section is intended to give, and does hereby give full and complete authority to the City Manager over any and all heritage trees in the City upon written consent of private property owners.

[Section 8.710 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted May 5, 2004; Section 8.710 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted November 27, 2006.]


8.720 Street Trees.

A.    Street Tree Plan and List of Trees. Street trees shall not fall under the definition of tree as provided in the definition portion of this ordinance.

1.    It is in the best interest of the City that a Street Tree Plan be developed and established for the planting, maintenance and replacement of trees in and along its streets. This section is adopted for the purpose of providing for such a plan and for the establishment of regulations necessary to carry out its purpose.

2.    The City shall prepare or cause to be prepared a Street Tree Plan for the planting and maintenance of trees in the streets of the City.

3.    The Street Tree Plan should include, but shall not be limited to, a series of maps of City streets upon which is designated a scheme for the planting of trees and the designation of streets for certain types of trees. Such maps shall show the interval between existing trees and the approximate place where each new tree is to be planted.

4.    A survey of the street trees presently existing in the City and their condition may be taken.

5.    Approval and amendments of the Street Tree Plan shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:

a.    Existing and planned street width.

b.    Existing and planned utilities.

c.    Pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

d.    Proposed trees are included in the City Arborist’s listing of approved species.

6.    The City Arborist shall maintain a list of approved varieties of trees that may be planted on any street within the City in accordance with the Street Tree Plan. Approval shall be based upon considerations such as maturity, height, susceptibility to disease or pests, reasonable expected freedom from nuisance characteristics and general suitability for any particular locations. The City Arborist’s listing of approved varieties shall not prevent the seeking of approval of unlisted varieties.

B.    Funding.

1.    A separate account shall be established and maintained for revenues and expenditures created by the street tree program.

2.    Property owners of new developments will pay a set amount per street tree in new developments. The money collected will be used by the City to purchase and install street trees and the amount will be based on the current price of 1.75 inch caliper nursery stock installed to City standards. The number of trees in new developments will be set at two per lot, and four for corner lots, for single family homes. For multi-family housing and commercial developments the number of trees will be based on linear feet of street frontage with one tree per 25-40 feet of frontage.

C.    Planting of Street Trees.

1.    The City may plant street trees along the streets of the City in accordance with the Street Tree Plan or approved development plan.

2.    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or set out any tree or authorize or cause or procure any person to plant or set out any tree in or upon any part of any street or public right-of-way without:

a.    Obtaining from the City Arborist a written permit to do so; and;

b.    Complying in all respects with the conditions set forth in such written permit and with the provisions of this ordinance.

3.    All applications for such permit shall describe work to be done and the variety, size and precise location of each tree to be planted. Upon review of the application:

a.    If the City Arborist has found that the proposed planting is in accord with the Street Tree Plan, the City Arborist shall grant a permit, and the trees shall become part of the City’s street tree inventory.

b.    If the City Arborist finds that the proposed planting is not in accord with the Street Tree Plan, but that the trees proposed to be planted have a reasonable likelihood of prospering and the application specifies the location, variety and grade of each tree and method of planting, including among other things, the supplying of suitable soil, then the City Arborist may grant a permit, and the tree shall become part of the City’s street tree inventory.

4.    The permit shall be good only for the planting season stated.

5.    All street trees shall be planted in accordance with specifications in the Tree Technical Manual.

D.    Protection of Street Trees.

1.    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or keep attached to any tree in or upon any public street or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree, any ropes, wires, chains, or other device whatsoever, except that the same may be attached to any tree as support or protection thereof.

2.    During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any buildings or structure, it shall be unlawful for the person in charge of such erection, repair, alteration or removal to leave any tree in or upon any street in the vicinity of such building or structure without a good and sufficient guard or protector as to prevent injury to such tree arising out of, or by reason of such erection, repair, alteration or removal. See West Linn Tree Technical Manual for details regarding tree protection during construction.

E.    Permit Requirements and Conditions.

The City maintains sole authority over the planting, pruning and removal of all trees and foliage on City property, including, but not limited to, street trees in the City’s Right of Way. Private individuals shall only be allowed to prune, remove or plant any tree on City property, including the Right of Way, with express written permission of the City. However, such small scale and minor pruning of street trees in the City’s right of way directly abutting private property shall be done by that property owner to maintain minimum sidewalk and road clearance as described in Section 8.720. Any such minor pruning shall only be deemed exempt from this permitting provided that it is the minimum reasonable amount necessary to achieve the clearance minima.

Should a citizen so desire, a request can be made to the City to have a City tree removed. The request will be reviewed, utilizing the guidelines for tree removal as presented herein. Minimum size thresholds shall not apply for street trees.

F.    Maintenance.

1.    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner adjacent to any street tree to maintain the tree according to the tree maintenance standards detailed in the City’s Tree Technical Manual. Maintenance includes replacement of trees that are dead, or in need of replacement due to injury, disease, etc. A fee may be paid to the City in lieu of replacement. In this case the City shall replace the tree at the time of its regular scheduled street tree plantings.

2.    All street trees must be pruned to ISA Pruning Standards for Shade Trees. See pruning guidelines in Tree Technical Manual for details.

3.    Street trees having branches projecting into the street or sidewalk shall be pruned by the owners of the property adjacent to where the trees are growing and shall be done according to the requirements for tree branch clearance over street and sidewalk areas, and signs as set forth in this ordinance.

4.    Limbs of trees may be allowed to project over the sidewalk area at an elevation of not less than 7 1/2 feet above the sidewalk level, and over the street area at an elevation of not less than 10 feet above the street level. However, on any street designated as an arterial and where parking has been prohibited, limbs of trees shall be pruned to a height of not less than 13 feet above the street level. Trees, which are not trimmed so as to meet the above specifications, shall be deemed to present an unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property.

5.    The City may cause to be pruned and maintained, all of the trees within the City street right-of -way.

6.    A private utility maintaining its utility system in a street may prune or cause to be pruned in accordance with the terms and conditions of their franchise agreement with the City.

7.    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or City department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted by the City Arborist.

[Section 8.720 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.720 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.730 Emergency Permit Process.

(1)    The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to issue an emergency tree-removal permit if the condition of the tree presents an immediate danger of collapse, and/or represents a clear and present hazard to persons or property.

For purposes of this section, a hazardous growth habit which will likely result in failure of the tree prior to consideration of the permit through the normal process means that the tree is already leaning, with the surrounding soil heaving, or showing other clear signs of imminent failure, and that the problem cannot be resolved through pruning, trimming, or other preventive maintenance.

(2)    An emergency tree-removal permit shall not require mailed or posted notice.

(3)    An emergency tree-removal permit denial may not be appealed to the City Council.

(4)    If the City Manager denies an emergency tree-removal permit, the applicant may apply for a tree-removal permit through the standard process.

(5)    A property owner may remove a tree which he/she has determined is in imminent danger of falling and/or posing a threat to life and/or property prior to the ability of the City to consider issuing an emergency tree removal permit (e.g., on a weekend day). In such cases, within five business days of the tree’s removal, the property owner shall provide written and photographic documentation of the condition of the tree prior to removal. If the City Manager does not agree with the property owner’s decision, the property owner may be subject to enforcement and mitigation action pursuant to Section 8.740.

(6)    Any officer of the Police Department or the Fire District may also require removal of a tree if, in the judgment of the officer during the performance of his or her public duties, the tree is in a hazardous or dangerous condition threatening life and/or property.

[Section 8.730 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.730 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.740 Non-Compliance, Penalty, and Enforcement.

Any violation of the terms of Sections 8.500 to 8.798 is a Class A violation. Each tree involved in the violation constitutes a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney shall institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provision of this section. These rights shall be in addition to any other remedies allowed by law. Upon discovery of a violation, the City shall notify the violator of the alleged violation and of the procedures and potential penalties associated with said violations.

The City Manager shall make a determination of whether the violation was knowing, willful and intentional on the part of the violator. If the City Manager determines that there is ample reason to believe that the violation was accidental or unintentional, the violator shall be permitted the opportunity to mitigate the violation through voluntary compliance process as found in subsection (1) of this section. Intentional violators shall be subject to penalties as listed on subsection (2) of this section as well as the tree replacement requirements of subsection (1)(a) of this section. Fines and penalties shall be submitted to the West Linn Municipal Court pursuant to the rules and procedures and authority of the Municipal Court to assess fines and other penalties for violation of the West Linn Municipal Code.

(1)    Voluntary Compliance Process. A voluntary compliance agreement shall contain the following:

(a)    A commitment by the violator to submit and carry out a tree replacement program that is approved by the City Manager. The agreement shall require at minimum the planting of replacement trees at a 1:1 inch per inch (circumference) ratio to the trees removed illegally. The size and quality of the mitigation nursery stock shall be approved by the City. If the applicant’s property is deemed inadequate in size to accommodate the replacement trees, then a fee may be paid into the Tree Canopy Replacement Fund at the minimum rate for installation of a 1.75 inch caliper tree to City standards.

(b)    Payment of a fee deposit, calculated based upon anticipated staff time devoted to investigation of the violation and review and approval of the voluntary compliance agreement and related compliance inspections. The actual staff time shall be tracked and charged against the fee deposit. At the conclusion of the process, any unused funds in the deposit shall be refunded. If the deposit funds run out prior to completion of the voluntary compliance process, the violator shall pay an additional deposit calculated as necessary to complete the process. If the violator does not pay such an additional deposit, the voluntary compliance process shall be terminated and the City Manager shall initiate enforcement action against the violator.

(c)    Trees that have been planted as part of a mitigation planting will not be covered by the minimum thresholds for trees requiring a permit for removal.

(2)    Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation causing the illegal removal of a tree who does not enter into a voluntary compliance agreement may upon conviction be fined a sum not to exceed the equivalent of three times the appraised value of the tree based on the latest revision of the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers evaluation method plus cost of prosecution including attorney’s fees for each tree removed, but in any case an amount not less than $500.00.

[Section 8.740 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.740 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006; amended by Ordinance No. 1621, adopted 04-21-14.]


8.745 Tree-Topping Prohibited.

[Section 8.745 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.745 deleted by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.750 Abatement.

(1)    When any tree located on private property is dead (and deemed to create a hazard) or infested with a disease or insects or is, in the opinion of the City Arborist, infectious and may spread such disease or insects to other trees in the City or otherwise an imminent hazard to persons or property, the City may remove or treat the tree or cause same to be removed or treated. Such removal or treatment shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

(2)    The City may abate or remove, or cause to be abated or removed, any tree located in the street right-of-way, or which encroaches from private property into the street right-of-way because of age, disease or other debilitating cause, death, insecure root system, or any other condition which, in the opinion of the City, causes its continued existence to be detrimental to the public interest.

(3)    If sections of the Community Tree Ordinance impose an undue hardship on an individual property owner, assistance by a grant-in-aid may be available through the City Manager’s office pursuant to the City’s Grant-In-Aid Policy.

[Section 8.750 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004; Section 8.750 amended by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.760 Tree Canopy Replacement Account.

(1)    An account shall be established and maintained for various tree related revenues and expenditures.

Sources of revenue for this account include the following:

(a)    Fees paid as part of voluntary compliance mitigation.

(b)    Fees paid as part of development mitigation.

(c)    Fines paid for noncompliance.

(d)    Gifts received by the City for the purpose of tree canopy replacement.

(2)    Expenditures for this account may include but are not limited to the following:

(a)    New tree installations on City property.

(b)    Natural area restorations on City property.

(c)    Street tree replacement programs.

(d)    New street tree installations in older neighborhoods.

[Section 8.760 added by Ordinance No. 1542, adopted 11-27-2006.]


8.795 Fees/Classification of Fees and Costs.

Fees shall be established by Ordinance of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. The City Council determines that the fees and costs imposed by this ordinance are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.

[Section 8.795 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004.]


8.797 Disclaimer of Liability.

Nothing contained in Section 8.500 to 8.798 shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City, its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant on his or her property or under his or her control in such condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any public right-of-way, park, or public place within the City.

[Section 8.797 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004.]


8.798 General Provisions.

If any provision or any portion thereof contained in this article is held to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this article, or portion thereof, shall be deemed severable, shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect.

[Section 8.798 added by Ordinance No. 1503, adopted 05-05-2004.]


Chapter 9 FRANCHISES

FRANCHISES

9.010    Definition.

9.020    Authority.

9.030    Restriction on Use of Rights of Way.


FRANCHISES


9.010 Definition.

Franchise. A grant of authority by agreement and contract and ordinance allowing the use of public rights of way within the City for utility, solid waste and recycling collection, and similar purposes.

[Section 9.010 added by Ordinance No. 1444, adopted February 28, 2000.]


9.020 Authority.

The City has the authority pursuant to Section 6 of the Charter and ORS Chapters 221, 459 and 459A to issue franchises allowing the use of public rights of way for utility and other purposes. The City Council may grant exclusive or non-exclusive franchises for solid waste collection, waste recycling services, natural gas distribution, electric power distribution, telecommunications services, cable television services and other services. Franchises shall be granted by a franchise agreement approved by ordinance.

[Section 9.020 added by Ordinance No. 1444, adopted February 28, 2000.]


9.030 Restriction on Use of Rights of Way.

The City has jurisdiction to control public rights of way within the City and may regulate the use of rights of way by ordinance, franchise, license, permit or any combination thereof.

[Section 9.030 added by Ordinance No. 1444, adopted February 28, 2000.]


9-1 KELLER DROP BOX, INC.

[Section 9-1 (Ordinance No. 1176) removed by Ordinance No. 1447, adopted May 8, 2000.]


9-2 WEST LINN DISPOSAL CO.

[Section 9-2 (Ordinance No. 1261) removed by Ordinance No. 1445, adopted March 13, 2000.]


9-3 NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS COMPANY

[Section 9-3 (Ordinance No. 1315) removed by Ordinance No. 1487, adopted August 7, 2002.]


9-4 PORTLAND GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY

[Section 9-4 (Ordinance No. 1342) removed by Ordinance No. 1483, effective April 1, 2002.]

 


Chapter 01 GENERAL

Sections:

01.010    TITLE

01.020    PURPOSE

01.030    COMPLIANCE

01.050    REPEALED

01.060    INTERPRETATION

01.070    SEVERABILITY

01.080    OFFICIAL ACTION

01.090    SITE ACCESS


01.010 TITLE

This code shall be known as the Community Development Code of the City of West Linn, and shall be referred to herein as “this code.”


01.020 PURPOSE

As a means of promoting the general health, safety and welfare of the public, this code is designed to set forth the standards and procedures governing the development and use of land in West Linn and to implement the West Linn Comprehensive Plan. To these ends, it is the purpose of this code to maintain and improve the existing character and quality of West Linn through:

A.    Identifying and protecting resource lands from urban development encroachment.

B.    Providing for the natural and cultural resources of the community.

C.    Providing adequate land to meet anticipated future demands for development in a logical and orderly manner.

D.    Encouraging flexibility and innovation in development techniques to permit diversity within the community.

E.    Providing for a range of housing types and costs in order to offer a wide variety of choices to present and future West Linn residents.

F.    Contributing to a healthy and diverse economy in West Linn.

G.    Providing for an orderly and timely provision of public facilities and services for future urban development.

H.    Providing for citizen participation in all phases of the planning process. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


01.030 COMPLIANCE

A.    Except as otherwise specifically provided by this zoning code, no building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, established, occupied, altered, maintained, improved, enlarged or moved, nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the City be commenced or changed, nor shall any condition of or upon real property be caused or maintained after the effective date of this code, except in conformity with conditions prescribed for each of the several zones and general regulations established in this code.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, occupy, alter, improve, enlarge, or use, or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement or use of premises located in any zone described in this zoning code contrary to the provisions of this code. Where this zoning code imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or code provisions, the provisions of this zoning code shall control.

C.    No lot area, yards, other open space or off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of this code shall be reduced below the minimum required for it by this code. No fee conveyance of any portion of a lot or parcel, for other than a public use, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than minimum ordinance requirements.

D.    No lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this code for one use shall be a required lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area for another use, except as provided in CDC 05.030(A). (Ord. 1635 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 1, 2014)


01.050 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

Repealed by Ord. 1635. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


01.060 INTERPRETATION

A.    The Planning Director shall have the initial authority and responsibility to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this code. A request for an interpretation shall be made in writing to the Planning Director. The Director’s interpretation may be appealed to the Commission as provided by CDC 99.060(B).

B.    The Director may develop guidelines to aid in the implementation and interpretation of the provisions of this code.


01.070 SEVERABILITY

Should any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this code as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.


01.080 OFFICIAL ACTION

All officials, departments and employees of the City vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals shall adhere to and require conformance with this code, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development or use which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this code. Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, whether intentional or otherwise, shall be void.


01.090 SITE ACCESS

The submittal of a City of West Linn development application represents permission for the decision-making authority and staff to have reasonable access to the site. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


Chapter 02 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

02.010    INTERPRETATION

02.030    SPECIFIC WORDS AND TERMS


02.010 INTERPRETATION

For the purpose of this code, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows.

A.    The word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is permissive.

B.    The words “used” or “occupied” shall include the words “intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.”

C.    The word “lot” or “parcel” includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.

D.    Words not specifically defined herein shall have the meaning specified in Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged. (Ord. 1604 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1636 § 2, 2014)


02.030 SPECIFIC WORDS AND TERMS

For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms or words are defined as follows.

Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). Attached or detached dwelling unit which is secondary to the primary dwelling unit and intended to provide convenient and affordable housing opportunities.

Accessory structure. A subordinate structure with a maximum area of 1,500 square feet, except for agricultural buildings, located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, the use of which is clearly incidental to and associated with the principal use. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    Greenhouse or hothouse;

2.    Swimming pools;

3.    Children’s playhouses and structures;

4.    Sheds;

5.    Barns;

6.    Gazebos;

7.    Solar and wind energy systems;

8.    Garages;

9.    Dog houses for up to four dogs, bird feeders, or other pet shelters;

10.    Appurtenances such as mailboxes and heat pumps; and

11.    Similar structures as determined by the Planning Director.

Accessory use. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use.

Acres, gross. All of the land area owned by the applicant under consideration. See “Tract.”

Acres, net. The total gross acres less the public right-of-way and other acreage deductions, as applicable. 

Adequate public facilities. Public facilities that must be adequate for an application for new construction, remodeling, or replacement of an existing structure to be approved are transportation, water, sewer, and storm sewer facilities. To be adequate, on-site and adjacent facilities must meet City standards, and off-site facilities must have sufficient capacity to (1) meet all existing demands, (2) satisfy the projected demands from projects with existing land use approvals, plus the additional demand created by the application, and (3) remain compliant with all applicable standards.

For purposes of evaluating discretionary permits in situations where the level-of-service or volume-to-capacity performance standard for an affected City or State roadway is currently failing or projected to fail to meet the standard, and an improvement project is not programmed, the approval criteria shall be that the development avoids further degradation of the affected transportation facility. Mitigation must be provided to bring the facility performance standard to existing conditions at the time of occupancy.

Administrator. The City Manager of West Linn, Oregon, or a duly authorized representative.

Agricultural building. A structure located on a farm and used in the operation of such farm for the storage, maintenance or repair of farm machinery and equipment or for the raising, harvesting and selling of crops or in the feeding, breeding management and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or honeybees, or for dairying and sale of dairy products or any other agricultural or horticultural use, or animal husbandry or any combination thereof, including the preparation and storage of products raised on such farm for man’s use and animal use and disposal by marketing or otherwise.

Agricultural sales. Sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides, and similar goods. Typical uses include nurseries and hay, feed, and grain stores.

Agricultural services. Establishments or places of business engaged in the provision of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include tree and lawn service firms.

Agriculture. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, dairying and/or animal husbandry, but not including the keeping or raising of fowl, pigs, or fur-bearing animals unless such is clearly incidental to the principal use of the property for the raising of crops.

Alley. A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

Alteration. A change in construction or a change of occupancy. When the term is applied to a change in construction, it is intended to apply to any change, addition, or modification in construction. When the term is used in connection with a change of occupancy, it is intended to apply to changes of occupancy from one trade or use to another or from one division of trade or use to another.

Alteration, structural. Any change or repair which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as alteration of girders. In addition, any change in the external dimensions of the building shall be considered a structural alteration.

Amusement enterprise. Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of entertainment or recreation which require less personal physical activity than those uses included in indoor participant sports and recreation. Typical uses include: billiard parlors, bowling alleys, arcades, and electronic game room facilities or movie theaters.

Anchor-secured docks. Docks that are held in place by cables that are then attached to the riverbed or shoreline by an anchoring system.

Animal sales and services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in animal-related sales and services. The following are animal sales and services use types:

Animal sales and services, grooming. Grooming of dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops.

Animal sales and services, kennels. Kennel services for dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses for a business venture include boarding kennels or dog training centers. Kennels will be further defined as any property where more than four dogs are kept, whether such animals are kept as personal property of the property owner or as a business venture, is deemed to be a kennel. A person may have more than four dogs and not be deemed a kennel, if one of the dogs is a female with a litter under the age of six months.

Animal sales and services, veterinary (large animals). Veterinary services for large animals. Typical uses include animal hospitals for large animals (horses, sheep) or veterinary hospitals for large animals.

Animal sales and services, veterinary (small animals). Veterinary services for small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, or animal hospitals for small animals.

Antenna(s). A device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel, or dish, for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radiation. An antenna is typically mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast, or building.

Appeal. A request that a final decision by the Director be considered by a higher authority either on the basis of a de novo hearing or with the inclusion of evidence in addition to that considered by the maker of the initial decision.

Approval authority. Either the Director, the initial hearing body, or the Council, depending on the context in which the term is used.

Approval or approved. A determination by the City of West Linn approval authority that the provisions of this code have been met.

Arterial. A street whose primary function is to provide for the movement of through traffic between areas and across portions of the City or region, and having the subordinate function of providing direct access to abutting land. Depending on the nature and location of an arterial street, it may be designed to the standards of a minor arterial street or a major arterial street.

Authorized. Having been granted written permission from the property owner(s) to act on his/her/their behalf. 

Authorized area. The area within the preference rights area, as determined by DSL, where the applicant may place their water-dependent structure (e.g., dock) is called the authorized area. (Also see “Preference rights” definition.)

Automotive and equipment. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in motorized vehicle-related sales or services. The following are automotive and equipment use types:

Automotive and equipment, cleaning. Washing and polishing of automobiles. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes.

Automotive and equipment, fleet storage. Fleet storage of vehicles used regularly in business operation and not available for sale or long-term storage of operating vehicles. Typical uses include taxi fleet, mobile catering truck storage, or auto storage garages.

Automotive and equipment; repairs, heavy equipment. Repair of trucks, etc., as well as the sale, installation, or servicing of truck or automotive equipment and parts together with body repairs, painting, and steam cleaning. Typical uses include truck transmission shops, body shops, or motor freight maintenance groups.

Automotive and equipment; repairs, light equipment. Repair of automobiles and the sale, installation, and servicing of automobile equipment and parts but excluding body repairs and painting. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto or motorcycle repair garages, or auto glass shops.

Automotive and equipment; sales/rentals, heavy equipment. Sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of heavy construction equipment and trucks together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include boat dealers, heavy construction equipment dealers, or truck dealers.

Automotive and equipment; sales/rentals, light equipment. Sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of autos, non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motorhomes, and trailers with less than a 10,000 gross cargo weight together with incidental maintenance. Typical uses include automobile dealers, car rental agencies, or recreational vehicle sales and rental agencies.

Automotive and equipment; storage, recreational vehicles and boats. Storage of recreational vehicles and boats. Typical uses include the collective storage of personal recreational vehicles or boats.

Bankfull stage. The level of stream flow where water reaches or exceeds the top of channel or otherwise inundates the adjacent floodplain on a frequency of approximately every 1.5 to two years. This is sometimes known as ordinary high water (OHW). In some high gradient or incised streams, the 1.5- to two-year floods may be restricted to the deepened channel. Conversely, in low gradient streams, where the grades adjacent to the streams are in the zero to 15 percent range, the bankfull stage/OHW is likely to be at the outer edge of adjacent floodplain areas. The bankfull stage or OHW level of stream systems is typically delineated in the field by:

1.    The outer extent of facultative or obligate plants;

2.    The upper elevation of float debris (litter of branches, twigs and organic material);

3.    The lower elevation of woody vegetation (e.g., willow and alder species); 

4.    Textural change of depositional sediment or changes in the character of the soil (e.g., from silts, sand, cobble and gravel to upland soils); 

5.    Top of the zone of washed or exposed roots; 

6.    A clear natural line impressed on the bank; or

7.    A break or change in slope angle. 

For the purpose of this code, the terms “bankfull stage” and “OHW” may be used interchangeably and are illustrated and further defined in Table 32-3.

Basement. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as defined herein.

Bed and breakfast. Overnight accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to transient guests for compensation.

Bike path. A way designed for and improved with a hard surface, and signed for use by bicycle traffic.

Block length. The distance measured along all that part of one side of a street which is between the centerline of two intersecting or intercepting streets, or between an intersecting or intercepting street, undivided acreage, or other major barrier.

Boat house. Roofed structure to store and protect a boat. Boat houses may also include roofed open-sided boat shelters.

Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

Building line. A line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.

Building maintenance services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial services. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.

Business equipment sales and services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional, and service establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but excludes automotive, construction, and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops, or hotel equipment and supply firms.

Business support services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of service, including instructional, of a clerical, employment, protective, or minor processing nature to firms rather than individuals and where the storage of goods other than samples is prohibited. Typical uses include: secretarial services, telephone answering services, or blueprint services.

Certified child care center. A certified child care center is regulated under OAR 414-300-0000 through OAR 414-300-0415. The use is defined in OAR 414-300-0005 generally as follows: The child care business is in a facility that has met zoning, occupancy, and building code requirements; usually a commercial building. The maximum number of children allowed in care depends on the square footage of the building, number of qualified staff, and various other factors. The Office of Child Care license reflects maximum number of children allowed in care at any one time.

Certified professional in erosion and sediment control. A person who has been so determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Society and the International Erosion Control Association (Urban Watershed Institute).

Channel. The channel is the physical confine of a stream within the “bankfull stage” and “OHW.” 

Child care. Duties and rules of the State of Oregon Office of Child Care are identified in ORS 329A.010 through 329A.030. “Child care” means the care, supervision and guidance on a regular basis of a child, unaccompanied by a parent, guardian or custodian, provided to a child during a part of the 24 hours of the day, in a place other than the child’s home, with or without compensation. Child care is exempt from Office of Child Care regulation if it provides care for three or fewer children, not including their own children; for any number of children from the same family, not including their own children. 

City. The City of West Linn, Oregon.

City Engineer. The City Engineer of West Linn, Oregon, or his or her authorized agent.

Clear vision area. An area which consists of a triangular area, two sides of which are property lines measured from the corner intersection of the access point lot lines for a distance specified in this regulation.

Co-location. The placement of two or more antenna systems or platforms by separate Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license holders on a structure such as a support structure, building, water tank, or utility pole.

Collector. A street supplementary to the arterial street system and a means of circulation between arterials and local streets; used to some extent for access to abutting properties and may be used to a limited extent for through traffic.

Commission. The Planning Commission of West Linn, Oregon.

Communications services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as utilities. Typical uses include: television studios, telecommunication service centers, or telegraph service offices.

Community building. A building operated by the public or a non-profit group, neighborhood or association for public assembly for meetings, arts, crafts or similar uses. Examples of a community building are a senior center or arts center.

Community recreation. Recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses typically associated with parks, play fields, or golf courses. 

Comprehensive Plan. The official document of West Linn that includes goals and policies that direct how West Linn will develop. It also may include action measures or strategies for implementing the goals and policies. The Comprehensive Plan is adopted by ordinance, and thus, has the force of law and is the basis for the Community Development Code.

Conditional use. A use which may be permitted by the approval authority following a public hearing, upon findings by the authority that the approval criteria have been met or will be met upon satisfaction of conditions of approval.

Construction sales and services. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures. Typical uses include: building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, and building contracting/construction offices.

Consumer repair services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than firms, but excluding “automotive and equipment” use types. Typical uses include: appliance repair shops, apparel repair firms, musical instrument repair firms and small repair shops.

Convenience sales and personal services. Small neighborhood oriented retail businesses (retail commercial and personal services) which provide for the daily needs of nearby residents. It includes uses such as grocery stores, drug stores, laundromats and dry cleaners.

Corner lot. A lot or parcel abutting on two intersecting streets other than an alley, excluding lots or parcels with boundary line angles greater than 135 degrees.

Council. The City Council of West Linn, Oregon.

Critical facility. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police stations, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

Cul-de-sac. A street or streets having one end open to traffic and the other end or ends terminating in a vehicle turnaround.

Cultural exhibits and library services. Museums, exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of art, or library collection of books, manuscripts, etc., for study and reading.

Cut or excavation. Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, or relocated.

Dedication. The legal conveyance of land, typically from a private property owner to the City. 

Developer. The owner of land proposed to be developed or partitioned, or representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises for any proposed development or division of land as provided in this code. Within the flood management area, this term shall include storage of equipment or materials. 

Development. Any manmade change defined as the construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, paving, filling, grading or site clearing, and grubbing in amounts greater than 10 cubic yards on any lot, parcel, or lot of record. Within the flood management area, this term shall also include storage of equipment or materials. Within the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Areas, this term shall also include any change of use or intensification of the use of land or water, including construction of structures (such as houses, structures, docks and associated pilings or piers), significant grading, or removal or addition of vegetation and groundcover unless specifically exempted per CDC 28.040. Development shall not include grading, site clearing, grubbing or filling where it is part of a submitted land use application that includes the restoration of grades and replanting the affected area with native vegetation per a re-vegetation plan. This definition is distinct and separate from previously disturbed areas (PDAs) and temporarily disturbed areas (TDAs). 

Director. The Planning Director of West Linn, Oregon, or authorized agent.

Disturbance. For the purpose of this code, the terms “disturbance” and “development” may be used interchangeably. 

Disturbed areas. Areas that have been subjected to disturbance or development. For the purpose of this code, the terms “disturbance” and “development” may be used interchangeably.

Division of land. The process of dividing a tract, lot or parcel by subdividing or partitioning. See “Partition land” and “Subdivide land.” A division of land shall be deemed to have occurred at the time when the final approved plat is recorded with the County Recorder’s office.

Dock. Dock/float means an individual secured and stationary or floating structure (other than a mooring buoy) used exclusively for mooring boats and for similar uses. Dock can also refer to water-dependent uses generically unless otherwise indicated from the context.

Drainageways. The channel of a drainage course, or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge surface runoff water.

Drive-through restaurant. An eating and drinking establishment organized so that motorists may order and pick up orders without the necessity of leaving the vehicle.

Drop box, trailer, or structure of similar function. A drop box, truck trailer or structure of similar function intended for the collection of donations which may include newspaper, household goods, clothes, cardboard, and other items. These drop boxes shall be operated by registered non-profit benevolent organizations, groups, associations or religious orders.

DSL. Department of State Lands.

Duplex residential units. Two dwelling units placed so that some structural parts are in common and are located on a single lot, parcel or tract. 

Dwelling unit. One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

Easement. A grant of the right to use a strip of land for a specific purpose.

Eating and drinking establishments. Establishments or places of business that are not drive-through restaurants and primarily engage in the sale of prepared or produced food and beverages for on-premises consumption, on-premises sale, or take out service. On-premises sales do not include sales to secondary retailers or wholesalers. Typical uses include, but are not limited to: fast food establishments, restaurants, delicatessens, brew-pubs, coffee shops, taverns, bars and lounges.

Emergency. Any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material, contamination, utility or transportation disruptions, and disease.

Engineer. The City Engineer of West Linn, Oregon, or a duly authorized representative.

Enhancement. See “Mitigation.”

Ephemeral streams. A stream or reach of a stream which flows only in direct response to precipitation and whose channels are always above groundwater or water table levels. Ephemeral streams typically drain sub basins of under 20 acres, have slopes of less than 10 percent as measured laterally from the stream thread and often traverse surficially with no recognizable drainage channel. 

Erosion. The process in which, by the actions of wind or water, soil particles are displaced and transported.

Erosion control, post-construction. The reestablishment of groundcover or landscaping prior to the removal of temporary erosion control measures.

Erosion prevention and sediment control. Measures that are required for construction sites where the ground surface will be disturbed with clearing, grading, fills, excavations, and other construction activities, in order to prevent and/or control eroded material and sediment from leaving the construction site and entering the City storm system and/or a water quality resource area.

Erosion, visible or measurable. Visible or measurable erosion includes, but is not limited to: deposits of mud, dirt, sediment, or similar material, exceeding one-half cubic foot in volume on public or private streets, adjacent property, or into the storm and surface water system, either by direct deposit, dropping discharge, or as a result of the action of erosion; evidence of concentrated flows of water over bare soils, turbid or sediment-laden flows, or evidence of on-site erosion such as rivulets on bare soil slopes where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on the site; and/or earth slides, mudflows, earth sloughing, or other earth movement that leaves the property. 

Expedited land division. A type of land division application for subdivision or partitioning of land for residential development that meets all of the definitional requirements of expedited land division, as defined by ORS 197.360. 

Extended-hour businesses. Businesses which are open to the public 17 or more hours a day on any given day of the week, or open between midnight and 6:00 a.m., including, but not limited to: eating and drinking establishments, convenience sales and personal services, drive-through restaurants, amusement enterprises, food and beverage retail sales, and general retail sales.

Fact-finding body. A body sitting for the purpose of determining the facts. The decision of the body is not discretionary.

Family. Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship; or a group of not more than five persons all or part of whom are not so related by blood or marriage living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

Family day care. Duties and rules of the Office of Child Care are identified in ORS 329A.010 through 329A.030. A certified family child care home or registered family child care home is identified in ORS 329A.250 and considered a residential use pursuant to ORS 329A.440; the use is defined as:

Certified Family Child Care Home. A certified family child care home, usually the provider’s home, providing child care for a maximum of 12 children (16 children with prior approval by the Office of Child Care). The provider’s own children are included in the determination of caregiver/child ratio and group size. A city may impose zoning conditions on the establishment and maintenance of a certified family child care home in an area zoned for residential or commercial use if the conditions are no more restrictive than conditions imposed on other residential dwellings in the same zone.

Registered Family Child Care Home. A child care facility in the provider’s home. The child care business holding a registration with the Office of Child Care may care for a maximum of 10 children, including the provider’s own children. Of the 10 children:

1.    No more than six may be younger than school age; and

2.    No more than two may be 24 months of age or younger.

A city may impose zoning conditions on the establishment and maintenance of a registered family child care home in an area zoned for residential or commercial use if the conditions are no more restrictive than conditions imposed on other residential dwellings in the same zone.

Fee simple. Land which is owned, typically by the owner of the house or building that occupies the land.

Fence. A vertical barrier for the purpose of screening, security and/or property delineation.

Fill. Placement of any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris and refuse, or any other material, organic or inorganic.

Final action, final decision, or final order. A determination reduced to writing, signed and filed under CDC 99.110(F) by the appropriate approval authority.

Financial and insurance. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial, insurance, or securities brokerage services. Typical uses include: banks, savings and loans, or insurance agencies.

Findings. A written statement of the facts determined at a public hearing. The findings are applied to the relevant approval criteria or standards by the approval authority as the basis for making its decision.

Flag lot. A lot complying with all other provisions of the Community Development Code which does not meet the minimum street frontage requirement of 35 feet, and which gains access to the public right-of-way via an access strip no less than 15 feet in width.

FLOODPLAIN DEFINITIONS.

Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone as seen on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.

Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equated or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V.

Base flood elevation. The base flood elevation is the elevation (normally in feet above sea level) which the base flood is expected to reach.

Below-grade crawlspace. An enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lower adjacent exterior grade. The height of the crawlspace, as measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, may not exceed four feet at any point.

Design flood elevation. The elevation of the 100-year storm as defined in FEMA Flood Insurance Studies or, in areas without FEMA floodplains, the elevation of the 25-year storm, or the edge of mapped floodprone soils or similar methodologies.

FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). The agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood Insurance Study. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

Flood management areas. All lands contained in the Flood Management Area Overlay Zone, which include: lands within the 100-year floodplain, flood area, and floodway as shown on the FEMA flood insurance map dated June 17, 2008; the area of inundation for the February 1996 flood; and lands which have documented evidence of flooding.

Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood, base. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

Floodplain. Land subject to periodic flooding, including the 100-year floodplain as mapped by FEMA Flood Insurance Studies or other substantial evidence of actual flood events.

Floodway. The portion of a watercourse required for the passage or conveyance of a given storm event as identified and designated by the City. The floodway includes the channel of the watercourse and the adjacent floodplain that must be reserved in an unobstructed condition in order to discharge the base flood.

Floodway fringe. The area of the floodplain, lying outside the floodway, which does not contribute appreciably to the passage of floodwater, but serves as a retention area.

Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Chapter 27 CDC.

Floor area. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. Attic spaces and unfinished basements shall not count for the purpose of determining parking requirements.

Floor area ratio (FAR). The FAR is that percentage of the total lot size that can be built as habitable space. A FAR of 0.45 means that the square footage of the lot is multiplied by 0.45 to yield the total habitable square footage of the house including accessory dwelling units. For example, on a 10,000-square-foot lot, an FAR of 0.45 will allow a 4,500-square-foot house (10,000 X 0.45 = 4,500). The FAR does not include or apply to attached garages. The FAR does not apply to detached garages, accessory dwelling units and accessory structures except that these detached structures may not individually exceed the height or square footage of the principal dwelling. The FAR does not include basement areas that average less than 50 percent of the basement perimeter exposed above grade. Uninhabitable space such as crawlspaces, attics, and spaces designed under the Flood Management Area Permit program to allow the passage of floodwaters are also exempt.

 

	
[IMAGE]
	FAR applied to a 10,000-square-foot lot yields a 4,500-square-foot house. The bigger the lot, the bigger the house. FAR excludes attached garage, detached garages and accessory structures, uninhabitable spaces, basements predominantly below grade, and spaces required to meet Flood Management Permit standards. 

Accessory structures cannot exceed the height or square footage of the principal dwelling.

	
[IMAGE]
	Basements are exempt from FAR if less than 50 percent of basement is exposed above grade.

 

Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.


[IMAGE]


Type I and II lands are excluded from FAR calculations. But the property owner is guaranteed at least a FAR of 0.30 (30 percent) for the total site including Type I and II lands.

Food and beverage retail sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food and beverages for home consumption. Typical uses include: groceries, delicatessens, or liquor stores, and excludes eating and drinking establishments.

Frontage. Property abutting on a street.

Frontage road. A minor street parallel and adjacent to arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.

Functions and values. Ecological functions describe the numerous functions that WRAs perform including water quality improvement, floodwater storage, terrestrial or aquatic habitat, aquifer recharge, etc. WRA values express the relative efficacy of the resource in meeting specific functions. 

Gangway/Ramp. A variably sloped structure intended to provide pedestrian access from the shore to a dock.

General retail services. The sale or rental of commonly used goods, and merchandise for personal or household use, but excludes those classified as agricultural sales, animal sales and services, automotive and equipment, business equipment sales and service, construction sales and services, food and beverage retail sales, and vehicle fuel sales. Typical uses include: department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, pet stores or book stores.

Glare. Light that causes visual discomfort or disability, and the wattage and/or light distribution is excessive for the purposes for which the illumination is necessary.

Grade. The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.

Grade, street. The slope of a road, street, other public way, or sidewalk specified in terms of percentage of slope.

Ground disturbing activity. Any activity that exposes soil through the use of motorized equipment.

Group residential. The residential occupancy of living units by groups of more than five persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and where communal kitchen/dining facilities are provided. Typical uses include occupancy of retirement homes, boarding houses, cooperatives, and halfway houses, but excluding residential facility and residential home as specified below. 

Habitable floor. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor.

Habitat conservation areas (HCA). Areas identified on the Habitat Conservation Areas Map and subject to the standards found in Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection.

Habitat Conservation Areas Map (“HCA Map”). A map adopted by the Metro Council September 29, 2005, amended December 8, 2005, and which was incorporated into the CDC by the West Linn City Council on September 25, 2008. The HCA Map, as amended by the City, serves as the official map used by the City to determine the location and designations of Habitat Conservation Areas regulated under Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection.

Heliport. A place specially designed and used for the landing and take-off of helicopters.

HISTORIC DEFINITIONS. The following terms and phrases shall have the meanings given to them below with regard to Chapter 25 CDC, Historic Resources:

Addition. Expansion or physical modification of the exterior of a historic resource that includes the expansion of the building footprint. Additions do not include painting and color selection or ordinary maintenance or repair of the resource. 

Alteration. Physical modification of the exterior of a historic resource that does not include an expansion of the building footprint. Partial demolition of a structure is an alteration. Alterations do not include painting and color selection or ordinary maintenance or repair of the resource.

Building. A structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 

Demolition. The entire removal of a structure. Demolition of a portion of a structure is an alteration.

Demolition by neglect. The gradual deterioration of a building when routine or major maintenance is not performed. This includes any structural deficiency or a deficiency in a building part, which when left unrepaired could lead to deterioration of the building’s structural frame and/or if it is open to entry by vandals or vagrants.

Eligible contributing. A building, structure, object, or site originally constructed within the applicable period of significance that retains and exhibits sufficient integrity (location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. 

Historic district. A geographically definable area containing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development, and listed as a historic district in the National Register or designated as a local historic district by the City Council. A historic district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. 

Historic landmark. A building, structure, site, or object listed individually on the National Register or designated as a local historic landmark by the City Council. 

Historic preservation. Preservation, restoration, or rehabilitation of a historic resource. 

Historic resource. A historic landmark or historic district listed on the National Register or designated as a local historic landmark or historic district by the City Council. 

National Register of Historic Places. The nation’s official list of buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts important in the nation’s history and maintained by the National Park Service in Washington, D.C., and hereinafter referred to as the “National Register.”

Non-contributing. A building, structure, object, or site originally constructed within the applicable period of significance that does not retain or exhibit sufficient integrity (due to its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association) to convey a sense of history. These properties do not strengthen the historic integrity of an existing or potential historic district in their current condition.

Not in period. A building, structure, object, or site that was originally constructed outside a historic district’s applicable period of significance. 

Not in period compatible. A building, structure, object or site built after the period of significance with a degree of craftsmanship that is compatible with the architecture of the district.

Not in period noncompatible. A building, structure, object or site built after the period of significance that is generally incompatible with the architecture of the district.

Object. A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 

Original. A component that was constructed on or added to the building during the period of significance. 

Period of significance. The dates stated in the official designation of a historic district that identify the period or periods of time when the geographic area attained the characteristics which qualify it for designation as a historic district.

Primary facade. That part of a historic resource where the main entry is located. On a corner lot each wall fronting a street shall be considered a primary facade. 

Primary structure. The principal structure on a site, typically a residence or a commercial building.

Property pending designation. A building, structure, site, or object for which a formal application for local historic designation has been initiated, or for which an application has been submitted to the State Historic Preservation Office for nomination to the National Register, or a building, structure, site, or object within a proposed historic district for which a formal application for historic designation has been submitted, but which has not yet been reviewed by the Keeper of the National Register, or has been reviewed by the Keeper and determined to be “eligible.” 

Rehabilitation. The process of returning a historic resource to a state of utility through repair, alterations, and additions, which makes possible an efficient use while preserving those portions or features of the historic resource that convey its historic significance. 

Site. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 

Visible. The resource or a portion of the resource that can be seen from the public right-of-way. For example, typically the primary facade of a historic resource can be seen from the public right-of-way.

Home occupation. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident’s dwelling unit. Standards for home occupations are set forth in Chapter 37 CDC. 

Horticulture. The cultivation of plants, garden crops, trees and/or nursery stock.

Hospitals. An institution where the ill or injured may receive medical, surgical or psychiatric treatment; and nursing, food and lodging during their stay.

Hotel/motel. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of lodging on a temporary basis with incidental food, drink, and other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests. 

Household hazardous waste depot. A depot intended to receive, classify, then transfer elsewhere hazardous wastes that are typically found in a household such as paint, motor oil, household cleaners and solvents, etc. 

Implementing ordinance. An ordinance adopted to carry out the Comprehensive Plan.

Initial hearing body. The decision-making body that renders the first decision in a land use case or legislative hearing.

Intentional. To act with a conscious objective to cause the result achieved or to engage in the conduct.

Intermittent streams. A stream that flows only during certain times of the year when it receives water from springs or surface sources such as precipitation. The term may be restricted to a stream that flows continuously during periods of at least one month; also may be a stream that does not flow continuously as when water losses from evaporation or seepage exceed the available stream flow. For the purpose of this code, intermittent and perennial streams are protected identically. 

Intersection. A place where a street and access point adjoin each other.

Joint-use boat docks. These structures are designed for, and shall be used exclusively by, two or more riverfront property owners. Typically, two adjacent riverfront property owners share the joint dock. Owners of non-riverfront property may be co-applicants for a joint boat dock.

Knowing. To act with an awareness of the action committed.

Landscaping. An area covered by grass, trees, bushes, and other vegetative material. Bark mulch may only be allowed when trees, plants, or shrubs are planted in that area so that the drip line of the trees and shrubs covers 75 percent of the bark mulch, or can be expected to do so within two growing cycles or years. Patio areas, decks and walkways may only comprise 25 percent of the landscaped area. Walkways and sidewalks not adjacent to vegetative landscaped areas cannot be considered to be part of the landscaping.

Large wood (recruitment). Large wood comprises trees that have fallen down in the WRA due to chronic mortality, disease, windstorms, landslides, erosion, flooding, etc., which in turn may provide aquatic and terrestrial habitat opportunities, modify stream velocities, channel depths and flow patterns and stabilize banks in the WRA. “Large wood recruitment” describes forested WRAs of sufficient size that have the potential to supply these trees which ultimately become “large wood.”

Laundry services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as “personal services.” Typical uses include: commercial laundry agencies, diaper services, or linen supply services, but excluding laundromats and dry cleaners.

Legislative. Any proposed action which would result in a change in City policy including:

1.    A change to the Comprehensive Plan text.

2.    A change to the Comprehensive Plan Map which involves a number of lots or parcels of land.

3.    A change to the text of an implementing ordinance.

4.    A change to the zoning map which involves a number of lots or parcels of land.

5.    A change to any land use plan or map which represents a change in City land use policy.

Limited duration. A temporary ground disturbing activity where water quality standards may be violated briefly, but not of sufficient duration to cause acute or chronic effects on beneficial uses.

Loading space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot, or parcel, with a building or use, or contiguous to a group of buildings or uses, for the temporary parking of a vehicle which is loading or unloading persons, merchandise, or materials, and which space or berth abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access or egress.

Local street. A street which functions primarily to provide access to abutting land, serving local traffic movements and not intended to accommodate through traffic.

Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly. Meetings and activities primarily conducted for the members of a particular group. Excluded from this use type are uses classified as “group residential,” “residential care facilities,” “senior centers,” and “transient lodging.” Typical uses include meeting places for civic clubs, community centers, lodges, or fraternal or veteran organizations.

Lot. 

1.    A single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.

2.    As a general term (lot) is retained to define characteristics or dimensional attributes of a lot or parcel (i.e., flag lot, lot area, lot coverage, lot line).

Lot area. The total area of a unit of land measured in a horizontal plane within the property lines exclusive of public and private roads, and easements of access to other property or the private driveway area of a flag lot.

Lot, coverage. The area covered by a building or buildings, expressed as a percentage of the total land area. For residential uses, these buildings shall include the principal residence or house, any accessory dwelling unit, and accessory structures requiring a building permit.

Lot, depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines.

Lot, double-frontage. A unit of land having frontage on two streets.

Lot line. The property line bounding a lot.

Lot line, front. 

1.    The lot line(s) common to the lot and a street (other than an alley) that separates the lot from the street.

2.    For a corner lot, the shortest lot line along a street (other than an alley) that separates the lot from the street, or as determined by the City.

Lot line, rear. 

1.    A line separating one lot from another on the opposite side of the lot from the front lot line.

2.    For a corner lot, the line opposite the front lot line, as determined by the City.

Lot line, side. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. An interior side lot line is a lot line separating more than one lot, or separating a lot and an alley. An exterior side lot line is a lot line separating a lot and a street other than an alley.

Lot of record. A unit of land created as follows:

1.    A lot in an existing, duly recorded subdivision;

2.    A parcel in an existing, duly recorded major or minor land partition;

3.    An existing unit of land for which a survey has been duly filed which conformed to all applicable regulations at the time of filing; or

4.    Any unit of land created prior to zoning and partitioning regulations by deed or metes and bounds description, and recorded with the County Clerk.

Lot width. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the building line.

Manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale. Small scale manufacturing use, limited to 5,000 square feet of building area, and commonly associated with general retail services where products are sold on site.

Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.

Manufactured home park or subdivision. Two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale or a subdivision pursuant to ORS 92.830 to 92.845.

Manufacturing of finished products (heavy industrial). Manufacturing, processing, or assembling of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials.

Manufacturing of finished products (light industrial). The manufacturing of finished products from previously prepared material (excluding raw materials).

Massing. The overall size and shape of a structure or building.

Maximum disturbed area (MDA). The MDA, as measured in square feet, is the maximum area within a WRA that can be disturbed in hardship cases under Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection. 

Medical and dental services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention, diagnosis and treatment (including outpatient surgery), or rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, nurses, and other health personnel as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services, but excludes those classified as any civic use or group residential use types. Typical uses include: medical offices, eye care offices, dental offices and laboratories, or health maintenance organizations. 

Minor modification. A change in the approved design that is equal to or less than a 10 percent increase in the length, width or height of the facility. A change of location by under 20 feet laterally for any part of the structure, ramp, dock, etc., also constitutes a minor modification.

Mitigation. Mitigation is creating, restoring or enhancing WRAs (including wetlands) to replace or compensate for the WRA lost. Creation entails constructing a WRA in an area that never supported WRAs historically. Restoration entails re-establishing WRA hydrology and vegetation to sites that have lost most of their function and value such as a site that was historically a WRA but dried out by draining or filling. Enhancement entails improving an existing but degraded WRA by correcting the conditions that cause it to be degraded. This might include providing more water to the site or the removal of invasive plant species and replacement with appropriate native plant material and trees. 

Mixed use development. A combination of different types of uses that are complementary and integrated. This refers to allowing residential and businesses to be located in the same area (e.g., apartments over shops or other businesses or apartments adjacent to grocery stores or other commercial establishments).

Mulch. Application of plant residue, netting, plastic, sheeting or other suitable materials to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in establishing plant cover. Plastic mulch may be used only temporarily, during construction activities.

Multiple family residential units. A structure containing three or more attached dwelling units in any vertical or horizontal arrangement.

Native vegetation. Any vegetation native to the Portland metropolitan area or listed on the Metro Native Plant list as adopted by Metro Council resolution.

Natural resource. A functioning natural system such as a wetland or stream.

Natural resource area. The land containing the natural resource to be protected.

Negotiate. Any activity preliminary to the execution of a binding agreement for the sale of land in a subdivision or partition, including but not limited to advertising, solicitation, and promotion of the sale of such land.

New construction. Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this code.

Non-conforming lot. A lot or parcel which does not meet the requirements of the applicable zone in terms of required area, width, or depth.

Non-conforming structure or use. A lawful existing structure or use, at the time the ordinance codified in this title or any amendment thereto becomes effective, which does not conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located.

Non-conforming use of land. A lawful use of land which existed prior to the effective date of this code where the use involves no structure or building other than a single minor accessory structure of sign(s) and which would not be permitted by the applicable regulations of this code.

Nursery. The propagation of trees, shrubs, vines or flowering plants for transplanting, sale, or for grafting or budding; planting of seeds or cuttings; grafting and budding one variety on another; spraying and dusting of plants to control insects and diseases, and buying and selling the above plant stock at wholesale or retail. Seasonal labor may be employed. The term “nursery” contemplates the sale of products of the nursery. The conduct of a nursery business presumes parking places for these functions. However, the use does not include the business of manufacturing and selling products composed of raw materials purchased off the premises. Plant-related products manufactured elsewhere may be resold on the premises.

Nursing home. A home, place or institution, or part thereof, in which convalescent and/or chronic care is rendered to two or more patients in exchange for compensation. Convalescent and/or chronic care includes, but is not limited to, the procedures commonly employed in nursing and caring for the sick; persons who are acutely ill or are surgical or maternity cases are excluded; qualified personnel and a consulting physician are available at all times; and isolation facilities are provided.

ODFW. Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife.

Open space. Land that is undeveloped and that is planned to remain so indefinitely. The term encompasses parks, forests, and farm land. It may also refer only to land zoned as being available to the public, including playgrounds, watershed preserves, and parks.

Ordinary high water (OHW) mark (or “line”). The line on the bank or shore to which the water ordinarily rises in season. Also known as OHWM.

Ordinary low water (OLW) mark (or “line”). The line on the bank or shore to which the water ordinarily recedes in season. Also known as OLWM.

Owner. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property.

Packaging and processing. The production, processing, assembling, packaging, or treatment of products from previously processed materials; or production, processing, assembling, and packaging of finished products from previously prepared materials.

Parcel. A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

Parking facilities. Parking services involving garages and lots, and may exclude required parking lots within the same lot of record of a particular development or use.

Parking space. A space as defined by the standards set forth in Chapter 46 CDC.

Parkway (parking strip). That portion of street right-of-way lying between the curb line of the improved roadway and the adjacent private property line.

Participant sports and recreation. Establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of sports or recreation by and for participants. Any spectators would be incidental and on a non-recurring basis. The following are participant sports and recreation use types:

Participant sports and recreation, indoor. Those uses conducted totally within an enclosed building. Typical uses include: indoor tennis courts, racketball courts, swimming pools, or physical fitness centers.

Participant sports and recreation, outdoor. Those uses conducted in open facilities. Typical uses include: driving ranges, miniature golf courses, tennis courts or swimming pools. 

Partition. Either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned.

Partition land. To divide land to create not more than three parcels of land within a calendar year.

Party. A person who has the right to pursue appeal or review of a decision of an approval authority.

Passive-oriented parks. Passive-oriented parks are more natural sites that provide trail-related recreation opportunities and passive outdoor activities such as wildlife watching, nature interpretation and picnicking. Accessory uses can also be (but not limited to) provided in this type of park, such as picnic areas, nature play features, trailheads, and environmental education facilities, provided they are accessory to the park’s passive uses. Amenities should be limited to those appropriate for the numbers and types of visitors the area can accommodate, while retaining its resource value, natural character, and the intended level of solitude.

Pedestrian way. A right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.

Permeable parking surface. A parking surface with proper base and subgrade preparation designed to incorporate pervious areas into paving systems, using either concrete or plastic products. A 100 percent gravel parking surface does not qualify as a permeable parking surface.

Permit. An official document issued by the City of West Linn authorizing performance of a specified activity.

Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

Personal service facilities. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services. It includes uses such as photography studios, barbershops, salons, and fitness studios.

Petition for review. A review of a land use decision made by the Planning Commission or Hearings Officer.

Pilings. Plastic, wood, steel, or composite poles that are driven into, or otherwise attached to, the river bed to hold a dock in place or to support a pier.

Plat. The final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision which the subdivider submits for approval and intends in final form to record.

Postal services. Mailing services and processing as traditionally operated or leased by the United States Postal Service, United Parcel Service and other postal services. 

Potentially severe erosion hazard area. Surface areas where erosion can be easily caused by removal of vegetation cover, stripping topsoil or by placement of fill, whether by natural causes such as streams or surface runoff or by development activities. The placement of any new fill or severe cuts in such an area shall be considered as creating a potentially severe erosion hazard.

Potentially severe landslide hazard area. Areas where earth movement or failure, such as slumps, mud flows, debris slides, rock falls or soil falls, is likely to occur as a result of development activities. These activities include excavation which removes support of soils by changes in runoff, or groundwater flow or vibration loading such as pile driving or blasting.

Practicable. Available and capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purpose.

Pre-application conference. A meeting between City staff and a prospective applicant, who is not necessarily the property owner but has the written permission of the property owner to schedule the conference, prior to the submittal of an application for a development permit.

Preference rights. The preference rights area represents the water surface that is allocated to each riverfront property owner by the Department of State Lands (DSL). Starting with the center thread of the river, DSL extends lines at right angles from that thread towards the OHW mark of the respective properties along the shoreline. (Because the thread of the river twists and turns, the line extending to shore can vary also in its angle.) The area within the preference rights area that the applicant may place their water-dependent structure (e.g., dock) is called the authorized area. (Also see “Authorized area” definition.)


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Previously disturbed areas (PDA). Areas, such as old driveways, trails, gardens, graded areas, old abandoned structural foundations, storm water outfalls and intakes, manholes, utilities, etc. that existed and were altered or modified before January 1, 2006, typically as a result of clearing, grubbing, grading, excavation or construction whereby the topography, ground cover and vegetation have been modified from their original or natural state and not re-established or returned to their natural state. The burden shall be on the applicant to date the PDA through photographs or other credible evidence. The PDA definition applies to Chapter 32 CDC and is distinct and separate from temporarily disturbed areas (TDAs) and maximum disturbed areas (MDAs).

Principal structure. The structure that represents the main use of the property; to which all other structures on the property serve an incidental or subordinate purpose. 

Private railed launch facilities. These are rail lines that usually extend from an on-shore boat storage facility above OHW, across the beach and into the water below OLW for the purpose of launching a boat.

Private street. An accessway which is under private ownership.

Professional and administrative services. Offices of private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provision of professional, executive, management, or administrative offices, legal offices, architectural or engineering firms, or real estate firms.

Property line. The division line between two units of land.

Property line adjustment. The relocation or elimination of all or a portion of the common property line between abutting properties that does not create an additional lot or parcel.

Protected water feature. A wetland identified in the West Linn Local Wetlands Inventory or any major or minor open channel drainageway identified by the most recently adopted West Linn Surface Water Management Plan, except for small manmade open roadside drainage swales in residential areas, or any drainage course identified by the West Linn Riparian Corridor Inventory as significant (not including the Willamette or Tualatin Rivers).

Protection area. Collective term to describe areas within the Willamette River Greenway boundary and/or Tualatin River Protection Area boundary.

Public right-of-way. The area between the boundary lines of a street, pedestrian way or bicycle path.

Public safety facilities. Providing protection pursuant to fire, life, and safety code sections together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations, police stations, and ambulance services.

Public support facilities. Public services that deal directly with citizens, to include meeting and hearing rooms, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles, and exclude commercial use type “professional and administrative services.” Typical use types are associated with governmental offices. 

Quasi-judicial action. An action which involves the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or amendment, as provided in this chapter.

Reasonable use. Uses, similar in size, intensity and type, to uses allowed on other properties in the City, that have the same zoning designation as the subject property. 

Recreational vehicle. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Recycle collection center (civic). A place where recyclable materials are deposited by the residents and sorted for transport to processing plants. Yard debris depots shall also fall into this classification. (Yard debris is organic material: leaves, grass clippings, weeds, etc.) 

Recycling collection center (commercial). A facility where glass, cans, and papers, or similar recyclable materials are collected for the purpose of being transferred to a paper salvage or recycling facility.

Religious institutions. A building constructed or utilized primarily for worship, together with its accessory uses, and buildings where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is controlled by a religious body organized to sustain worship.

Remodeling. The alteration of the physical condition of more than 50 percent of the floor area of an existing structure. Remodeling does not include normal maintenance or repair.

Research services. Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature which is generally provided as a service or which is conducted by and for a private firm, but excludes medical testing and analysis. Typical uses include: electronics research laboratories, environmental research and development firms, or pharmaceutical research labs.

Residential facility. A facility licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources under ORS 443.400 to 443.460 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training, or a combination thereof, for six to 15 individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet Department of Human Resources licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility. 

Residential home. A home licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources under ORS 443.400 to 443.825 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training, or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. This definition includes facilities categorized as “adult foster homes” under ORS 443.700 to 443.825. Staff persons required to meet the Department of Human Resources licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home.

Restoration. The process of returning a disturbed or altered area or feature to a previously existing natural condition. Restoration activities reestablish the structure, function, and/or diversity to that which occurred prior to impacts caused by human activity.

Review. A request that a final decision by the initial approval authority be considered by a higher authority as set forth in Chapter 99 CDC.

Riparian. Those areas associated with streams, lakes, and wetlands where vegetation communities are predominately influenced by their association with water.

Riparian corridor. Any area within and adjacent to a WRA on the West Linn WRA Map for its vegetative, forested and habitat values.

Riparian vegetation. Plants native to the riparian areas.

Roadway. The portion of a street right-of-way developed for vehicular traffic.

Rough proportionality. The allowed relationship between an exaction imposed to comply with a City code standard and the impact of the proposed development that is alleviated through imposition of the exaction. The measure of rough proportionality involves the following steps:

1.    Identify the public problem caused or exacerbated by the proposed development which the proposed exaction is designed to address.

2.    Measure the impact of the proposed development upon the identified public problem.

3.    Analyze how the proposed exaction solves or alleviates the identified public problem.

4.    Analyze the proportionality of the proposed exaction to that part of the problem created or exacerbated by the proposed development.

Routine repair and maintenance. Activities directed at preserving an existing allowed use or facility, without expanding the development footprint or site use.

Schools. Public, private or parochial place or institution for teaching or learning. Typical uses include elementary, junior and senior high schools and related uses; excluding trade and business schools and colleges.

Scrap operations, salvage. Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling, or processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original form. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk yards, or paper salvage yards. 

Sediment. Any organic or mineral material that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by water, wind, or gravity as a product of erosion.

Senior center. Facility that provides meetings and activity space primarily for senior citizens. Ancillary uses that support the senior center are also permitted. 

Senior citizen/handicapped housing facilities. Living facilities which provide living units, congregate dining, recreational facilities and other services and requiring 24-hour staffing assistance.

Sidewalk. A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing built to City standards.

SIGN DEFINITIONS. The following terms and phrases shall have the meanings given to them below with regard to Chapter 52 CDC, Signs:

Billboard sign. A freestanding sign in excess of the maximum size allowed for freestanding signs.

Building face. The area of a single side of a structure used for computing allowable signage for that structure. More specifically, the building face is the height from grade to the roof eaves multiplied by the width of all walls facing the same direction on a single side of a structure. See illustration below.


[IMAGE]


Note: For angled walls, walls cannot be double counted. In other words, to calculate the building face of side “C,” you would add C+C+(C or B), while side “B” would then consist of B+(A or B) only. 

Business. A commercial, office, or industrial development of one or more buildings on one or more tax lots in which there may be shared facilities such as parking, pedestrian mall, or common ownership of real property upon which the development is located.

Business center. A commercial or industrial area planned and built as a unit containing two or more commercial or industrial establishments on a fully developed site of four acres or more in size, associated by common agreement or under common ownership, which comprise a single commercial or industrial unit with common parking, limited access, and a minimum frontage of 200 lineal feet. A large independent store or business on a fully developed site greater than 10 acres in size may also be considered as a shopping center for the purpose of outdoor advertising.

City sign. Signs which are erected and maintained by the City. This shall include temporary signs which are specifically approved by the City for placement in the public right-of-way in accordance with a resolution adopted pursuant to CDC 52.109(D).

Clear vision area. An area of unobstructed visibility which must be maintained for corner lots and driveways as specified in CDC 42.050. See illustration below.


[IMAGE]


Copy area. The smallest rectangular area which encompasses a business logogram or message. This is used to compute the sign area for, among others, channelized letter signs. The copy area for backlit awning signs shall consist of the area which is illuminated. Depending on the emphasis of the sign structure, the materials on which the sign is placed may be included in the copy area calculations. See illustration below.


[IMAGE]


Double-faced signs. Signs which have only two sign surfaces back to back. Allowable sign square footage applies to only one side of double-faced signs. 

Grade. For the purpose of establishing the height of freestanding signs, the centerline of the nearest street shall be considered grade. The height of all signs mounted on a building shall be measured from the same point considered to be the grade of the building.

Incombustible material. Flame-resistant material as defined in the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 43, Fire-Resistive Standards.

Maintain. To permit a sign, sign structure, or part thereof to continue; or to repair or refurbish a sign, sign structure, or part thereof.

Projecting sign. A double-faced sign which projects more than 18 inches from the building wall to which it is attached.

Sign. Any description, words, numbers, or illustration, which is affixed directly or indirectly upon a building, vehicle, structure, or land, which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business, and which is visible from any public street, waterway, alley, or private area open to public vehicular travel. National flags and flags of political subdivisions shall not be construed as signs. See illustration below.


[IMAGE]


Sign base. The structure beneath a freestanding sign which houses the upright supports for that sign.

Sign face or faceplate. The material on which a design, message, or logogram is printed or otherwise affixed. “Faceplate change” includes any change to an existing sign display.

Sign structure. The supports, braces, and framework of the sign.

Sign, A-frame. A temporary, freestanding, and portable form of advertising, also known as a sandwich board. 

Sign, attached. A sign which is mounted to the walls of a building and may either be flat against or projecting from the wall.

Sign, awning. A sign painted, stamped, perforated, stitched, or otherwise applied on the valance of an awning.

Sign, changeable copy. A sign designed such that the copy can be readily altered as described below:

Changeable copy sign (automatic). A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lampbank or through mechanical means; e.g., electronic or electrical time and temperature units.

Changeable copy sign (manual). A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field; e.g., readerboards with changeable letters.

Sign, electric. Any sign containing electrical wiring but does not include signs illuminated by an exterior floodlight source.

Sign, entryway. A freestanding sign placed at the entry to a commercial or industrial property that does not exceed 30 inches in height above grade and does not obstruct vision of motorists at driveway or street intersections.

Sign, freestanding. A sign which is ground-supported only and has no support other than one or more columns placed on a foundation designed to withstand the maximum movement developed by the sign in high wind without lateral bracing or support. Right-of-way setback distance to freestanding signs is measured to the closest part of the sign and/or support structures to the right-of-way. 

Sign, freeway-oriented. A sign primarily designed to be read by a motorist traveling on a highway designated by the Oregon State Highway Department as a freeway or expressway; specifically, this shall be Interstate 205 and shall not include Highway 43.

Sign, illuminated. A sign which uses a light source to make recognizable its message or image in darkness. This definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs as well as reflectorized, glowing, or radiating signs.

Sign, marquee. Any sign affixed to or constructed in a permanent roofed structure projecting over a pedestrian or vehicular travel way from the side of a building.

Sign, non-conforming. Any sign lawfully installed prior to the effective date of this code, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not meet the current applicable standards for compliance.

Sign, permanent. A sign constructed of durable materials such as wood, plastic, or metal which can withstand the deteriorating effects of weathering (e.g., tearing, cracking, peeling, warping) for a period of not less than six years. See illustration for “Sign.”

Sign, roof. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.

Sign, subdivision monument. A sign at the entry to a subdivision on land owned by the homeowners association or the developer. 

Sign, Sunday. A temporary A-frame sign allowed within City right-of-way on Sundays, subject to the requirements of CDC 52.109(E). 

Sign, temporary. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. See illustration below.


[IMAGE]


Single-faced signs. Signs which have one advertising surface and only one side is visible to public right-of-way or private areas open to public vehicular travel, though not always placed flat against the surface of a wall.

Total sign area. The accumulated amount of signage from several locations. Total allowable sign area may normally be divided among two or more signs. 

Wall sign (flat). A sign which is painted or which is attached so its surface is parallel with the mounting wall and is readable from one side only.

Significant tree. A tree is determined to be significant by the City Arborist based on its size, health, species, location, proximity to other significant trees, and other characteristics.

Single-family attached residential units. Two dwelling units attached side by side with some structural parts in common at a common property line on separate lots or parcels.

Single-family detached residential units. One dwelling unit, freestanding and structurally separated from other dwelling units or buildings, located on a lot or parcel.

Slope. Measurement of the deviation of a non-level land feature from the horizontal, measured as a percent calculated as maximum rise divided by minimum horizontal run. Example: a rise of one foot divided by a run of 10 feet equals slope of 10 percent. Slope shall be measured in intervals corresponding with slope analysis requirements in the Community Development Code. Slope shall be measured at a right angle from the mapped elevation interval lines.

Slope determination (for WRAs). Slope (e.g., rise over run) is the average slope in the first 50 feet as measured at right angle from the OHW mark, the edge of bankfull stage or outer edge of wetland.

Soil infiltration. The process by which water on the surface enters the soil and replenishes below ground water tables. 

Start of construction. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a structure (other than manufactured home) without a basement or poured footings, the “start of construction” includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure, or any part thereof, on its piling or foundation. For manufactured homes not within a manufactured home subdivision, “start of construction” means the affixing of the manufactured home to its permanent site. For manufactured homes within manufactured home subdivisions, “start of construction” is the date on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed.

Stealth designs. The use of structures, etc., to accommodate and conceal a WCF, particularly as it may be seen from the adjoining right-of-way. An example would be the use of a cupola or clock tower to hide a WCF. Stealth designs can be either inside or outside a building.

Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or unused under floor space is more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter, or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement or unused under floor space shall be considered as a story.

Story, first. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor shall be classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more than four feet below grade, as defined herein, for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter, or more than eight feet below grade, as defined herein, at any point.

Story, half. A story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story.

Stream. A body of water with a current or flow confined within the OHW mark or the edge of bankfull stage. (See also ephemeral stream or water resource.)

Stream centerline or thread. The starting point of measurement for ephemeral streams which often lack an identifiable bankfull stage or OHW mark.

Street. A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, and the placement of utilities and including the terms “road,” “highway,” “lane,” “avenue,” “alley,” “place,” “court,” “way,” “circle,” “drive,” or similar designations.

Stripping. Any activity which disturbs vegetated or otherwise stable soil surface, including clearing and grubbing operations.

Structure. Anything built or constructed.

Subdivide land. To divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.

Subdivision. Either an act of subdividing land or an area or a tract of land subdivided as defined in this chapter.

Substantial construction. An approved application shall have undertaken substantial construction when any of the following have taken place: utilities have been installed to serve the project; approved grading has been undertaken representing at least 25 percent of all the required preliminary grading; foundation excavation has occurred; foundation or building construction has occurred; street improvements are being installed; or a major physical improvement, required as part of the approved permit, has clearly begun. Substantial construction is not satisfied by simply having approved pre-construction plans or building permits, or by site clearing and grubbing. Actual physical improvements as identified above must have taken place. 

Substantial damage. Within the flood management area, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 

Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.

Super stores. Large box-like or monolithic retail and associated commercial use structures of 40,000 square feet or more in size. Stores over 40,000 square feet that are broken up into separate and distinct architectural buildings or separate and distinct elements, but still under the same ownership or operated by the same company, are also defined as super stores. 

Temporarily disturbed areas (TDA). Area impacted by clearing, grubbing, grading, excavation, storage of building materials, building equipment, construction activity or other temporary activity whereby the area is modified from its original state but is subsequently fully restored in terms of soil character and grades and re-vegetated. TDAs will not have any new structures or other physical improvements built on them, but they may have buried utilities approved consistent with Chapter 32 CDC. The TDA definition is distinct and separate from disturbed areas, PDAs and MDAs. TDAs shall not include significant trees or wetlands that cannot be replicated in a timely way through restoration. 

Temporary use. A use which, by its nature, will last under two years, with the exception of drop boxes and structures/trailers serving a similar function and construction related uses and facilities. Examples of temporary uses include, but are not limited to: uses associated with the sale of goods for a specific holiday, activity or celebration, such as the sale of Christmas trees and fireworks; uses associated with construction; seasonal uses, such as the sale of fresh fruits, produce, and flowers; uses associated with festivals, celebrations or special promotional events; a real estate office within a development limited to the sale of real estate in the development; and portable outdoor storage units or similar structures as are typically used for storing items in conjunction with a move, minor remodel or construction project. Temporary uses do not include businesses seeking a temporary or interim location.

Tract. A lot or parcel, or more than one contiguous lot or parcel, in a single ownership.

Trailhead. A trail access point as identified in the Comprehensive Plan. The purpose of the trailhead is to provide access to a trail and trail information, and to provide parking for trail users that do not live in the immediate area of the trail, or choose to arrive by automobile. 

Transition area. The land around the edge of the natural resource area that constitutes a buffer, or transition, to protect the resource from conflicting development and activities.

Transportation facilities. Facilities and amenities that are used for transporting people and goods. Typical uses include streets, highways, sidewalks, transit stops and stations, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, bike lanes, and operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction of these facilities. There are two classifications of transportation facilities (Type I and Type II):

1.    Transportation facilities (Type I) are those which are designated in the adopted TSP or are part of an approved, active development order. Type I facilities are permitted uses in all zoning districts.

2.    Transportation facilities (Type II) are those which are not designated in the adopted TSP or part of an approved, active development order. Type II transportation facilities are allowed in all zoning districts subject to conditional use approval and the additional criteria of CDC 60.090. 

Types of land. Lands are categorized into one of four types (I, II, III or IV), depending on their features including slope, drainage and geology. In considering slope of the site, lands shall be classified into the steepest category for which they qualify. 

Type I lands. Lands that have severe constraints that preclude the use of standard development techniques and technical criteria. Type I lands exist in one or more of the following areas:

1.    Slope: Land that has slopes of 35 percent or more over more than 50 percent of the site, as shown on the RLIS topography GIS layer. 

2.    Drainage: All lands within the designated floodway as shown on the appropriate FEMA flood panel.

3.    Geological hazard: All landslide areas shown on the City’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan (“NHMP”) and identified as “landslide potential exists” on Map 16 of the NHMP, or areas outside Map 16, but within Map 17, Landslide Vulnerable Analysis Area.

Type II lands. Lands which have constraints that are sufficient to preclude most standard types of development. Constraints in these areas generally do not constitute a health or safety hazard, but require the use of non-standard technical design criteria. Type II lands exist in one or more of the following areas:

1.    Slope: Land that has slopes over 25 percent on more than 50 percent of the site, as shown on the RLIS topography GIS layer. 

2.    Drainage: All drainage courses identified on the water resource area maps or areas identified as protected Goal 5 Wetlands, and areas outside the floodway, but within the floodway fringe, also known as the 100-year floodplain.

3.    Geology: All known mineral and aggregate deposits identified on the Comprehensive Plan map as protected Goal 5 resources.

Type III lands. These lands are considered within the major portion of the City’s developable lands. Standard development criteria can be applied through normal implementation measures. Type III lands have slopes over 10 percent on more than 50 percent of the site, as shown on the RLIS topography GIS layer.

Type IV lands. These lands are considered to have few, if any, constraints to development and are within the major portion of the City’s developable lands. Normal development standards will apply in these areas. Type IV lands have slopes 10 percent or under on more than 50 percent of the site, as shown on the RLIS topography GIS layer.

Unhealthy or disturbed state. Defines an area of a WRA that is dominated by non-native vegetation and/or grading which is an appropriate candidate for restoration to its natural condition.   

Unlisted use. A use that is not listed as either a use permitted outright or a conditional use in a particular zone.

Urgent care. A facility which provides emergency medical care on a non-appointment basis, but does not have overnight sleeping facilities. 

Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

Utilities. All lines, facilities and services related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, gas, power, information, telecommunication and telephone cable, and includes facilities for the generation of electricity, or similar service. There are two classes of utilities – major and minor:

Utility, major. A major utility facility or service includes, but is not limited to: a substation; pump station; water storage tank; sewerage treatment plant; water treatment plant; and transmission lines for water, drainage or sewerage collection systems, gas or electric, or other similar use.

Utility, minor. A minor utility facility or service includes, but is not limited to: overhead or underground electric, telephone or cable television poles and wires, and distribution lines for electric, gas, water, drainage or sewerage collection systems, or other similar use.

Variance. A discretionary decision to permit modification of the terms of an implementing ordinance based upon specific findings delineated in the Community Development Code. 

Vehicle fuel sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale, from the premises, of petroleum products with incidental sale of tires.

Walkway/boardwalk. A floating or non-floating platform that either provides pedestrian access along a shoreline or within a riparian area; it may also act as a bridge between two bodies of land.

Water-dependent uses. Any use that requires access to, or use of, the rivers.

Water resource area (WRA). Any water resource or riparian area identified in the West Linn   WRA Map and the adjacent area of varying widths, established pursuant to Chapter 32 CDC, in which development activities are restricted in order to protect the functions and values of the associated water resource (see graphic below).


[IMAGE]


Water resource area transition and setback area. The land adjacent to the protected water feature that constitutes a buffer, or transition, to protect the resource from conflicting development and activities.

Water resource (or feature). Any stream or wetland identified on the West Linn WRA map.

Wetlands. Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands are also defined by the subcategories of “high quality wetlands” and “locally significant wetlands.”

Wholesale, storage, and distribution. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage, distribution, and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. The following are wholesaling, storage, and distribution use types:

Wholesaling, storage and distribution (heavy industrial). Open air storage, distribution, and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone yards, or grain elevators.

Wholesaling, storage and distribution (light industrial). Wholesaling, storage, and warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, or moving and storage firms.

Wholesale, storage, and distribution, mini-warehouses. Storage and warehousing service within a building(s) primarily for individuals to store personal effects and by businesses to store materials for operation of an industrial or commercial enterprise located elsewhere. Incidental uses in a mini-warehouse may include the repair and maintenance of stored materials by the tenant, but in no case may storage spaces in a mini-warehouse facility function as an independent retail, wholesale business, or service use.

Spaces shall not be used for workshops, hobbyshops, manufacturing, or similar uses and human occupancy of said spaces shall be limited to that required to transport, arrange, and maintain stored materials.

Willamette River Greenway Area. The area designated by the City of West Linn Comprehensive Plan as within the Willamette River Greenway and thus subject to the provisions of Goal 15 (Willamette Greenway) of the Oregon Statewide Planning Program.

Wireless communication facility (WCF). An unstaffed facility for the transmission or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals, usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet, or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment, a support structure, antennas, or other transmission and reception devices. It may also include stealth designs.

Wireless communication facility (WCF), attached. A wireless communication facility that is affixed to an existing structure; e.g., an existing building wall or roof, mechanical equipment, tower or pole, water tank, utility pole, or light pole. It cannot include an additional new wireless communication support structure.

Wireless communication support structure. A new structure, tower, pole, or mast erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include, but are not limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles, and guyed towers.

Yard. A required area of land unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure that is 30 inches or more above the general ground level, with the exception of fences, walkways/staircases, retaining walls, poles, posts, customary yard accessories, appurtenances, ornaments, furniture and accessory structures or uses permitted subject to the provisions of this code. (See Figure A below.)


[IMAGE]


Figure A 

Yard, front. A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the lot line to the nearest point of the building. In the case of flag lots, the front yard may either face an adjacent street right-of-way or the access driveway along the flag lot stem. The front of the house or dwelling faces the front yard. (See Figure B.)


[IMAGE]


Figure B

Yard, rear. A yard between side lot lines or between a street side yard and opposite side lot line and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of a main building. The rear of the house or dwelling faces the rear yard. In the case of corner lots, the rear yard is not always on the opposite side of the house or dwelling as the front yard. (See Figure A.)

Yard, side. A yard between the front and rear yard measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of the building. The side of the house or dwelling faces the side yard. (See Figure A.)

Yard, side street. For dwellings or homes on corner lots, this is the yard on the side of the house that faces a street right-of-way and does not include the front of the house or front yard. (See Figure A). (Ord. 1604 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1614 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1622 §§ 22, 29, 2014; Ord. 1623 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1655 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1662 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1675 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1686 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1694 § 1, 2019)


Chapter 03 DEFINITIONS – USES

(Repealed by Ord. 1604)


Chapter 05 GENERAL

Sections:

05.010    PURPOSE

05.020    CLASSIFICATIONS OF ZONES

05.030    ZONING MAP

05.040    DETERMINATION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES

05.050    REVIEW OF ANNEXED LAND FOR SOLID WASTE FACILITY SITING


05.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of the zoning provisions of this code is: to implement the Comprehensive Plan; to provide rules, regulations, and standards governing the use of land and structures; to carry out the development pattern and plan of the City; to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, flood, pollution, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply, sewage, and drainage; and to encourage the conservation of energy resources.


05.020 CLASSIFICATIONS OF ZONES

All areas within the corporate limits of the City of West Linn are hereby divided into zone districts, and the use of each tract and ownership of land within the corporate limits shall be limited to those uses permitted by the zoning classification applicable to each such tract as hereinafter designated. The zoning districts within the City of West Linn are hereby classified and designated as follows:

 

	Zone Standards	Zone Designation	Dwelling Units per Net Acre	Lot Size per Unit in Square Feet

	Low Density	 	 	 

	Single-Family Residential detached	R-40	1.1	40,000

	Single-Family Residential detached	R-20	2.18	20,000

	Single-Family Residential detached	R-15	2.9	15,000

	Single-Family Residential detached	R-10	4.35	10,000

	Single-Family Residential detached	R-7	6.2	7,000

	 

	Medium Density Residential	R-5

R-4.5	8.7

9.68	5,000

4,500

	 

	Medium High Density	R-3

R-2.1	14.5

20.74	3,000

2,100

	 

	Commercial	 	 	 

	Neighborhood Commercial	NC	 	 

	General Commercial	GC	 	 

	Office Business Center	OBC	 	 

	 

	Industrial	 	 	 

	Campus Industrial	CI	 	 

	General Industrial	GI	 	 

	 

	Overlay Zones	 	 	 

	Planned Unit Development	PUD	 	 

	Historic District	HD	 	 

	Historic Landmark	HL	 

	Flood Management Area	FMA	 	 

	Willamette River Greenway	WRG	 	 

	Tualatin River Protection	TRP	 

	Wetland and Riparian Area	WRA	 	 

	Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District	WFC	 

(Ord. 1291, 1990; Ord. 1321, 1992; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015)


05.030 ZONING MAP

A.    The boundaries of each of the foregoing districts and the zoning classification and use of each tract in each of said zoning districts are hereby prescribed to coincide with the identifying zone classifications shown on the map entitled “West Linn Zoning Map,” dated with the effective date of this code and signed by the Mayor and City Recorder and hereafter referred to as the “Zoning Map,” and said map by this reference is made a part of this code. A certified print of the adopted Zoning Map or map amendments shall be maintained in the office of the Community Development Department as long as the code remains in effect.

B.    Each lot, tract, and parcel of land, or portion thereof, within the zone boundaries as designated and marked on the Zoning Map, is hereby classified, zoned, and limited to the uses as hereinafter specified and defined for the applicable zone classification.

C.    Amendments to the City Zoning Map may be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 98 and 99 CDC. Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the document adopting the map amendment and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting documents, on file in the Community Development Department. The Planning Director shall maintain in his or her office, and available for public inspection, an up-to-date copy of the City Zoning Map to be revised so that it accurately portrays changes of zone boundaries.

D.    The Planning Director shall maintain on a set of zoning maps an index indicating the case number, type of action, and location of actions taken under this code. (Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


05.040 DETERMINATION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES

Where due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the City Zoning Map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of district boundary lines, determination of zoning boundaries shall be determined by the Planning Director in accordance with the following standards:

A.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.

B.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot or parcel lines shall be construed as following such lot or parcel lines.

C.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following City limits.

D.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following river, stream, and/or drainage channels shall be construed as following river, stream, and/or drainage channels.

E.    Whenever any street is lawfully vacated, and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attached to and become a part of lands adjoining such street, the lands formerly within the vacated street shall automatically be subject to the same zoning district designation that is applicable to lands to which same attaches. (Ord. 1636 § 4, 2014)


05.050 REVIEW OF ANNEXED LAND FOR SOLID WASTE FACILITY SITING

Within a one-year period following annexation of land into the City, the City will determine whether or not the annexed land, where the land is designated for commercial and industrial use, includes appropriate areas for siting solid waste facilities. If commercial or industrial designated land is annexed to the City that is appropriate for siting solid waste facilities, the City will then notify Metro of the need to update this agreement. (Ord. 1442, 1999)


Chapter 08 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED, R-40

Sections:

08.010    PURPOSE

08.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

08.030    PERMITTED USES

08.040    ACCESSORY USES

08.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

08.060    CONDITIONAL USES

08.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

08.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

08.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


08.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this district is to provide for development where there are some available services, but the services will not support the development of land at more urban densities. The intent of the zone is to allow development at a level based on the existing service level, but in a manner which does not adversely impact environmentally sensitive areas. This zone may also be applied to areas where public harm to wildlife habitats may result if developed at a higher density.


08.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 08.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 08.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all the conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required;

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 08.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


08.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Community recreation.

2.    Family day care.

3.    Public support facilities.

4.    Residential home.

5.    Single-family detached residential unit.

6.    Utilities, minor.

7.    Manufactured housing. 

8.    Transportation facilities (Type I). (Ord. 1354, 1994; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008)


08.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


08.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC. 

2.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary use subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

4.    Agricultural or horticultural use; provided, that no retail or wholesale business sales office is maintained on the premises; and provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residence other than a dwelling on the same lot, nor on a lot less than one acre or which has less than 20,000 feet per head of livestock. These uses are subject to the nuisance provisions found in Section 5.400 et seq. of the West Linn Municipal Code. (Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1624 § 2, 2014)


08.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

1.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

2.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

3.    Public safety facilities.

4.    Recycle collection center.

5.    Religious institution.

6.    Schools.

7.    Utilities, major.

8.    Aggregate extraction except aggregate extraction on submersible land subject to valid permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Oregon State Land Board. 

9.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 4, 2011)


08.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet for a single-family detached unit.

2.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 150 feet.

3.    The average minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.

4.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

5.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback areas from the lot line shall be:

a.    For the front yard, 30 feet, except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

b.    For an interior side yard, 10 feet.

c.    For a side yard abutting a street, 30 feet.

d.    For a rear yard, 30 feet.

6.    The maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply.

7.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 25 percent.

8.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot, which does not abut a street or a flag lot, shall be 20 feet.

9.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

10.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 2, 2018)


08.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 5, 2014)


08.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 3, 2018)


Chapter 09 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED, R-20

Sections:

09.010    PURPOSE

09.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

09.030    PERMITTED USES

09.040    ACCESSORY USES

09.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

09.060    CONDITIONAL USES

09.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

09.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

09.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

09.100    REDIVISION PLAN REQUIRED


09.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this district is to provide for development flexibility at a range of densities where urban services are available. The intent of the zone is to allow development at a level which recognizes and preserves natural features of the area. This zone may also be applied to areas where public harm to wildlife habitats may result if developed at a higher density. (Ord. 1308, 1991)


09.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 09.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 09.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 09.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


09.030 PERMITTED USES

The following are uses permitted outright in this zoning district:

1.    Community recreation.

2.    Family day care. 

3.    Residential home.

4.    Single-family detached residential unit.

5.    Utilities, minor.

6.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

7.    Manufactured home. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1635 § 4, 2014)


09.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


09.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC.

2.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

4.    Agricultural or horticultural use; provided, that no retail or wholesale business sales office is maintained on the premises; and provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residence other than a dwelling on the same lot, nor on a lot less than one acre, or which has less than 20,000 feet per head of livestock. These uses are subject to the nuisance provisions found in Section 5.400 et seq. of the West Linn Municipal Code.

5.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1624 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 5, 2014)


09.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

1.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

2.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

3.    Public safety facilities.

4.    Public support facilities.

5.    Recycle collection center.

6.    Religious institution.

7.    Schools.

8.    Senior center. 

9.    Utilities, major.

10.    Aggregate extraction except aggregate extraction on submersible land, subject to valid permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Oregon State Land Board.

11.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1172, 1985; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 5, 2011)


09.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet for a single-family detached unit.

2.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 150 feet.

3.    The average minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.

4.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

5.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback areas from the lot line shall be:

a.    For the front yard, 20 feet, except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

b.    For an interior side yard, seven and one-half feet.

c.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

d.    For a rear yard, 20 feet.

6.    The maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply.

7.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 25 percent.

8.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot which does not abut a street or a flag lot shall be 15 feet.

9.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

10.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 4, 2018)


09.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 6, 2014)


09.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 5, 2018)


09.100 REDIVISION PLAN REQUIRED

A.    Where the property being developed is in excess of multiples of 20,000 square feet and additional dwelling units could be developed, a redevelopment plan shall be required as a condition of approval for a single-family dwelling building permit, partition or subdivision.

B.    The redevelopment plan is a sketch plan, and a land survey and engineering drawing is not required except where there are unique soil, topographic or geologic conditions. Under the provisions of CDC 99.035, Administrative Procedures, the Planning Director may require additional information.

C.    The applicant shall submit a topographic map based on available information, and a subdivision layout in accordance with standards set forth in Chapter 85 CDC, Land Division, and the Low Density Residential, R-20 zone.

D.    A building permit issued shall be for a specified future lot or parcel and the building shall meet the setback provisions of the Low Density Residential, R-20 zone.

E.    The redivision plan is considered a guide. Its purpose is to assure the efficient use of land and orderly growth. At such time as the property owner applies to redivide the land, a different proposal may be submitted for approval provided it meets all of the requirements. The redivision plan is not binding on the applicant or the City at the time a formal application is submitted under the land division chapter.

F.    The Planning Director shall approve the redivision plan in the manner set forth in CDC 99.060(A)(2), except that no notice shall be given. The applicant may appeal the Planning Director’s decision as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

G.    The Planning Director’s decision shall be based on the following findings:

1.    The redivision plan complies with the applicable requirements of the land division chapters and Low Density Residential, R-20 zone.

2.    The sub-surface sewage system has been approved.

3.    There is adequate water for the proposed use. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1636 § 7, 2014)


Chapter 10 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED, R-15

Sections:

10.010    PURPOSE

10.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

10.030    PERMITTED USES

10.040    ACCESSORY USES

10.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

10.060    CONDITIONAL USES

10.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

10.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

10.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


10.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for development at levels which relate to the site development limitations. This zone is applicable to areas having steep slopes, areas subject to high erosion potential, areas which will cause serious off-site drainage problems, areas subject to movement, or areas with other types of limitations which require a minimum amount of disturbance to the natural features.


10.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 10.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 10.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 10.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


10.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zoning district:

1.    Community recreation.

2.    Family day care. 

3.    Residential home. 

4.    Single-family detached residential unit.

5.    Utilities, minor.

6.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

7.    Manufactured home. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1635 § 6, 2014)


10.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


10.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC.

2.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

4.    Agricultural or horticultural use; provided, that no retail or wholesale business sales office is maintained on the premises; and provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residence other than a dwelling on the same lot, nor on a lot of less than one acre, or which has less than 20,000 feet per head of livestock. These uses are subject to the nuisance provisions found in Section 5.400 et seq. of the West Linn Municipal Code.

5.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1624 § 4, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 7, 2014)


10.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. 

1.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

2.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly. 

3.    Public safety facilities.

4.    Public support facilities. 

5.    Recycle collection center.

6.    Religious institution.

7.    Schools.

8.    Senior center. 

9.    Utilities, major. 

10.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 6, 2011)


10.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following requirements are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet for a single-family detached unit.

2.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 45 feet.

3.    The average minimum lot width shall be 80 feet.

4.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

5.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback areas from the lot line shall be:

a.    For the front yard, 20 feet, except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

b.    For an interior side yard, seven and one-half feet.

c.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

d.    For a rear yard, 20 feet.

6.    The maximum building height shall be 40 feet, except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply. 

7.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 30 percent.

8.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot which does not abut a street or a flag lot shall be 15 feet.

9.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

10.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 6, 2018)


10.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 8, 2014)


10.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 7, 2018)


Chapter 11 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED, R-10

Sections:

11.010    PURPOSE

11.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

11.030    PERMITTED USES

11.040    ACCESSORY USES

11.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

11.060    CONDITIONAL USES

11.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

11.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

11.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


11.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for urban development at levels which relate to the site development limitations, proximity to commercial development and to public facilities and public transportation. This zone is intended to implement the Comprehensive Plan policies and locational criteria, and is applicable to areas designated as Low Density Residential on the Comprehensive Plan Map and Type I and Type II lands identified under the Buildable Lands Policy.


11.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 11.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions (CDC 11.050) is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    A conditional use (CDC 11.060) is a use the approval of which is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


11.030 PERMITTED USES

The following are uses permitted outright in this zoning district:

1.    Single-family detached residential unit.

2.    Community recreation.

3.    Family day care. 

4.    Residential home. 

5.    Utilities, minor.

6.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

7.    Manufactured home.

8.    Community building on City-owned property at 3706 Cedaroak Drive and indicated on the map below.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1635 § 8, 2014; Ord. 1661 § 1, 2017)


11.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


11.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC.

2.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

4.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC. 

5.    Agricultural or horticultural use; provided, that no retail or wholesale business sales office is maintained on the premises; and provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residence other than a dwelling on the same lot, nor on a lot of less than one acre, or which has less than 20,000 feet per head of livestock. These uses are subject to the nuisance provisions found in Section 5.400 et seq. of the West Linn Municipal Code.

6.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1624 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 9, 2014)


11.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

1.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

2.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

3.    Public safety facilities.

4.    Public support facilities.

5.    Recycle collection center. 

6.    Religious institution.

7.    Schools.

8.    Senior center. 

9.    Utilities, major. 

10.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1172, 1985; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 7, 2011)


11.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet for a single-family detached unit.

2.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

3.    The average minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

4.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

5.    Except as specified in CDC 25.070(C)(1) through (4) for the Willamette Historic District, the minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback area from the lot line shall be:

a.    For the front yard, 20 feet; except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

b.    For an interior side yard, seven and one-half feet.

c.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

d.    For a rear yard, 20 feet.

6.    The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply.

7.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 35 percent.

8.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot which does not abut a street or a flag lot shall be 15 feet.

9.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

10.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1175, 1986; Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1614 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 8, 2018)


11.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 9, 2014)


11.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 9, 2018)


Chapter 12 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED AND ATTACHED, R-7

Sections:

12.010    PURPOSE

12.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

12.030    PERMITTED USES

12.040    ACCESSORY USES

12.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

12.060    CONDITIONAL USES

12.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

12.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USE

12.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


12.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for urban development at levels which relate to the site development limitations, the proximity to commercial development, and to public facilities and public transportation. This zone is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.


12.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 12.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions (CDC 12.050) is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 12.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations.

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


12.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zone.

1.    Single-family detached residential unit.

2.    Single-family attached residential units.

3.    Community recreation.

4.    Family day care. 

5.    Residential home. 

6.    Utilities, minor.

7.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

8.    Manufactured home. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1635 § 10, 2014)


12.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


12.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC. 

2.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

4.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

5.    Agricultural or horticultural use; provided, that no retail or wholesale business sales office is maintained on the premises; and provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residence other than a dwelling on the same lot, nor on a lot of less than one acre, or which has less than 20,000 feet per head of livestock. These uses are subject to the nuisance provisions found in Section 5.400 et seq. of the West Linn Municipal Code.

6.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1255, 1989; Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1624 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 11, 2014)


12.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

3.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

4.    Public safety facilities.

5.    Public support facilities. 

6.    Recycle collection center.

7.    Religious institution.

8.    Schools.

9.    Senior center. 

10.    Utilities, major. 

11.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 8, 2011; Ord. 1675 § 10, 2018)


12.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

A.    The minimum lot size shall be:

1.    For a single-family detached unit, 7,000 square feet. 

2.    For each attached single-family unit, 5,500 square feet. No yard shall be required between the units.

B.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

C.    The average minimum lot width shall be 35 feet.

D.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

E.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback areas from the lot line shall be:

1.    For the front yard, 20 feet, except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

2.    For an interior side yard, seven and one-half feet.

3.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

4.    For a rear yard, 20 feet.

F.    The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

G.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 35 percent. 

H.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot which does not abut a street or a flag lot shall be 15 feet.

I.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

J.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 11, 2018)


12.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USE

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 10, 2014)


12.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Area.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 12, 2018)


Chapter 13 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DETACHED AND ATTACHED/DUPLEX, R-5

Sections:

13.010    PURPOSE

13.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

13.030    PERMITTED USES

13.040    ACCESSORY USES

13.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

13.060    CONDITIONAL USES

13.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

13.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USE

13.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


13.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for urban development at levels which relate to the site development limitations, proximity to commercial development and public facilities and public transportation, and to the surrounding development pattern. This zone is intended to carry out the intent of the Comprehensive Plan which is to provide for a choice in housing types and is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria in the Comprehensive Plan for medium density residential housing.


13.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 13.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 13.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 13.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


13.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zoning district:

1.    Single-family detached residential unit.

2.    Single-family attached residential unit.

3.    Duplex residential unit.

4.    Community recreation.

5.    Family day care.

6.    Residential home. 

7.    Utilities, minor.

8.    Transportation facilities (Type I). 

9.    Manufactured home. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1614 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1635 § 12, 2014)


13.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


13.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Manufactured home park, subject to the provisions of Chapters 36 and 55 CDC.

2.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC. 

3.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

4.    Temporary uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

5.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

6.    Agricultural or horticultural use; provided, that no retail or wholesale business sales office is maintained on the premises; and provided, that poultry or livestock shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residence other than a dwelling on the same lot, nor on a lot of less than one acre, or which has less than 20,000 feet per head of livestock. These uses are subject to the nuisance provisions found in Section 5.400 et seq. of the West Linn Municipal Code.

7.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1624 § 7, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 13, 2014)


13.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

1.    Certified child care center. 

2.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

3.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

4.    Manufactured home subdivision subject to the provisions of Chapter 36 CDC.

5.    Public safety facilities. 

6.    Public support facilities. 

7.    Recycle collection center. 

8.    Schools.

9.    Senior center. 

10.    Utilities, major. 

11.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 9, 2011; Ord. 1675 § 13, 2018)


13.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

A.    The minimum lot size shall be:

1.    For a single-family detached unit, 5,000 square feet.

2.    For each attached single-family unit, 4,500 square feet. No yard shall be required between the units.

B.    The minimum front lot line length, or the minimum lot width at the front lot line, shall be 35 feet.

C.    The average minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

D.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

E.    Except as specified in CDC 25.070(C)(1) through (4) for the Willamette Historic District, the minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback areas from the lot line shall be:

1.    For the front yard, 20 feet, except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

2.    For an interior side yard, five feet.

3.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

4.    For a rear yard, 20 feet.

F.    The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply. 

G.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent.

H.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot which does not abut a street or a flag lot shall be 15 feet.

I.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

J.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1614 § 4, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 14, 2018)


13.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USE

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 11, 2014)


13.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 15, 2018)


Chapter 14 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ATTACHED AND DETACHED/DUPLEX, R-4.5

Sections:

14.010    PURPOSE

14.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

14.030    PERMITTED USES

14.040    ACCESSORY USES

14.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

14.060    CONDITIONAL USES

14.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

14.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

14.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


14.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for urban development at levels which relate to the site development limitations, proximity to commercial development and public facilities and public transportation, and to the surrounding development pattern. This zone is intended to carry out the intent of the Comprehensive Plan which is to provide for a choice in housing types, and is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria in the Comprehensive Plan for medium density residential housing.


14.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 14.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 14.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 14.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


14.030 PERMITTED USES

The following are uses permitted outright in this zoning district:

1.    Single-family detached residential unit. 

2.    Duplex residential units.

3.    Family day care. 

4.    Single-family attached residential units.

5.    Community recreation.

6.    Residential home.

7.    Utilities, minor.

8.    Manufactured housing. 

9.    Transportation facilities (Type I). (Ord. 1180, 1986; Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1248, 1989; Ord. 1354, 1994; Ord. 1584, 2008)


14.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


14.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Manufactured home park, subject to the provisions of Chapters 36 and 55 CDC.

2.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC.

3.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

4.    Temporary uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC. 

5.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

6.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008)


14.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. 

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

3.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

4.    Medical and dental offices or clinic.

5.    Nursing home.

6.    Postal services.

7.    Professional and administrative services.

8.    Public safety facilities.

9.    Public support facilities. 

10.    Recycle collection center. 

11.    Religious institution. 

12.    Schools.

13.    Senior center. 

14.    Utilities, major.

15.    Senior citizen/handicapped housing facilities with a maximum number of units 50 percent above the allowed density for the property; provided, that in addition to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, the following conditions shall apply:

a.    Facilities intended for senior citizens shall be restricted to persons 60 years and older. In the case of couples, one member of the couple shall be 60 years or older.

b.    Building height restrictions shall be the same as the subject zoning district.

c.    Community space and related equipment shall be required to provide social and recreational opportunities for project occupants. Included may be such facilities as game rooms, meeting rooms, music or craft rooms. At least one community room within a project shall include a service area with a kitchen sink, counter top and storage cabinets, and shall have easy access to a storage area sized to store tables, chairs and janitorial supplies. All complexes shall have a minimum of 15 square feet of community space per occupant, based on one person per bedroom.

d.    Congregate dining facilities providing regular daily meals for residents shall be provided.

e.    A minimum of 10 square feet of general storage area other than regular kitchen, bedroom and linen storage shall be provided within each unit. Complexes which do not include laundry facilities in the units shall have adequate laundry facilities accessible to all tenants.

f.    The maximum number of units allowed in a senior citizen or handicapped housing facility shall be as follows:

1)    Medium high density district (R-2.1). The base density shall be 50 percent above the allowed density for the property.

2)    Medium density district (R-4.5). The density shall be 50 percent above the allowed density for the property.

g.    The design of the building(s) and the site and landscaping plans shall be subject to Design Review, Chapter 55 CDC. Special considerations for this use are the following:

1)    Structures shall be compatible in style, color, materials, and scale with the general character of the neighborhood.

2)    The building design and site layout shall define recognizable semi-public, semi-private and private spaces; ensure a sense of protection and community identity; and minimize barriers to handicapped or elderly persons.

3)    A minimum of 25 percent of the property shall be in landscaping. The landscaping shall include areas for outdoor recreation, pedestrian access and amenities, and adequate visual and sound buffering of adjacent properties.

4)    No more than 25 percent of the total number of units may be used for nursing care patients.

5)    Minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be the same as the underlying district unless the approval authority board finds that a greater setback is indicated by uses and structures on surrounding properties or unique circumstances of the site. 

16.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1172, 1985; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 §§ 10, 11, 2011; Ord. 1675 § 16, 2018)


14.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

A.    The minimum lot size shall be:

1.    For a single-family detached unit, 4,500 square feet.

2.    For each attached single-family unit, 4,000 square feet.

3.    For a duplex, 8,000 square feet or 4,000 square feet for each unit.

B.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

C.    The average minimum lot width shall be 35 feet.

D.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

E.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback areas from the lot line shall be:

1.    For a front yard, 20 feet; except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

2.    For an interior side yard, five feet.

3.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

4.    For a rear yard, 20 feet.

F.    The maximum building height shall be 35 feet except for steeply sloped lots in which case the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply.

G.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 40 percent.

H.    The minimum width of an accessway to a lot which does not abut a street or a flag lot shall be 15 feet.

I.    The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

J.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 17, 2018)


14.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 12, 2014)


14.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 18, 2018)


Chapter 15 SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, R-3

Sections:

15.010    PURPOSE

15.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

15.030    PERMITTED USES

15.040    ACCESSORY USES

15.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

15.060    CONDITIONAL USES

15.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

15.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

15.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


15.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for urban development at levels which relate to the site development limitations, proximity to commercial development and public facilities and public transportation, and to the surrounding development pattern. This zone is intended to carry out the intent of the Comprehensive Plan which is to provide for a choice in housing types and is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria in the Comprehensive Plan for high density residential housing.


15.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 15.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 15.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied; and

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 15.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


15.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are uses permitted outright in this zoning district:

1.    Single-family detached residential units.

2.    Duplex residential unit.

3.    Multiple-family residential unit.

4.    Single-family attached residential units.

5.    Group residential units.

6.    Community recreation.

7.    Family day care. 

8.    Residential home. 

9.    Utilities, minor.

10.    Manufactured housing. 

11.    Transportation facilities (Type I). (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1354, 1994; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008)


15.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


15.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions.

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC.

2.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

4.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

5.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008)


15.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following uses are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Use.

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

3.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly.

4.    Nursing home.

5.    Public safety facilities.

6.    Public support facilities.

7.    Religious institution.

8.    Residential facility. 

9.    Schools.

10.    Senior center. 

11.    Utilities, major.

12.    Senior citizen/handicapped housing facilities with a maximum number of units 50 percent above the allowed density for the property; provided, that in addition to the provisions of Chapter 60, the following conditions shall apply:

a.    Facilities intended for senior citizens shall be restricted to persons 60 years and older. In the case of couples, one member of the couple shall be 60 years or older.

b.    Building height restrictions shall be the same as the subject zoning district.

c.    Community space and related equipment shall be required to provide social and recreational opportunities for project occupants. Included may be such facilities as game rooms, meeting rooms, music or craft rooms. At least one community room within a project shall include a service area with a kitchen sink, counter top and storage cabinets, and shall have easy access to a storage area sized to store tables, chairs and janitorial supplies. All complexes shall have a minimum of 15 square feet of community space per occupant, based on one person per bedroom.

d.    Congregate dining facilities providing regular daily meals for residents shall be provided.

e.    A minimum of 10 square feet of general storage area other than regular kitchen, bedroom and linen storage shall be provided within each unit. Complexes which do not include laundry facilities in the units shall have adequate laundry facilities accessible to all tenants.

f.    The maximum number of units allowed in a senior citizen or handicapped housing facility shall be 50 percent above the allowed density for the property.

g.    The design of the building(s) and the site and landscaping plans shall be subject to Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review. Special considerations for this use are the following:

1)    Structures shall be compatible in style, color, materials, and scale with the general character of the neighborhood.

2)    The building design and site layout shall define recognizable semi-public, semi-private, and private spaces; ensure a sense of protection and community identity; and minimize barriers to handicapped or elderly persons.

3)    A minimum of 25 percent of the property shall be in landscaping. The landscaping shall include areas for outdoor recreation, pedestrian access and amenities, and adequate visual and sound buffering of adjacent properties.

4)    No more than 25 percent of the total number of units may be used for nursing care patients.

5)    Minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be the same as the underlying district unless the approval authority finds that a greater setback is indicated by uses and structures on surrounding properties or unique circumstances of the site.

13.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 §§ 12, 13, 2011; Ord. 1675 § 19, 2018)


15.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are requirements for uses within this zone:

A.    The minimum lot size shall be:

1.    For a single-family detached unit, 3,000 square feet.

2.    For each attached single-family unit, 3,000 square feet.

3.    For each multiple-family dwelling unit, 3,000 square feet.

B.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

C.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

D.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback area from the lot line shall be:

1.    For a front yard, 15 feet (20 feet for a garage); except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

2.    For an interior side yard, five feet.

3.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

4.    For a rear yard, 15 feet, except that in the case of an apartment structure in this district, an additional yard area may be required between the structure in this district and any adjacent low density residential uses.

E.    The maximum building height shall be 35 feet for an attached or detached single-family unit, duplex unit or multi-family unit, except for steeply sloped lots when the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply.

F.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

G.    The maximum floor area ratio for single-family homes shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

H.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 20, 2018)


15.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 13, 2014)


15.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings, residential homes and residential facilities. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 21, 2018)


Chapter 16 SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, R-2.1

Sections:

16.010    PURPOSE

16.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

16.030    PERMITTED USES

16.040    ACCESSORY USES

16.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

16.060    CONDITIONAL USES

16.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

16.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

16.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


16.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for urban development at levels which relate to the site development limitations, proximity to commercial development and public facilities and public transportation, and to the surrounding development pattern. This zone is intended to carry out the intent of the Comprehensive Plan which is to provide for a choice in housing types and is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria in the Comprehensive Plan for high density residential housing.


16.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 16.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 16.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 16.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


16.030 PERMITTED USES

The following are uses permitted outright in this zoning district: )

1.    Community recreation.

2.    Duplex residential unit. 

3.    Family day care. 

4.    Group residential units.

5.    Multiple-family residential unit.

6.    Residential home. 

7.    Single-family attached residential units.

8.    Utilities, minor.

9.    Transportation facilities (Type I). (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1248, 1989; Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1584, 2008


16.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


16.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC. 

2.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

3.    Temporary uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC. 

4.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

5.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1565, 2008)


16.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zoning district subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses: 

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Convenience sales and personal services.

3.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

4.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly. 

5.    Medical and dental offices or clinic.

6.    Nursing home.

7.    Postal services.

8.    Professional and administrative services.

9.    Public safety facilities.

10.    Public support facilities. 

11.    Recycle collection center. 

12.    Religious institution.

13.    Residential facility. 

14.    Schools.

15.    Single-family detached residential unit.

16.    Utilities, major.

17.    Senior citizen/handicapped housing facilities with a maximum number of units 50 percent above the allowed density for the property; provided, that in addition to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC the following conditions shall apply:

a.    Facilities intended for senior citizens shall be restricted to persons 60 years and older. In the case of couples, one member of the couple shall be 60 years or older.

b.    Building height restrictions shall be the same as the subject zoning district.

c.    Community space and related equipment shall be required to provide social and recreational opportunities for project occupants. Included may be such facilities as game rooms, meeting rooms, music or craft rooms. At least one community room within a project shall include a service area with a kitchen sink, counter top and storage cabinets, and shall have easy access to a storage area sized to store tables, chairs and janitorial supplies. All complexes shall have a minimum of 15 square feet of community space per occupant, based on one person per bedroom.

d.    Congregate dining facilities providing regular daily meals for residents shall be provided.

e.    A minimum of 10 square feet of general storage area other than regular kitchen, bedroom and linen storage shall be provided within each unit. Complexes which do not include laundry facilities in the units shall have adequate laundry facilities accessible to all tenants.

f.    The maximum number of units allowed in a senior citizens or handicapped housing facility shall be as follows:

1)    Medium high density district (R-2.1). The base density shall be 50 percent above the allowed density for the property. 

2)    Medium density district (R-4.5). The density shall be 50 percent above the allowed density for the property.

g.    The design of the building(s) and the site and landscaping plans shall be subject to design review, Chapter 55 CDC. Special considerations for this use are the following:

1)    Structures shall be compatible in style, color, materials, and scale with the general character of the neighborhood.

2)    The building design and site layout shall define recognizable semi-public, semi-private and private spaces; ensure a sense of protection and community identity; and minimize barriers to handicapped or elderly persons.

3)    A minimum of 25 percent of the property shall be in landscaping. The landscaping shall include areas for outdoor recreation, pedestrian access and amenities, and adequate visual and sound buffering of adjacent properties.

4)    No more than 25 percent of the total number of units may be used for nursing care patients.

5)    Minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be the same as the underlying district unless the approval authority finds that a greater setback is indicated by uses and structures on surrounding properties or unique circumstances of the site.

18.    Senior center. 

19.    Manufactured housing. 

20.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1172, 1985; Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1354, 1994; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1500, 2003; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 §§ 14, 15, 2011; Ord. 1675 § 22, 2018)


16.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are requirements for uses within this zone:

A.    The minimum lot size shall be:

1.    For a single-family detached unit, 4,000 square feet.

2.    For each attached single-family unit, 2,700 square feet.

3.    For a duplex, 7,000 square feet, or 3,500 square feet for each unit.

4.    For a boarding, lodging or rooming house, 7,000 square feet.

5.    For each multiple-family dwelling unit, 2,100 square feet. A multiple-family dwelling unit is limited to three and one-half stories in height.

B.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

C.    The average minimum lot width shall be 35 feet.

D.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

E.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback area from the lot line shall be:

1.    For a front yard, 20 feet; except for steeply sloped lots where the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

2.    For an interior side yard, five feet.

3.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

4.    For a rear yard, 20 feet, except that in the case of an apartment structure in this district, an additional yard area may be required between the structure in this district and any adjacent low density residential uses.

F.    The maximum building height shall be:

1.    Thirty-five feet for a garden apartment low rise unit, single-family unit, attached single-family unit, duplex unit or boarding house, except for steeply sloped lots when the provisions of Chapter 41 CDC shall apply.

2.    Three and one-half stories or 45 feet for a garden apartment medium rise unit.

G.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

H.    The maximum floor area ratio for single-family homes shall be 0.45. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

I.    The sidewall provisions of Chapter 43 CDC shall apply. (Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 23, 2018)


16.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application, based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 14, 2014)


16.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 24, 2018)


Chapter 18 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL, NC

Sections:

18.010    PURPOSE

18.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

18.030    PERMITTED USES

18.040    ACCESSORY USES

18.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

18.060    CONDITIONAL USES

18.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

18.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

18.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


18.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of the neighborhood commercial zone is to provide for convenience goods and services within a cluster of stores. Convenience goods are goods which are bought frequently, at least weekly, and for which people do not engage in comparison shopping. The range of uses is limited to those uses which can be supported by a limited trade area. Uses in this district are intended to meet neighborhood needs as opposed to community-wide needs. This zone is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.


18.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 18.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 18.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 18.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


18.030 PERMITTED USES

The following are uses permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Convenience grocery store.

2.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

3.    Family day care. 

4.    Utilities, minor.

5.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

6.    Single-family residential unit above a permitted use. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1613 § 2, 2013)


18.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


18.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

2.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

3.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


18.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses.

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Consumer repair services.

3.    Convenience sales and personal services.

4.    Food and beverage retail sales.

5.    Financial, insurance and real estate services.

6.    Nursery. 

7.    Medical and dental services.

8.    Personal service facilities.

9.    Professional and administrative services.

10.    Utilities, major.

11.    Extended-hour businesses. CUPs shall be required when:

a.    New extended-hour business is proposed by construction of a new building.

b.    Expansion of the size of existing buildings for use by an extended-hour business is proposed. 

12.    Postal services. 

13.    Public safety facilities.

14.    Public support facilities. 

15.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1180, 1986; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1402, 1997; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 25, 2018)


18.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

2.    The average minimum lot width shall be 35 feet.

3.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

4.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback area from the lot line shall be:

a.    For a front yard, 25 feet.

b.    For an interior side yard, seven and one-half feet.

c.    For a side yard abutting a street, 15 feet.

d.    For a rear yard, 25 feet. However, where the use abuts a residential district, the setback distance of the residential zone shall apply.

5.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent; however, the above requirements in this section may be modified for developments under the planned unit development provisions of Chapter 24 CDC.

6.    The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories, or 35 feet. (Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014)


18.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B).


18.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 26, 2018)


Chapter 19 GENERAL COMMERCIAL, GC

Sections:

19.010    PURPOSE

19.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

19.030    PERMITTED USES

19.040    ACCESSORY USES

19.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

19.060    CONDITIONAL USES

19.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

19.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

19.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


19.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for the concentration of major retail goods and services at centers. The intent is to provide for the provision of a variety of goods and services and for comparison shopping, to accommodate new businesses and employment opportunities, to promote a suitable mix of commercial uses, to contribute to community identity and to assure that the commercial development is scaled to blend with nearby residential areas, and that the residential areas are protected from noise, glare of lights, traffic congestion and other possible adverse effects. This zone is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.


19.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 19.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 19.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 19.060.

C.    A conditional use, CDC 19.060, is a use the approval of which is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


19.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Agricultural sales.

2.    Agricultural services.

3.    Animal sales and services, grooming.

4.    Building maintenance services.

5.    Business equipment sales and services.

6.    Business support services.

7.    Communications services.

8.    Consumer repair services.

9.    Convenience sales and personal services.

10.    Eating and drinking establishments.

11.    Drive-through restaurants.

12.    Family day care. 

13.    Financial, insurance and real estate services.

14.    Food and beverage retail sales.

15.    General retail services.

16.    Hotel/motel, including those operating as extended hour businesses.

17.    Laundry services.

18.    Senior center. 

19.    Medical and dental services.

20.    Parking facilities.

21.    Participant sports and recreation, indoor.

22.    Personal service facilities.

23.    Professional and administrative services.

24.    Research services.

25.    Utilities, minor.

26.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

27.    Extended-hour businesses that do not include the construction of a new building or expansion of an existing structure.

28.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

29.    Lodge, fraternal, community center, and civic assembly within the commercial districts along Highway 43, Salamo Road or Blankenship Road.

30.    Religious institutions within the commercial districts along Highway 43, Salamo Road, or Blankenship Road. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1411, 1998; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1622 § 23, 2014; Ord. 1655 § 2, 2016)


19.040 ACCESSORY USES

1.    Manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale. (Ord. 1686 § 2, 2018)


19.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Single-family residential unit and attached single-family units above a permitted use or a commercial use or place of assembly authorized as a conditional use (e.g., children’s day care center, superstore, amusement enterprise, transient lodging, religious institution, school, lodge or community center), and multiple-family units: as a mixed use in conjunction with commercial development, only above the first floor of the structure, except in the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District where dwellings may also occupy a portion of the ground floor pursuant to CDC 58.050.

2.    Animal sales and services: kennels, as prescribed with no exterior runs or storage.

3.    Animal sales and services: veterinary (small animals), as prescribed with no exterior runs or storage.

4.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

5.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

6.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC. 

7.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1192, 1987; Ord. 1385, 1996; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1613 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015)


19.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses:

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Automotive and equipment:

a.    Cleaning.

b.    Repairs, heavy equipment.

c.    Repairs, light equipment.

d.    Sales/rentals, heavy equipment.

e.    Sales/rentals, light equipment.

f.    Storage, recreation vehicles and boats.

3.    Construction, sales and services.

4.    Heliports.

5.    Hospitals.

6.    Light industrial, manufactured.

7.    Light industrial, finished products.

8.    Spectator sports facilities.

9.    Vehicle fuel sales.

10.    Utilities, major.

11.    Wholesale storage and distribution:

a.    Mini-warehouse.

b.    Light.

12.    Single-family homes, which were non-conforming structures and were damaged, whereby the cost of rebuilding the damaged portions would exceed 50 percent of the then current replacement cost of the entire building. Determination of rebuilding costs shall be per CDC 66.070(A). 

13.    Household hazardous waste depot. 

14.    Super stores.

15.    Amusement enterprises.

16.    Public agency administration.

17.    Public safety facilities.

18.    Public support facilities.

19.    Recycle collection center.

20.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

21.    Postal services.

22.    Religious institutions not listed as permitted uses in CDC 19.030. 

23.    Schools (with under 200 students). 

24.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria.

25.    Lodge, fraternal, community center and civic assembly not listed as permitted uses in CDC 19.030. 

26.    Extended hour businesses that include a new building or expansion of an existing structure. (Ord. 1192, 1987; Ord. 1339, 1992; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1523, 2005; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 §§ 16, 17, 2011; Ord. 1622 § 23, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 27, 2018)


19.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.    Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

2.    The average minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

3.    The average minimum lot depth shall not be less than 90 feet.

4.    Where the use abuts a residential district, except as provided in CDC 58.090(C)(1), the setback distance of the residential zone shall apply. 


[IMAGE]


5.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent, except as provided in CDC 58.090(C)(1)(d).

6.    The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories or 35 feet for any structure located within 50 feet of a low or medium density residential zone, and three and one-half stories or 45 feet for any structure located 50 feet or more from a low or medium density residential zone.

7.    For lot lines that abut an arterial, there shall be no minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback area, and the maximum building setback shall be 20 feet. The front setback area between the street and the building line shall consist of landscaping or a combination of non-vehicular hardscape areas (covered with impervious surfaces) and landscaped areas. If there are not street trees within the public right-of-way, the front setback area shall include such trees per the requirements of the City Arborist.

B.    The requirements of subsections (A)(1) through (5) of this section may be modified for developments under the planned unit development provisions of Chapter 24 CDC. (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1614 § 5, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014)


19.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 15, 2014)


19.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings and approved conditional use applications pursuant to CDC 60.030(C). (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1635 § 14, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 28, 2018)


Chapter 21 OFFICE BUSINESS CENTER, OBC

Sections:

21.010    PURPOSE

21.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

21.030    PERMITTED USES

21.040    REPEALED

21.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

21.060    CONDITIONAL USES

21.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

21.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

21.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


21.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for groups of business and offices in centers, to accommodate the location of intermediate uses between residential districts and areas of more intense development, to provide opportunities for employment and for business and professional services in close proximity to residential neighborhoods and major transportation facilities, to expand the City’s economic potential, to provide a range of compatible and supportive uses, and to locate office employment where it can support other commercial uses. The trade area will vary and may extend outside the community. This zone is intended to implement the policies and criteria set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.


21.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 21.030, is a use that requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC. 

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 21.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 21.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance. (Ord. 1463, 2000)


21.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Business equipment sales and services.

2.    Business support services.

3.    Communications services.

4.    Cultural exhibits and library services.

5.    Family day care. 

6.    Financial, insurance and real estate services.

7.    Hotel/motel, including those operating as extended hour businesses.

8.    Medical and dental services.

9.    Parking facilities.

10.    Participant sports and recreation, indoor.

11.    Personal services and facilities.

12.    Professional and administrative services.

13.    Utilities, minor.

14.    Transportation facilities (Type I).

15.    Special use areas only if located on those properties indicated on the map below.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1622 § 23, 2014; Ord. 1660 § 1, 2017)


21.040 ACCESSORY USES

Repealed by Ord. 1622.


21.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Animal sales and services: veterinary (small animals) as prescribed with no exterior runs or storage.

2.    Multiple-family units only above the first floor of the structure, as a mixed use in conjunction with commercial development that utilizes the entire first floor.

3.    Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

4.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

5.    Home occupation, subject to provisions of Chapter 37 CDC.

6.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. 

7.    Eating and drinking establishments that do not constitute more than 20 percent of the total floor area of the building in which it is located. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1647 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1655 § 3, 2016)


21.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following uses are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Use:

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Convenience sales and personal services.

3.    Food and beverage retail sales.

4.    Heliports.

5.    Research services.

6.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

7.    Utilities, major.

8.    Vehicle fuel sales.

9.    Single-family homes, which were non-conforming structures and were damaged, whereby the cost of rebuilding the damaged portions would exceed 50 percent of the then current replacement cost of the entire building. Determination of rebuilding costs shall be per CDC 66.070(A).

10.    Postal services.

11.    Public safety facilities.

12.    Public support facilities.

13.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1172, 1985; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 § 18, 2011; Ord. 1622 § 23, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 29, 2018)


21.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.    Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

2.    The average minimum lot width shall be 35 feet.

3.    Repealed by Ord. 1622. 

4.    The yard dimensions or building setback area from the lot line shall be:

a.    Interior side yard, a minimum of seven and one-half feet.

b.    Side yard abutting a street, no minimum.

c.    Rear yard, a minimum of 25 feet.

d.    Front yard, no minimum and a 20-foot maximum. The front setback area between the street and the building line shall consist of landscaping or a combination of non-vehicular hardscape areas (covered with impervious surfaces) and landscaped areas. If there are not street trees within the public right-of-way, the front setback area shall include such trees per the requirements of the City Arborist. 


[IMAGE]


5.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

6.    The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories or 35 feet for any structure located within 50 feet of a low or medium density residential zone and three and one-half stories or 45 feet for any structure located 50 feet or more from a low or medium density residential area.

B.    The requirements of subsections (A)(1) through (4) of this section may be modified for developments under the planned unit development provisions of Chapter 24 CDC. (Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014)


21.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 16, 2014)


21.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 30, 2018)


Chapter 22 CAMPUS INDUSTRIAL, CI

Sections:

22.010    PURPOSE

22.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

22.030    PERMITTED USES

22.040    ACCESSORY USES

22.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

22.060    CONDITIONAL USES

22.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

22.080    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

22.090    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

22.100    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


22.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of the Campus Industrial zoning district is to provide a mix of clean, employee intensive industries, offices, and retail commercial uses which have no off-site impacts in terms of noise, odor, glare, lights, vibration, smoke, dust or other types of off-site impacts. The zone provides for combining parking, landscaping and other design features which physically and visually link structures and uses within one development.


22.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 22.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 22.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 22.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


22.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Research services.

2.    Manufacturing of finished products; provided, that:

a.    The use is employee intensive, providing approximately 15 or more jobs for every developed acre of land.

b.    The use is not of a type or intensity which produces odor, smoke, fumes, noise, glare, heat or vibrations which are incompatible with other primary uses allowed in this district.

c.    The physical and operational requirements of the use, including type of structure used and volume of heavy traffic generated, are similar to other industrial and office uses allowed in this district.

3.    Business support services.

4.    Personal service facilities primarily serving the business community within the area.

5.    Corporate headquarters or regional offices with 50 or more employees.

6.    Offices, except corporate headquarters or regional offices allowed under subsection 5 of this section, and those offices specified as limited uses under CDC 22.050(B), may occupy up to 70 percent of the total floor area of the development.

7.    Participant sports and recreation, indoor and outdoor, developed to serve primarily the recreational needs of residents and employees of the district. 

8.    Transportation facilities (Type I). (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


22.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC and include among other uses the following:

1.    Public support facilities.

2.    Building maintenance facilities.

3.    Recycling collection centers; provided, that any storage of material shall be within an enclosed structure.

4.    Children’s day care.

5.    Utilities, minor.


22.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.    The following uses are allowed on a limited basis as part of the development of this district when developed concurrently with or after the primary uses, subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section:

1.    Convenience sales and personal services.

2.    Banks.

3.    Medical and dental services.

4.    Eating and drinking establishments.

5.    Drive-through restaurants.

6.    Drive-through window service for all uses allowed in this subsection in conjunction with the limitations in subsection B of this section.

B.    Limitations and conditions on the development of the uses in subsection A of this section shall be as follows:

1.    The total combined floor area occupied by all the listed uses shall not exceed 10 percent of the total floor area occupied by the permitted use. Formula: 0.10 times permitted floor area equals listed use floor area.

2.    All listed uses shall be located, arranged and integrated within the development to serve primarily the shopping and service needs of employees of the district.

3.    No outdoor storage of materials associated with the listed use shall be allowed.

4.    Uses shall not be of a type or intensity which produces odor, smoke, fumes, noise, glare, heat or vibrations which are incompatible with associated permitted uses in the area.

5.    All listed uses shall comply with the dimensional and development standards under CDC 22.070 and 22.080.

C.    The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

2.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

3.    Water dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

4.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1655 § 4, 2016)


22.060 CONDITIONAL USES

A.    The following are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses, and, in addition, the proposed use:

1.    Will have minimal adverse impact on the appropriate development of permitted uses on abutting properties and the surrounding area considering location, size, design and operating characteristics of the use.

2.    Will not create offensive odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, glare, heat or vibrations which are incompatible with permitted uses allowed in this zone.

3.    Will be located on a site occupied by a permitted use or a use permitted under prescribed conditions or, if separate, in a structure which is compatible with the character and scale of uses allowed within the district, and on a site no larger than necessary for the use and operational requirements of the use.

4.    Will provide vehicular and pedestrian access, circulation, parking and loading areas which are compatible with similar facilities for uses on the same site or adjacent sites.

5.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria.

B.    Uses allowed subject to the above conditions are:

1.    Transient lodging and associated convention facilities.

2.    Heliports.

3.    Retail and service commercial uses.

4.    Household hazardous waste depot. (Ord. 1172, 1985; Ord. 1339, 1993; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


22.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.    The purposes of these requirements and limitations are to:

1.    Encourage coordinated development, and the most efficient and maximum use of campus industrial districts.

2.    Provide for adequate structure separation to ensure air and light access, and fire safety and protection for all.

3.    Provide for a compatible mix of uses supportive of public transportation facilities.

4.    Provide for the protection of adjacent properties.

5.    Provide for open space and outdoor activity areas.

B.    Site area requirements. A site area for purposes of this section shall be the total land area to be developed as a unit, prior to the creation of any new parcels or lots within the land area. A site area may be either of the following:

1.    A parcel or lot, or tract.

2.    Two or more contiguous tracts, lots or parcels under separate ownership; provided, that:

a.    All individual property owners are members of a group formed for the purpose of developing the properties as a single planned development; or

b.    All individual ownerships are converted into development shares prior to any building permit being issued for the project; or

c.    The owners shall record, in the office of the City Recorder, a contract in which all owners agree to subject the use and development of individual ownerships to the development plan for the site area as approved by the City. No permit shall be issued on any structure or use not indicated on the City-approved development plan for the site area.

C.    Minimum site area size requirements.

1.    Developments which include uses under at least two of the permitted use categories under CDC 22.030 shall require a minimum site area of three acres.

2.    Developments which include only uses under CDC 22.030(1) through (5), and accessory uses, shall require a minimum site area of two acres.

3.    Developments which include only uses under CDC 22.030(7) shall require a minimum site area of one acre.

D.    Undersized lots. Any permitted use under CDC 22.030, and accessory uses, may be established on a lot or parcel smaller than the minimum site area requirements which is physically separated from all other undeveloped or underdeveloped properties in this district, or which is approved as a conditional use under CDC 22.060. Uses under CDC 22.050 shall not be included in undersized lot developments.

E.    Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area for all permitted and conditional uses within a site area shall not exceed the net site area multiplied by one (1:1).

F.    Floor area requirements. Any permitted use or combination of permitted uses under CDC 22.030 may be allowed within a development in this district at floor area percentages, excluding accessory uses, not exceeding those illustrated on the following table:

 

Floor Area Limitations for Permitted Use Categories Under CDC 22.030

	1, 2, 3, 4, & 5	6	7

	100%	70%	100%

Limited uses: Only permitted use floor area may be included for purposes of calculating the allowed limited use floor area for development.

G.    The requirements under this section may be modified or waived by the Director pursuant to the provisions of CDC 99.060. Approval shall not be granted unless the applicant provides evidence substantiating conditions in subsections (G)(1) through (3), or (G)(4), of this section:

1.    The modification or waiver is consistent with the purposes under this section; and

2.    The need for the use for which additional floor area is requested is at least as great as the need for other compatible permitted uses allowed in this district; and

3.    The proposed use, and location of the use, is compatible with, and complementary to, existing or proposed developments within the district area; or

4.    A substantial mix of permitted uses has been established within the immediate district area to the extent that all permitted use categories under Section 22.030 are represented.

H.    Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all structures shall be 55 percent of the net site area, after any required dedications for roadway purposes. A minimum of 25 percent of the development site area shall be used for landscaping, natural areas or outdoor recreational use area.

I.    Minimum perimeter setback is 15 feet.

1.    The following uses may be allowed within a perimeter setback area which fronts on a public road:

a.    Landscaping.

b.    Bikeways, trails, pedestrian walks and plazas.

c.    Access driveways.

d.    Bus shelters and other pedestrian amenities.

e.    Identification signs.

2.    The following uses may be allowed within perimeter setback areas which are adjacent to other site areas:

a.    Landscaping.

b.    Bikeways, trails, pedestrian walks, patios, courts.

c.    On-site directional signs.

d.    Coordinated joint use circulation drives, parking, loading, recreational activity areas, plazas.

e.    Coordinated joint use structures, subject to provisions of the Uniform Building Code.

J.    Minimum street frontage is 50 feet.

K.    Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories or 35 feet for any structure located within 50 feet of a residential zone and three and one-half stories or 45 feet for any structure located 50 feet or more from a residential zone. (Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 17, 2014)


22.080 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

All development within this district is subject to the review procedures and application requirements under Chapter 55 CDC. In addition, the following specific standards, requirements, and objectives shall apply to all development in this district:

A.    Building siting and design. The design and siting of structures in this district shall comply with the following:

1.    Particular attention shall be given to the siting and design of all structures, and portions thereof, which may be viewed by the public from inside and outside the development.

2.    When more than one permitted use is to be included in a site area, structures and uses shall be arranged and clustered to maximize opportunities for shared circulation, parking, loading, pedestrian walkways and plazas, recreation areas, transit-related facilities, and day and night surveillance.

B.    Access and on-site circulation. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 48 CDC, the location, design and development of on-site circulation shall:

1.    Provide, as appropriate, joint access and circulation drives through and between developments.

2.    Provide continuous pedestrian and bicycle access to permitted and accessory uses, and uses permitted under prescribed conditions within and between developments, and conveniently located bicycle storage to service the various uses.

3.    Provide on-site directional signing identifying the location of all uses within the development.

4.    Minimize barriers to handicapped and elderly persons.

C.    Parking and loading requirements. The provisions of Chapter 46 CDC shall apply, except as modified to address the following objectives:

1.    Locate parking areas to maximize the potential for shared parking between on- and off-site complementary uses, as provided under Chapter 46 CDC.

2.    Encourage the provision of priority parking spaces convenient to the building entrances for employee carpool vehicles.

3.    Maximize the joint use of truck loading and maneuvering areas between on-site and adjacent off-site complementary uses.

4.    Locate necessary commercial or recreational vehicle storage in areas which are generally inappropriate for permitted use parking, and buffer such areas from residential uses. No parking or loading space required under Chapter 46 CDC shall be used for storing a commercial or recreational vehicle.

D.    Landscaping. A minimum of 25 percent of the developed site area shall be used for landscaping. The design and development of landscaping in this district shall:

1.    Enhance the appearance of the site internally and from a distance.

2.    Include street trees and streetside landscaping. (Trees and ground cover shall be selected from those recommended in the adopted design plan, as applicable.)

3.    Provide an integrated open space and pedestrian way system within the development with appropriate connections to surrounding properties.

4.    Include, as appropriate, a bikeway, pedestrian walkway or jogging trail.

5.    Provide buffering or transitions between uses.

6.    Encourage outdoor eating areas conveniently located for use by employees.

7.    Encourage outdoor recreation areas appropriate to serve all the uses within the development.

E.    Fences. Periphery fences shall not be allowed within this district. Decorative fences or walls may be used to screen service and loading areas, private patios or courts. Fences may be used to enclose playgrounds, tennis courts, or to secure sensitive areas or uses, such as vehicle storage areas or drainage detention facilities. Fences shall not be located where they impede pedestrian or bicycle circulation through or between site areas.

F.    Signs. One freestanding or ground-mounted sign may be provided for a development pursuant to Chapter 52 CDC.

G.    Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of materials shall be allowed within this district.

H.    The requirements of subsections A through G of this section may be modified for developments under the planned unit development provisions of Chapter 24 CDC.


22.090 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by CDC 22.070, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 18, 2014)


22.100 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

11.    Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 31, 2018)


Chapter 23 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL, GI

Sections:

23.010    PURPOSE

23.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

23.030    PERMITTED USES

23.040    ACCESSORY USES

23.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

23.060    CONDITIONAL USES

23.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

23.080    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

23.090    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


23.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this zone is to provide for manufacturing, processing and assembling uses which are of a size and scale which makes them generally incompatible with other adjoining non-industrial uses. The uses included in this zone are generally characterized by large buildings and large storage areas and have off-site effects from smoke, odor, noise, dust, lights or other externalities. The zone is intended to implement the policies and locational criteria in the Comprehensive Plan.


23.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 23.030, is a use which requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 23.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied; and

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 23.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance.


23.030 PERMITTED USES

The following uses are uses permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Agricultural sales and services.

2.    Animal sales and services:

a.    Kennels.

b.    Veterinary, small and large animals.

3.    Automotive and equipment:

a.    Cleaning.

b.    Fleet storage.

c.    Repairs, light and heavy equipment.

d.    Sales/rentals, light and heavy equipment.

e.    Storage, recreational vehicles and boats.

4.    Construction sales and services.

5.    Laundry services.

6.    Manufacturing of products:

a.    From raw materials.

b.    From previously prepared materials.

7.    Packaging and processing.

8.    Postal service.

9.    Public safety facilities.

10.    Public support facilities.

11.    Research services.

12.    Scrap operations, recycling collection center.

13.    Utilities, minor and major.

14.    Wholesale, storage and distribution:

a.    Mini-warehouse.

b.    Light.

c.    Heavy.

15.    Transportation facilities (Type I). (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


23.040 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC.


23.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Sign, subject to the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC.

2.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

3.    Water-dependent uses, subject to the provisions of Chapters 28 and 34 CDC.

4.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


23.060 CONDITIONAL USES

The following uses are conditional uses which may be allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses:

1.    Heliport.

2.    Household hazardous waste depot. 

3.    Transportation facilities (Type II). See CDC 60.090 for additional approval criteria. (Ord. 1339, 1993; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


23.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.    Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 50 feet.

2.    The average minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

3.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

4.    Where the use abuts a residential district, the setback distance of the residential zone shall apply.

5.    The maximum lot coverage shall be 50 percent.

6.    The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories or 35 feet for any structure located within 100 feet of a residential zone and three and one-half stories or 45 feet for any structure located 100 feet or more from a residential zone.

B.    The requirements of subsections (A)(1) through (5) of this section may be modified for developments under the planned unit development provisions of Chapter 24 CDC. (Ord. 1622 § 24, 2014)


23.080 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1636 § 19, 2014)


23.090 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A.    The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

3.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

4.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

5.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

6.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

7.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

8.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

9.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

10.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, apply to all uses except detached single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1675 § 32, 2018)


Chapter 24 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

24.010    PURPOSE

24.020    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

24.030    EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

24.040    NON-COMPLIANCE – BOND

24.050    STAGED DEVELOPMENT

24.060    AREA OF APPLICATION

24.070    EXEMPTIONS FROM PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS

24.080    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

24.090    APPLICABILITY AND ALLOWED USES

24.100    APPROVAL CRITERIA

24.110    RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CALCULATIONS

24.120    EXAMPLES OF RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CALCULATIONS

24.130    ALLOWABLE DENSITY ON TYPE I AND II LANDS

24.140    TRANSITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON DENSITY TRANSFER

24.150    DENSITY BONUSES

24.160    DENSITY BONUS CHART

24.170    USABLE OPEN SPACE REQUIRED

24.180    APPLICABILITY OF THE BASE ZONE PROVISIONS

24.190    PUD AMENDMENT TRIGGER


24.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of the Planned Unit Development overlay zone is to provide a means for creating planned environments:

A.    To produce a development which would be as good or better than that resulting from traditional lot-by-lot development.

B.    To preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the existing landscape features and amenities through the use of a plan that relates the type and design of the development to a particular site.

C.    To correlate comprehensively the provisions of this title and all applicable plans; to encourage developments which will provide a desirable, attractive, and stable environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area.

D.    To allow flexibility in design, placement of buildings, use of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking areas, and to best utilize the potentials of sites characterized by special features of geography, topography, size, and shape.

E.    To allow a mixture of densities between zoning districts and plan designations when more than one district or designation is included in the development.

F.    To develop projects that are compatible with neighboring development in terms of architecture, massing, and scale. Where that cannot be accomplished, appropriate transitions should be provided that are deferential or sympathetic to existing development.

G.    To carry out the goals of West Linn’s Vision, Imagine West Linn, especially goals relating to housing, commercial, and public facilities.


24.020 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    The Planned Unit Development (PUD) zone is an overlay zone and the following are preconditions to filing an application:

1.    Attending a pre-application conference with the City Community Development Department pursuant to CDC 99.030;

2.    Attending a meeting with the respective City-recognized neighborhood association(s), per CDC 99.038, and presenting their preliminary proposal and receiving comments.

B.    The application shall be filed by the owner of record or authorized agent.

C.    Action on the application shall be as provided by Chapter 99 CDC, Procedures for Decision-Making: Quasi-Judicial. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


24.030 EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

If the final plat has not been recorded with the County within three years from the date of approval of the development plan, the application shall be null and void unless an extension is granted per CDC 99.325. If an extension is granted, the final plat must be recorded with the County before the extension lapses. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


24.040 NON-COMPLIANCE – BOND

A.    Non-compliance with an approved final plat or development plan shall be a violation of this chapter.

B.    The development shall be completed in accordance with the approved final plat or development plan, including landscaping and recreation areas, before any occupancy permit will be issued, except that when the Planning Director determines that immediate execution of any feature of an approved final plat or development plan is impractical due to climatic conditions, unavailability of materials, or other temporary condition, the Director shall, as a precondition of the issuance of a required permit, require sufficient funds such as a cashier’s check to guarantee completion of the feature at a time certain not to exceed one year.


24.050 STAGED DEVELOPMENT

The applicant may elect to develop the site in stages. “Staged development” is defined as an application that proposes numerous phases or stages to be undertaken over a period of time. Typically, the first phase will be sufficiently detailed pursuant to the submittal standards of Chapter 85 CDC. Subsequent phases shall provide the type of use(s); the land area(s) involved; the number of units; generalized location and size (square feet) of commercial, industrial, or office projects; parks and open space; street layout, access, and circulation; etc. Generalized building footprints for commercial, office, public, and multi-family projects and parking lot layout will be required. Staged development shall be subject to the provisions of CDC 99.125.


24.060 AREA OF APPLICATION

Planned unit developments (PUDs) can be utilized in all residential, commercial, and industrial districts on lots or parcels of land that are a minimum of three acres in size. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1636 § 20, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 3, 2016)


24.070 EXEMPTIONS FROM PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS

A planned unit development (PUD) shall not apply in cases where all the following conditions exist:

A.    No density transfer is proposed pursuant to provisions of this chapter.

B.    No development, construction, or grading will take place on Type I and II lands.

C.    All the Type I and II lands shall be dedicated to the City as open space, or protected by easement with appropriate delineation.


24.080 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

The submittal requirements shall apply to non-exempt projects as identified in CDC 55.025, and shall include the following:

A.    Narrative discussing proposal and applicability of the PUD and addressing approval criteria of this chapter; design review, CDC 55.100; and CDC 92.010(E).

B.    Narrative and table showing applicable density calculations.

C.    Map showing how the densities will be distributed within the project site.

D.    Compliance with submittal requirements of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, including full response to approval criteria for Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, and Chapter 85 CDC, if it is a single-family PUD.

E.    Narrative, tables, and showing all density transfers.

F.    Tables and maps identifying acreage, location and type of development constraints due to site characteristics such as slope, drainage and geologic hazards. For Type I, II and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), the applicant must provide a geologic report, with text, figures and attachments as needed to meet the industry standard of practice, prepared by a certified engineering geologist and/or a geotechnical professional engineer, that includes:

1.    Site characteristics, geologic descriptions and a summary of the site investigation conducted;

2.    Assessment of engineering geological conditions and factors;

3.    Review of the City of West Linn’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan and applicability to the site; and

4.    Conclusions and recommendations focused on geologic constraints for the proposed land use or development activity, limitations and potential risks of development, recommendations for mitigation approaches and additional work needed at future development stages including further testing and monitoring.

G.    Other material as required by the Planning Director. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1662 § 2, 2017)


24.090 APPLICABILITY AND ALLOWED USES

Subject to the provisions of CDC 24.070, 24.080 and this section, the PUD Overlay Zone may be applied to all residential, commercial, and industrial zones.

A.    In addition to the uses allowed outright in the underlying zone the following uses shall be allowed outright where all other applicable standards are met.

1.    Single-family, duplex, attached housing and multiple-family housing.

2.    Community buildings.

3.    Indoor recreation facility, athletic club, fitness center, racquetball court, swimming pool, tennis court, or similar use.

4.    Outdoor recreation facility, golf course, swimming pool, tennis court, or similar use.

5.    Recreation vehicle storage area.

6.    Public safety facilities.

7.    Major or minor utilities.

8.    Religious institution, day care center, public or private schools. 

B.    Any commercial uses listed under the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zone shall be allowed in the manner provided by the base zone or adopted plan document and, in addition, the applicant must prove:

1.    The uses are for the purpose of primarily serving the residents of the proposed development; and

2.    There is a need for the type and amount of commercial space. A market analysis may be required.

3.    The use will reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) between residents and existing neighborhood commercial locations. (Ord. 1463, 2000)


24.100 APPROVAL CRITERIA

A.    The approval criteria of CDC 55.100, design review, and CDC 92.010(E) shall apply to non-exempted projects per CDC 55.025. Single-family detached, single-family attached, and duplex residential units proposed shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 43 CDC at time of building permit application. 

B.    The application shall also demonstrate compliance with the following criteria:

1.    The proposal shall preserve the existing amenities of the site to the greatest extent possible by relating the type and design of the development to the topography, landscape features, and natural amenities existing on the site and in the vicinity.

2.    The proposed PUD shall provide a desirable, attractive, and stable environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area through thorough, well-developed, detailed planning and by comprehensively correlating the provisions of this code and all applicable adopted plans.

3.    The placement and design of buildings, use of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking areas, and landscaping shall be designed to best utilize the potentials of the site characterized by special features of geography, topography, size, and shape.

4.    The PUD shall be developed so that it is compatible with neighboring development in terms of architecture, massing, and scale. Where that cannot be accomplished, appropriate transitions shall be provided that are deferential or sympathetic to existing development.

C.    All densities, density transfers, transitions, density bonuses, and proposed setbacks shall conform to provisions of this chapter as required by CDC 24.080 and 24.110 through 24.170 inclusive. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1662 § 3, 2017)


24.110 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CALCULATIONS

A.    The PUD allows density to be transferred on residential portions of the site. The following sections explain how the allowed number of dwelling units per acre is calculated. The standards are also intended to ensure that PUDs and adjoining developments are compatible and maintain a sense of neighborhood unity.

B.    Net acres for land to be developed with detached single-family dwellings, or multi-family dwellings including duplexes, is computed by subtracting the following from the gross acres:

1.    Any land area which is included in a boundary street right-of-way or water course, or planned open space areas if density transfer is not requested.

2.    An allocation of 25 percent for public or private facilities (e.g., streets, paths, right-of-way, etc.) or, when a tentative plat or plan has been developed, the total land area allocated for public or private facilities.

3.    A lot or parcel of at least the size required by the applicable base zone, if an existing dwelling is to remain on the site.

C.    The allowed density or number of dwelling units on the site, subject to the limitations in CDC 24.140 and 24.150, is computed by dividing the number of square feet in the net acres by the minimum number of square feet required for each lot or parcel, by the base zone. (Ord. 1636 § 21, 2014)


24.120 EXAMPLES OF RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CALCULATIONS

When density is to be transferred on a land area with Type I or Type II land, the following procedure will apply:

 

EXAMPLE 

	FACTS:	 	 

	RIGHT-OF-WAY:	 	 

	 	PUBLIC	(59,677 sq. ft.)	 

	 	PRIVATE	(33,106 sq. ft.)	2.13 AC

	OPEN SPACE:	 	 

	 	DEDICATION TO CITY	(60,113 sq. ft.)	 

	 	COMMON OWNERSHIP	(2,614 sq. ft.)	1.44 AC

	SINGLE-FAMILY USE:	 	 

	 	TYPE I & II LANDS	(104,000 sq. ft.)	 

	 	TYPE III & IV LANDS	(197,433 sq. ft.)	6.92 AC

	 	 	 	 

	GROSS SITE AREA:	10.49 AC

	 	 	 	 

	DENSITY CALCULATIONS:	 	 

	 	GROSS SITE AREA	10.49 AC	 

	(-)	RIGHT-OF-WAY	2.13 AC	 

	 	NET SITE AREA	8.36 AC	 

	 	 	 	 

	OPEN SPACE:	 	 

	 	(1.44 Ac. x 100% transfer – 10,000 sq. ft. min. lot size) =	 	6.27 lots

	 	 	 	 

	TYPE I & II LANDS DEVELOPED	 	 

	 	(104,000 sq. ft. x 50% developable – 10,000 sq. ft. min. lot size) =	 	5.2 lots

	 	 	 	 

	TYPE III & IV LANDS DEVELOPED	 	 

	 	(197,435 sq. ft. x 100% developable – 10,000 sq. ft. min. lot size) =	 	19.74 lots

	 	 	 	 

	TOTAL ALLOWED DENSITY:	 	31 LOTS


24.130 ALLOWABLE DENSITY ON TYPE I AND II LANDS

A.    This table relates to the allowed density of development on Type I and II lands. “Development” means when the footprint of a home is placed on Type I or II lands, or when over 50 percent of the lot comprises Type I or II lands. Generally speaking, the greater the constraints, the lower the density; and the lower the constraints, the higher the allowable density.

Please note that density transfers from constrained lands generally allow a 50 to 100 percent transfer. The rationale for only a 50 percent transfer is that these lands have historically been of marginal development value (e.g., wetlands, 52 percent slopes, etc.); so to say those lands should have the same 100 percent development value and potential as less constrained lands would be wrong since they are tougher to build on and they are generally appraised at a lower land value than flatter, more developable sites.

There are three categories of allowable density: (1) “building not allowed”; (2) allowable density “when developed”; and (3) allowable density “when transferred.” The first category means that no building is allowed in, for example, slopes over 50 percent or in wetlands. The prohibition is represented by an “X.” The second category means that if a developer wants to develop an area, it can only be developed at 50 percent of normal density or not at all. The third category, “when transferred,” explains what percentage of the normal density of the Type I and II lands can be transferred to on-site non Type I and II lands.

B.

 

	 	 	Allowable Density*

	Type I or

Type II lands	Building Not Allowed	When Developed	When Transferred

	Slopes	 	 	 

	  25 – 35%	 	50%**	75%

	  35 – 50%	 	X	75%

	  More than 50%	X	X	50%

	 	 	 	 

	Confirmed Landslide Hazards	X	X	50%

	 	 	 	 

	Flood Management	 	 	 

	100-Year Floodplain	X	X	50%

	Floodway	X	X	50%

	 	 	 	 

	Water Quality Resource Area	X	X	50%

	Significant Natural Areas	X	X	50%

	Significant Tree/Tree Clusters on Type I and II Lands	X	X	50%

	Significant Tree/Tree Clusters on Non-Type I and II Lands 	X	X	100%

	Planned Public Open Space/Regional Storm Treatment Facility***	X	X	100%

*    Development of single-family detached residences on pre-existing lots of record is exempt from this chart; most restrictive density governs in the event of conflict or overlap.

**    The “50 percent allowable density when developed” means that if we reduce the number of homes on constrained lands, we reduce the hazard potential which typically increases with higher density and increased site disturbance. Consequently, the density is reduced in half (50 percent). That means that to develop on a predominantly steep lot would require twice the minimum lot size of the underlying zone (e.g., you would need a 20,000-square-foot lot in the R-10 zone). When Type I and II lands are to be developed, the 70 percent rule shall not apply to those areas; it shall only apply to the developable net area as defined in CDC 85.200(J)(7). (Ord. 1408, 1998)


24.140 TRANSITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON DENSITY TRANSFER

A.    Because the PUD and the provisions of this chapter allow increased residential densities and various housing types, it is necessary that some kind of transition be provided between the project site and the surrounding properties. These transitions will, for example, mitigate the impacts of multi-family housing next to single-family housing. Transitions are not required in all cases, however. The following exceptions shall apply:

1.    Single-family PUD next to single-family non-PUD does not require a transition (e.g., even though it is R-5 single-family next to R-10, etc.). Also, similar type housing does not need to transition (e.g., duplex next to duplex);

2.    Two housing units attached side by side by common wall are considered compatible with detached single-family units; but

3.    More than two attached housing units (e.g., a triplex) are not considered compatible with a single-family detached unit; however

4.    Where a proposed residential unit is to be located at least 200 feet from the nearest existing single-family home, the provisions of subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section shall not apply. The 200-foot transition must be on the subject property. All parking and access shall be a 20-foot minimum setback from abutting property line, unless the approval authority, based upon the City Engineer’s recommendation, approves a circulation plan which supports reduced transition to accommodate joint access between adjoining properties.

B.    Where transitions are required, they shall be satisfied by at least one of the following provisions:

1.    An intervening street or driveway that is existing, platted or specifically proposed in the Transportation Master Plan and has a minimum width of 24 feet;

2.    Natural topography such as a drainageway or wetland that provides adequate horizontal separation (minimum 40 feet), or a cliff or embankment that provides adequate vertical separation which shall be defined as having the PUD site at least 10 feet below the abutting non-PUD site, plus vegetation for adequate screening. The natural topography may be on an adjoining lot or parcel;

3.    Manmade berm (five feet minimum height) with landscaping for adequate screening with a 40-foot minimum width. This transition must be on the subject lot or parcel;

4.    The on-site lot or parcel sizes for detached single-family homes adjacent to each property line shall not be smaller than a lot 75 percent of the minimum size of the lot size allowed on the abutting lots or parcels by the applicable zone, or 7,000 square feet, whichever is less; or

5.    A horizontal separation of at least 200 feet between on- and off-site structures. The 200-foot transition must be on the subject site. (Ord. 1636 § 22, 2014)


24.150 DENSITY BONUSES

A.    Although the density may be reduced by CDC 24.130, applicants are encouraged to seek density bonus credits under such categories as “site planning and design excellence.” The permitted number of dwelling units may be increased up to 29 percent above those computed under the formula above based on a finding of the Planning Director that the density bonus credits have been satisfied as set forth in the following section and in CDC 24.160:

B.    Site planning and design excellence allow additional units up to the maximum indicated on the chart when excellence in site planning and building design is demonstrated with respect to neighborhood compatibility, recreation space, security and crime prevention, and livability of on-site environment, as determined through design review. Examples of quality design features which may be used to address the foregoing include, but are not limited to:

1.    Maximum retention and integration of natural features into site design in addition to open space areas dedicated to the City. 

2.    Minimize impervious surfaces. Locate parking facilities and garages at the rear of buildings accessed by alleys. De-emphasis of the automobile is encouraged through placement of parking at side or rear of buildings (reference CDC 55.100(A)(2)).

3.    Maximize recreation and open spaces in addition to open space areas dedicated to the City.

4.    Superior landscape plan in terms of quantity of materials and quality represented by size of plant/tree, variety of plant/tree, and mix to allow seasonal colors. The landscape plan should incorporate available natural site features (e.g., rock outcroppings, creeks, etc.). The landscape plan should relate to or complement on-site buildings, frame views, and show sensitivity to the micro-climate. Other landscape elements may include rockeries, ornamental pools, and pathways.

5.    Architectural design that emphasizes high quality materials, finish, texture, and craftsmanship. Architectural complexity and richness of detail are sought. Contextual design that draws from the predominant architecture of the area is preferred over contrasting design. Only examples of manifestly outstanding contrasting design would be acceptable alternatives to the contextual approach. The design should accommodate the human scale with multiple light windows, appropriately scaled entryways, and porches. Facades should be broken up into multiple elements, both horizontally and vertically. Variations in the building silhouette and depth are also desirable.

6.    Integration of various housing types and densities supported by neighborhood commercial uses and basic services.

7.    Well-articulated pedestrian and bikeway path system and public transit system, if applicable, that unifies the development site and connects with adjacent development and destinations. Transit facilities are important.

C.    The City shall encourage and assist in the accumulation of density bonus developments. The final density allowed will depend on the following factors:

1.    The amount of density allowed shall be rounded up to the next figure when any partial figure of one-half or greater results from adding the percentage density increase to the base density.

2.    The development shall be subject to all applicable development standards of this code. The Planning Director may recommend that the proposed design of the development be modified to ensure that development standards are satisfied. Modifications of design may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.    Reduction in building coverage.

b.    Clustering of buildings.

c.    Redesign of parking or street layout.

d.    Protection of resource areas. (Ord. 1463, 2000)


24.160 DENSITY BONUS CHART

The cumulative density bonus for all categories except for design excellence or low cost housing cannot exceed 20 percent. To achieve the maximum 29 percent density bonus, the application must qualify for the low cost housing bonus, the design excellence bonus, or both.

 

	Bonus Category	LOW DENSITY

% of increase

(R-20, R-15, R‑10, R-7, R-40)	MEDIUM DENSITY

% of increase

(R-5 & R-4.5)	HIGH DENSITY

% of increase

(R-2.1, R-3.0)

	1.	Low Cost Housing:	5%	8%	8%

	 	At least 20 percent of the dwelling units must qualify and be approved for lower income occupants under a federal, State, or local program. (See also senior housing bonus associated with R-4.5, R-3 and R-2.1 zones)

	2.	Common wall units:	5%	n/a	n/a

	 	At least 20 percent of the dwelling units must be common wall.	 	 	 

	3.	Park Dedication:	5%/1/2 ac.	8%/1/2 ac.	4%/1/2 ac.

	 	Improved site area is dedicated and accepted by the City, or other public agency, as usable, accessible park land. In Tanner Basin, where System Development Charge (SDC) credits are given for certain dedications of open space, the density bonus may result in reduced SDC compensation.

	4.	Design Excellence:	15%	15%	15%

	 	The development satisfies the criteria for exceptional design, pursuant to CDC 24.150.	 	 	 

	5.	Natural area/resource dedication of non-constrained lands (Type I and II lands and lands devoted to preservation of significant trees) pursuant to CDC. Includes but is not limited to trails, paths, trailhead construction where appropriate. The City has the authority to refuse such dedication for the purpose of bonus density if the City determines that the dedication would provide no significant benefits to the City.	5%/1/2 ac.	5%/1/2 ac.	5%/1/2 ac.

NOTE: To interpret the above table, 8%, for example, means the development may increase density by that amount. The “5%/1/2 ac.” notation means that density can increase by 5% for every 1/2 acre of park land that is dedicated.

(Ord. 1463, 2000)


24.170 USABLE OPEN SPACE REQUIRED

Residential planned unit developments (PUDs) shall comply with the following usable open space requirements:

A.    PUDs that contain multi-family units shall comply with the requirements of CDC 55.100(F).

B.    PUDs that contain 10 or more single-family detached, single-family attached, or duplex residential units shall comply with the following usable open space requirements.

1.    The plan shall include an open space area with at least 300 square feet of usable area per dwelling unit.

2.    The usable open space shall meet the design requirements of CDC 55.100(F)(2).

3.    The usable open space shall be owned in common by the residents of the development unless the decision-making authority determines, based upon a request from the applicant and the recommendation of the City Director of Parks and Recreation, that the usable open space should be dedicated to the City for public use. If owned in common by the residents of the development, then a homeowner’s association shall be organized prior to occupancy to maintain the usable open space.

4.    If the usable open space contains active recreational facilities such as hard surface athletic courts or swimming pools, then the usable open space area shall not be located on the perimeter of the development unless buffered by a transition pursuant to CDC 24.140(B). (Ord. 1463, 2000)


24.180 APPLICABILITY OF THE BASE ZONE PROVISIONS

The provisions of the base zone are applicable as follows:

A.    Lot dimensional standards. The minimum lot size and lot depth and lot width standards do not apply except as related to the density computation under this chapter.

B.    Lot coverage. The lot coverage provisions of the base zone shall apply for detached single-family units. For single-family attached residential units, duplex residential units, and multiple-family residential units, the following lot coverage provisions shall apply, based upon the underlying base zone.

 

	R-40, R-20	35 percent

	R-15	40 percent

	R-10, R-7	45 percent

	R-5, R-4.5	50 percent

	R-3, R-2.1	60 percent

C.    Building height. The building height provisions of the underlying zone shall apply.

D.    Structure setback provisions.

1.    Setback areas contiguous to the perimeter of the project shall be the same as those required by the base zone unless otherwise provided by the base zone or Chapter 55 CDC.

2.    The side yard setback provisions shall not apply except that all detached structures shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of five feet, or meet the Uniform Building Code requirement for fire walls.

3.    The side street setback shall be 10 feet.

4.    The front yard and rear yard setbacks shall be 15 feet. Porches may encroach forward another five feet. Additional encroachments, such as porches, are allowed per Chapter 38 CDC.

5.    The setback for a garage in the front yard that opens onto the street shall be 20 feet unless the provisions of CDC 41.010 apply. Garages in the rear yard may meet the standards of CDC 34.060.

6.    The applicant may propose alternative setbacks. The proposed setbacks must be approved by the decision-making body and established as conditions of approval, or by amendment to conditions of approval. The decision-making body will consider among other things maintenance of privacy, adequate light, defensible space, traffic safety, etc.

E.    All other provisions of the base zone shall apply except as modified by this chapter. (Ord. 1442, 1999)


24.190 PUD AMENDMENT TRIGGER

Amendments to PUDs shall be required when 10 percent or more of the housing type changes (e.g., from single-family units to multi-family units) from the tentatively approved PUD plan, or when there is more than a 10 percent change in the number of units, or when the layout of streets and lots significantly changes. Amendments shall require review per CDC 99.120.


Chapter 25 OVERLAY ZONES – HISTORIC DISTRICT

Sections:

25.010    PURPOSES

25.020    USE OF THIS CHAPTER

25.030    PERMITTED USES

25.040    HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW PROCESSES

25.050    APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

25.060    DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO HISTORIC RESOURCES

25.070    ADDITIONAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO HISTORIC DISTRICTS

25.080    MODIFICATIONS TO DESIGN STANDARDS

25.090    DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE

25.100    REMOVAL OF HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION

25.110    RELOCATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE

25.120    DEMOLITION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE

25.130    DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT

25.140    HISTORIC RESOURCE MAP


25.010 PURPOSES

The purposes of this chapter are to: 

A.    Foster community and neighborhood pride and sense of community identity based on recognition and use of historic and cultural resources.

B.    Identify and protect the City’s historic resources (see Chapter 2 CDC, Definitions), including the diverse architectural styles that reflect the phases of the City’s history.

C.    Encourage preservation and use of historic sites, structures, and districts within the City that reflect special elements of its historical, architectural, archaeological, artistic, cultural, and engineering heritage.

D.    Provide procedures and establish approval criteria for all reviews of proposed alterations to the exterior of historic structures and sites and other development in historic districts. 

E.    Increase economic and financial benefits to historic property owners and the community.

F.    Ensure that changes to designated historic resources protect the integrity of the resource and the significant aspects of the area’s heritage. 

G.    Provide regulations that will ensure the preservation of the quality and historic integrity of historic resources and their site and, if applicable, ensure compatibility and consistency with the qualities of the respective historic district its nomination was intended to preserve. 

H.    Provide for creation of new historic districts and designation of new landmarks, as appropriate, and to allow removal of such designations if they are no longer appropriate. 

I.    Provide a process to enable thoughtful consideration of the proposed demolition of historic structures. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.020 USE OF THIS CHAPTER

A.    Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all properties designated as historic resources as shown on the City’s zoning map and properties listed on the National Register. Specific sections apply as noted in subsections B and C of this section.

B.    Hierarchy of regulation. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede any conflicting standards or criteria elsewhere in the CDC. The underlying zoning provisions for the applicable zone still apply. 

1.    Exemptions. The items listed in CDC 25.040(A), Exemptions from historic design review, are exempt from historic review provided that they comply with any applicable requirements in CDC 25.040(A).

2.    Design standards. CDC 25.060, Design standards applicable to historic resources, applies to historic reviews for designated properties, except for CDC 25.060(B), Standards for accessory structures, which applies only to accessory structures on sites containing historic resources. 

3.    Additional design standards. CDC 25.070, Additional design standards applicable to historic districts, provides additional standards that are applicable to historic design review for historic district properties. 

a.    CDC 25.070(A), Standards for alterations and additions, applies only to historic design review in a historic district. 

b.    CDC 25.070(B), Standards for new construction, applies only to new development or construction in a historic district beyond alterations and additions, and including accessory structures. 

c.    CDC 25.070(C), Willamette Historic District general standards, applies only to alterations and additions, new construction, and accessory structure construction in the Willamette Historic District.

C.    Applicability of historic design standards. Development subject to this chapter must comply with applicable historic design review standards unless otherwise approved through the modifications process under CDC 25.080. The “X” in the following chart indicates which standards are applicable to different types of development.

 

	STANDARDS APPLICABILITY MATRIX

	SECTION	PROPOSED ACTIVITY	ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS	ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS	NEW CONSTRUCTION	ACCESSORY STRUCTURES	ACCESSORY STRUCTURES

	LOCATION	HISTORIC LANDMARK	HISTORIC DISTRICT	HISTORIC DISTRICT	HISTORIC LANDMARK	HISTORIC DISTRICT

	25.060 DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO HISTORIC RESOURCES	A. STANDARDS FOR ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS	X	X	X	X	X

	B. STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES	 	 	 	X	X

	25.070 ADDITIONAL DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO HISTORIC DISTRICTS	A. STANDARDS FOR ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS	 	X	 	 	X

	B. STANDARDS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION	 	 	X	 	X

	C. WILLAMETTE HISTORIC DISTRICT GENERAL STANDARDS	 	X	X	 	X

(Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.030 PERMITTED USES

Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, uses permitted by the base zoning district that are in accordance with the CDC are allowed on sites containing historic resources. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.040 HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW PROCESSES

Proposed changes to historic resources that are not exempted by subsection A of this section, Exemptions from historic design review, are subject to subsection B of this section, Class I historic design review, or subsection C of this section, Class II historic design review. Class I historic design review addresses significant changes that warrant staff review. Class II historic design review addresses major changes including additions and new construction, subject to Historic Review Board approval. The processes for conducting Class I and Class II historic design review are in Chapter 99 CDC.

A.    Exemptions from historic design review. The following are exempt from historic design review:

1.    Ordinary maintenance. Ordinary maintenance or repair including a change of facade colors, unless the color is specifically listed in the historic resource inventory, historic resource nomination, or National Register nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource’s historic significance.

2.    Gutters and downspouts. Replacement or addition of gutters and downspouts that are rectangular, ogee, or K-shaped and composed of wood or metal material, or styles and materials that match those that were typically used on similar style buildings of the era, or the era the building style references. 

3.    Foundation. Repair of a foundation with the same material or construction of a foundation in the same location that does not result in raising or lowering the building elevation. 

4.    Building material. Replacement of building material, when required due to deterioration of material, with building material that matches the original material.

5.    Roof material. Repair or replacement of roof material with material comparable to the existing roof, or replacement of the roof in its entirety with cedar shingles, three tab asphalt shingles, or architectural composition shingles.

6.    Window sashes. Replacement of window sashes with new sashes consistent with the original appearance. Elements of consistency include: material, profile and proportions of the sash, sill, trim, light patterns, glass color, and profile of mullions and muntins. 

7.    Storm windows. Storm windows made of painted wood, baked enamel, anodized aluminum, or other materials with forms that complement or match the color, detail, and proportions of the building.

8.    Egress windows. Addition of egress windows on secondary facades with wood windows or windows that are consistent with subsection (A)(6) of this section.

9.    Landscaping. Landscaping changes unless the landscaping is identified in the historic resource inventory, historic resource nomination, or National Register nomination, as an attribute that contributes to the resource’s historic value.

10.    Fences. Construction of fences that meet the following requirements in addition to the requirements of Chapter 44 CDC:

a.    Traditional fences. Any fence along a front lot line or along the portion of a side lot line between the street and the primary structure (see Figures 1 and 2) which:

1)    Consists of pickets, each of which are between one and three inches wide and spaced equally; 

2)    Does not have solid portions exceeding 50 percent; and 

3)    Is no greater than 36 inches in height. 

b.    General fences. Any fence that is not located along a front lot line or along the portion of a side lot line between the street and the primary structure that is:

1)    Constructed of wood fence boards, rails, posts, and associated hardware only; and 

2)    No greater than 72 inches in height.


[IMAGE]


Figure 1: Example of Exempt Interior Lot Fence Locations


[IMAGE]


Figure 2: Example of Exempt Corner Lot Fence Locations

11.    Retaining walls. Construction of retaining walls that meet the following requirements: 

a.    No greater than three feet high; and

b.    Project above upper grade no more than 12 inches.

12.    Swimming pools. Construction of in-ground swimming pools in rear yards.

13.    Mechanical equipment. Replacement or installation of mechanical equipment, if 100 percent screened by a permitted building, fence, or landscaping that precludes visibility from any street.

14.    Solar energy systems. Replacement or installation of solar energy systems that are not part of a project that includes other elements subject to historic design review, provided the following requirements are met: 

a.    On a flat roof, the horizontal portion of a mansard roof, or roofs surrounded by a parapet that is at least 12 inches higher than the highest part of the roof surface: 

1)    The solar energy system must be mounted flush or on racks with the system or rack extending no more than five feet above the top of the highest point of the roof. 

2)    The solar energy system must be screened from view from all streets by an existing parapet along the street-facing facade that is as tall as the tallest part of the solar energy system, or by setting the solar energy system back from the roof edges facing the street four feet for each foot of solar energy system height.

b.    On a pitched roof, solar energy systems may be located on a section of pitched roof facing a rear lot line or on a section of pitched roof facing within 45 degrees of the rear lot line. (See the example on the right side of Figure 3.) The system must be mounted flush, with the plane of the system parallel with the roof surface, with the system no more than 12 inches from the surface of the roof at any point, and set back three feet from the roof edge and ridgeline. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 3: Exempt Solar Energy System Locations

15.    Skylights. Replacement or installation of skylights that are not part of a project that includes other elements subject to historic design review, provided the following requirements are met: 

a.    For skylights that are on a flat roof, the horizontal portion of a mansard roof, or roofs surrounded by a parapet that is at least 12 inches higher than the highest part of the roof surface, the skylight must be screened from view from all streets by:

1)    An existing parapet along the street-facing facade that is as tall as the tallest part of the skylight; or

2)    Setting the skylight back from the roof edges facing the street four feet for each foot of skylight height.

b.    For skylights that are on a pitched roof, the skylight must be flat and must face a side or rear lot line or be located on a section of a pitched roof that faces within 45 degrees of a rear lot line. (See the right side of Figure 3.)

16.    Utilities, street infrastructure, and street furniture. Replacement or installation of utilities, street infrastructure, or street furniture except for streetlights, utility boxes, benches, receptacles, and the installation of curbs where there are none. Replacement and new sidewalks shall not exceed four feet in width except as required to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall be compatible in location, pattern, spacing, dimensions, and materials with existing sidewalks. 

17.    Accessory structures. Construction of accessory structures under 120 square feet and 10 feet in height (greenhouses, storage sheds, jacuzzis, spas, structures, gazebos, etc.) in a side or rear yard.

B.    Class I historic design review. The following are subject to Class I historic design review to determine their compliance with the applicable approval standards:

1.    Nonexempt. Items listed in CDC 25.040(A)(1) through (17) that do not qualify for an exemption;

2.    Facade alteration. Alteration of a facade when 100 square feet or less of the structure’s facade is being altered; 

3.    Ingress/egress. Revised points of ingress/egress to a site;

4.    Americans with Disabilities Act. Proposals seeking compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, not including the public right-of-way; and 

5.    Art and statuary. Construction of freestanding art and statuary over 10 feet tall. 

C.    Class II historic design review. All proposed new construction, alterations, and additions, not identified as exempt under subsection A of this section, or subject to Class I historic design review under subsection B of this section, are subject to Class II historic design review and must meet the applicable approval standards. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.050 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

A.    Historic design review. Applications for historic design review shall include the following:

1.    Narrative. Written narrative explaining the proposal and how it meets the approval criteria in CDC 25.060 and 25.070, as applicable; 

2.    Existing plan and elevation drawings. Plan and elevation drawings of the existing structure, if applicable, including materials;

3.    Proposed plan and elevation drawings. Plan and elevation drawings of the proposed changes, including materials;

4.    Current photographs. Photographs of the existing structure, if applicable;

5.    Historic photographs. Historic photographs and/or drawings of the existing structure, if available; and

6.    Supplementary. For additions that increase the gross square footage of the structures on the site by more than 50 percent, and/or new construction in a historic district:

a.    Plan and elevation drawings of adjacent properties; and

b.    A rendering and/or photo-simulation showing the proposal in context.

B.    Designation of a historic resource. Applications for designation as an historic resource shall include the following: 

1.    Narrative. Written narrative description of the proposed historic resource and how it meets one or more of the approval criteria in CDC 25.090(A);

2.    Site plan. Site plan depicting the property boundaries and all structures and features on the site;

3.    Current photographs. Current photographs of all elevations of the existing structure and any significant features;

4.    Historic photographs. Historic photographs, plans, or maps, if available;

5.    Supplementary documentation. Any other documentation demonstrating the significance of the proposed historic resource; and 

6.    Owner consent. Owner consent as follows:

a.    Historic landmarks. The property owner must consent, in writing, to a proposed historic landmark designation with the exception that properties listed on the National Register shall be regulated as historic landmarks regardless of the owner’s consent.

b.    Historic districts. A property owner may refuse to consent to historic district designation at any point during the designation process. Properties in historic districts listed on the National Register shall be regulated as historic properties regardless of the owner’s consent.

C.    Removal of historic resource designation. Applications for removal of historic resource designation shall include the following:

1.    Narrative. Written narrative description of the historic resource proposed for removal of designation that addresses the considerations identified in CDC 25.100;

2.    Site plan. Site plan depicting the property boundaries and all structures and features on the site;

3.    Current photographs. Current photographs of all elevations of the existing structure and any significant features;

4.    Historic photographs. Historic photographs, plans, or maps, if available; and 

5.    Supplementary documentation. Documentation that the property owner objected, on the record, at the time of designation, if applicable.

D.    Relocation of a historic resource. Applications for relocation of an historic resource shall include the following: 

1.    Examination of alternatives. Documentation that all reasonable alternatives to relocation have been explored and that relocation is the preferred alternative. 

2.    Structure and site documentation. Documentation of the historic structure and site conditions prior to relocation, including detailed photography, notes, drawings, and reference measurements. 

3.    Moving procedures. Clearly stated moving procedures that will be utilized to protect historic elements and document the relocation, including: plans for minimizing damage to historic materials, labeling system for dismembered elements to assure accurate reconstruction in the new location, and plans for protecting the historic resource until reconstruction is complete. 

E.    Demolition of a historic resource.

1.    Historic landmark or contributing primary structure. An application for the demolition of a historic landmark or contributing primary structure shall include:

a.    A statement of the historic significance of the structure or resource to the community, taking into consideration its designation as a historic landmark or its contributing status in a historic district.

b.    A statement demonstrating good faith efforts of the property owner to sell or relocate the structure or resources, including, but not limited to:

1)    Real estate taxes for the two years immediately preceding the application;

2)    Assessed value for the two years immediately preceding the application;

3)    Current fair market value of the structure or resource as determined by an appraiser;

4)    All listings for the structure or resource for the past two years including prices asked and offers received; and 

5)    Documentation of all attempts to relocate the structure or resource.

c.    Documentation of the historic structure and site conditions prior to demolition, including detailed photography, notes, drawings, and reference measurements.

d.    A report from a structural engineer on the condition of the structure or resource.

e.    The estimated cost of rehabilitation of the structure or resource.

f.    A report from a real estate or other market professional identifying potential alternative uses for the structure or resource permitted within the existing zoning classification.

g.    A report identifying available economic incentives for adaptive reuse of the structure or resource.

h.    A proposed plan for redevelopment of the site on which the structure or resource is located.

2.    Non-contributing or not in period primary structure and accessory structure. An application for the demolition of a non-contributing or not in period primary structure or an accessory structure shall include:

a.    A statement of the historic significance of the structure or resource to the community, taking into consideration its location on the site of a historic landmark or within a historic district. 

b.    A site plan depicting the property boundaries and all structures and features on the site.

c.    A proposed plan for redevelopment of the site on which the structure or resource is located. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.060 DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO HISTORIC RESOURCES

The following design standards apply to all changes, including alterations, additions, and new construction proposed on a designated historic resource. These standards are intended to preserve the features that made the resources eligible for historic designation. Development must comply with all applicable standards, or be approved through the modifications process specified in CDC 25.080. 

A.    Standards for alterations and additions. This section applies to historic reviews for alteration of and additions to designated historic resources:

1.    Retention of original construction. The original construction shall be maintained or restored to the greatest extent practicable. Stylistic features of original construction that shall be preserved include, but are not limited to: a line of columns, decorative shingles, projecting bays, other primary structural elements, spatial relationships that characterize the property, examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize the building, and architectural details defining the structure’s character and historic significance. 

2.    Retention of historic material. Removal or alteration of historic materials and features shall be avoided during the construction of new additions or exterior alterations. Whenever possible, deteriorated materials and architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced. In the event replacement of an existing feature is necessary, new materials shall, to the extent possible, match those of the original building in terms of composition, design, color, texture, and other visual features. 

3.    Time period consistency. Buildings shall be recognizable as a physical record of their time and place. Alterations which have no historical basis or which seek to create a false sense of historical development are not allowed.

4.    Significance over time. Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right, and during the period of significance, shall be retained and preserved.

5.    Differentiate old from new. Alterations and additions shall be differentiated from the original buildings and shall be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale, proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property.

6.    Reversibility. Additions and alterations shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its context would be unimpaired.

7.    Building additions. Building additions shall be subordinate to the original building, smaller in scale, and attached to the rear or set back along the side. Features of building additions, including the proportions of window and door openings, shall be consistent with those of the existing building. Dimensional and other requirements in the underlying zone, as applicable, shall apply.

8.    Building height and roof pitch. Existing or historic building heights and roof pitch shall be maintained. 

9.    Roof materials. Replacement of a roof or installation of a new roof with materials other than cedar shingles, three tab asphalt shingles, or architectural composition shingles must be demonstrated, using photographic or other evidence, to be in character with those of the original roof, or with materials that are consistent with the original construction.

10.    Existing exterior walls and siding. Replacement of the finish materials of existing walls and siding with different material must be demonstrated, using photographic or other evidence, to be in character with those of the original materials, or with materials that are consistent with the original construction. 

11.    New exterior walls and siding. Wood siding or shingles shall be used unless the applicant demonstrates that an alternative material has a texture and finish typically used on similar style buildings of the era, or the era the building style references. Vinyl or other materials that do not match those that were typically used on similar style buildings of the era, or the era the building style references, are not permitted.

12.    Gutters and downspouts. Replacement or new gutters and downspouts shall be rectangular, ogee, or K-shaped and comprised of wood or metal material, or styles and materials that match those that were typically used on similar style buildings of the era, or the era the building style references. Vinyl or other materials and styles that do not match those that were typically used on similar style buildings of the era, or the era the building style references, are not permitted.

13.    New windows. New windows shall match the appearance of the original windows as closely as possible. Wood window frames and sashes shall be used unless the applicant demonstrates that the non-wood windows are consistent with their wooden counterparts, including profile and proportion of the sash, sill, trim, light patterns, glass color, and profile of mullions and muntins. The window trim and sill shall match the original trim.

14.    Storm windows. Storm windows shall be made of painted wood, baked enamel, anodized aluminum, or another material that is consistent with the color, detail, and proportions of the building.

15.    Window replacement. Replacement of windows or window sashes shall be consistent with the original historic appearance, including the profile of the sash, sill, trim, window plane relative to the building wall plane, light pattern, glass color, profile of mullions and muntins, and color. 

16.    Doors. Doors shall be painted or stained wood, fiberglass clad, or metal clad, or another material that is consistent with the original historic appearance.

17.    Porches. Front porches are allowed on new construction. No front porch shall be added to a structure if there was not one originally. Existing front porches shall not be enclosed or enlarged. Alterations to existing front porches and side yard porches that face a street shall:

a.    Maintain the shape, width, and spacing of the original columns; and

b.    Maintain the height, detail, and spacing of the original balustrade.

18.    Decks. Decks shall be located in rear yard or the portion of the side yard behind the front 50 percent of the primary structure. 

19.    Foundations. Repair or construction of a foundation that results in raising or lowering the building elevation must demonstrate that:

a.    The proposal is consistent with the original design and, if applicable, is consistent in the context of adjacent and other structures on the block, based on photographic or other evidence; or

b.    That it is necessary to satisfy a requirement of the building code and/or floodplain regulations (Chapter 27 CDC). 

20.    Lighting. Residential lighting shall be shielded to prevent glare and compatible with the architectural character of the building. Blinking, flashing, or moving lighting is not permitted.

B.    Standards for accessory structures. The following standards apply to accessory structures on properties designated as historic resources in addition to the regulations in Chapter 34 CDC: 

1.    All accessory structures.

a.    Location. 

1)    Accessory structures in the Willamette Historic District are subject to the setback requirements of CDC 25.070(C)(1) through (4); 

2)    Accessory structures on historic landmark properties must meet the setback requirements of the underlying zone and Chapter 34 CDC; 

3)    Detached accessory structures shall be in the rear yard; and

4)    Two-story accessory structures shall be at least 10 feet from the house; and one-story accessory structures shall be at least three feet from the house. 

b.    Height. Accessory structures in the Willamette Historic District are subject to CDC 25.070(C)(7). Accessory structures on historic landmark properties must meet the height requirements of the underlying zone and Chapter 34 CDC.

2.    Conversions and additions. Existing detached, unheated structures including, but not limited to, workshops and garages, may be converted into other allowable accessory uses under the following conditions: 

a.    The structure is located behind the house’s front building line; 

b.    A structure in the front yard cannot be converted to a heated accessory structure; 

c.    A story may be added to an existing non-contributing garage or similar accessory structure; provided, that the final design meets the setback standards of this chapter for a two story accessory structure (see CDC 25.070(C)(1) through (4)) for the historic district, or the setbacks in Chapter 34 CDC for a historic landmark; and

d.    The conversion of an existing structure is not required to meet the design standards in CDC 34.030, but it must conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.070 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO HISTORIC DISTRICTS

This section provides additional standards that are applicable to properties within a historic district. 

A.    Standards for alterations and additions.

1.    Compatibility with nearby context. Alterations and additions shall be: 

a.    Compatible in scale and mass to adjacent properties; and 

b.    Constructed such that they maintain the privacy of the residents of adjacent properties through window placement, orientation or landscaping. 

2.    Not in period buildings. Alterations to compatible, not in period buildings shall follow all applicable standards of this chapter to avoid creating a false sense of history.

3.    Not in period noncompatible buildings. Alterations to not in period, noncompatible buildings shall be consistent with applicable standards in CDC 25.060 and 25.070. Such buildings do not contribute to the historic value of the district and are not subject to standards pertaining to siding, windows, and other materials listed in CDC 25.060(A); however, such buildings shall not be so stylistically different from adjacent buildings that they detract from the district’s historic character.

B.    Standards for new construction. The standards in this section apply only to new construction in a historic district beyond alterations and additions, including new accessory structures. These standards shall apply in addition to any other applicable standards (see the Standards Applicability Matrix in CDC 25.020).

1.    New construction shall complement and support the district. The historic district’s defining characteristics include a discernible aesthetic rhythm of massing, scale, and siting. Infill buildings shall not deviate in a detracting manner from these elements, but appear as complementary members of the district, by conforming to the following:

a.    Lot or parcel size, massing, scale, proportion, form, siting, floor area ratio, window patterns, building divisions, and height shall correspond to the contributing buildings within the district, and any specific historic district standards and the applicable requirements of the underlying zone. 

b.    Infill buildings shall relate to and strengthen the defining characteristics, including architectural style, without replicating the historic buildings. Buildings shall differentiate by use of materials, mechanical systems, construction methods, and, if applicable, signage. Architectural style shall not be the primary indicator of differentiation.

c.    Mechanical and automobile infrastructure must be appropriately concealed when not consistent with the district’s character.

2.    Reconstruction. Reconstruction of buildings that existed within the district during the period of significance is allowed. Reconstructions shall be done in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Reconstruction.

3.    Archaeological resources shall be preserved in place or mitigated. When new construction must disturb archaeological resources, mitigation measures shall be carried out consistent with applicable state and federal laws. As appropriate, information yielded from archaeological mitigation shall be interpreted in the new building or site. 

C.    Willamette Historic District general design standards. This subsection applies only to alterations and additions, new construction, and accessory structure construction of residential and historically residential properties in the Willamette Historic District. Other buildings are subject to the requirements in Chapter 58 CDC. Dimensional and other requirements of the underlying zone, as applicable, shall apply. 

1.    Front yard setback.

a.    The front yard setback shall equal the average of the front setbacks of adjacent homes on the block face. For corner lots, the setback shall be the average between the adjacent house to the side and 20 feet. The setback shall be the distance measured from the front property line to the dominant vertical face of the building, exclusive of any porches or front landings. 

b.    Unenclosed porches with no living space above may encroach into the front yard setback six feet from the dominant vertical face of the building. 


[IMAGE]


Figure 4: Front Yard Setback

2.    Side yard setback. Side yard setbacks shall be five feet, except: 

a.    Bays, porches and chimneys and other projections that are cumulatively no more than 20 percent of the overall respective building wall length may intrude 18 inches into the side yard setback; and 

b.    One story accessory structures may be sited within three feet of the side property line and two story accessory structures shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the side property line.

3.    Side street setback. Setbacks from side streets shall be 10 feet for both developed and undeveloped streets, except: 

a.    Bays, porches and chimneys and other projections may intrude two feet into side street yard setback; and 

b.    One and two story accessory structures may be sited within five feet of the side street property line.

4.    Rear yard setback. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet, except for accessory structures, which may be sited to within three feet of the rear property lines. 

5.    Orientation. New home construction on corner lots shall be oriented the same direction as the majority of homes on the street with the longest block frontage. 

6.    Repealed by Ord. 1675.

7.    Building height.

a.    Residential structures are limited to 28 feet in height. Cupolas and towers shall not exceed 50 feet in height.

b.    One story accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet. For the purposes of this chapter, any one story accessory structure over 15 feet is considered a two story structure.

c.    Two story accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum height of 23 feet as measured per Chapter 41 CDC.

d.    Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the primary dwelling. 

8.    Building shapes and sizes. No building shall exceed 35 feet in overall width. Front facade gables shall not exceed 28 feet in overall width. 

9.    Roof pitch. Roofs shall have a pitch of at least 6:12.

10.    Garage access and parking areas.

a.    Garages shall be accessed from an alley, if present. No garage door may face or have access onto a street except when alley access is not available. 

b.    Parking areas. 

1)    No residential lot shall be converted solely to parking use.

2)    No rear yard area shall be converted solely to parking use. 

3)    When a lot is adjacent to an alley, all parking access shall be from the alley. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013; Ord. 1636 § 23, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 33, 2018)


25.080 MODIFICATIONS TO DESIGN STANDARDS 

This section provides for deviation from site development standards in this chapter to enable flexibility and innovation consistent with the purposes of this chapter while ensuring that the features that historic designations are intended to preserve are maintained. 

A.    Applicability. The provisions of Chapter 75 CDC, Variance, shall not apply to the standards in this chapter.

B.    Assessment of modification. When an applicant proposes an alternative to the standards of this chapter the approval authority shall grant a modification when:

1.    Historical records. The applicant demonstrates by review of historical records or photographs that the proposed alternative is consistent with and appropriate to the architecture in the historic district, or is appropriate to the applicable style of architecture; 

2.    Consistency. The resulting development of the proposal would be consistent with the intent of the standards for which the modification is requested, as determined by the approval authority; 

3.    Negative impacts. Negative impacts to adjacent homes and/or a historic district will be minimized. These include, but are not limited to, loss of solar access, light, or air to an adjacent structure, and scale or mass that visually overwhelm or are not deferential to an adjacent landmark or contributing structure; and

4.    Exceptional architecture. The proposal incorporates exceptional and appropriate architectural elements into the building. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.090 DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE	

The designation of historic resources shall comply with the following criteria; provided, that the age of a specific building shall not be deemed sufficient in itself to warrant designation of a building as historic. 

A.    Approval criteria. The approval authority may designate additional historic resources if it determines that the site or district proposed for designation meets at least one of the following five criteria:

1.    Events. Is associated with an event or events that made a significant contribution to the history of the city, county, state or nation; 

2.    Persons. Is associated with the life or lives of a significant person or people in the history of the city, county, state or nation; 

3.    Architecture. Embodies distinctive architectural characteristics of a type, style, period or method of construction; 

4.    Construction. Represents the work of a master builder, designer, or architect who influenced the development of the city, county, state or nation; or

5.    Archaeology. Has yielded, or will likely yield, information important in prehistory or history.

B.    Pending designation – Issuance of permits. No building permit for altering, moving, or demolishing any proposed historic resource shall be issued while any advertised public hearing or any appeal affecting the proposed designation of the area or building is pending. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.100 REMOVAL OF HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION

These provisions allow for the removal of the local historic designation when it is no longer appropriate. This review does not affect a property or district’s listing on the National Register. Proposals to remove historic resource designation shall be approved if the approval authority finds that removal of the designation is appropriate after considering the information required under subsections A and B of this section. 

A.    Assessment of designation. The approval authority shall consider:

1.    Criteria. Whether the historic resource meets the criteria for listing under CDC 25.090(A);

2.    Hardship. The importance to the public of retaining the historic resource relative to the hardship to the owner and any potential hazard to the public if the historic resource is retained;

3.    Condition. The physical condition of the historic resource and any loss of characteristics that originally caused it to be listed; 

4.    Historic or architectural significance. The historic or architectural significance of the historic resource;

5.    Economic use and benefits. The economic use of the historic resource and any economic benefits associated with the proposed new use of the property; and 

6.    Location. If within a historic district, its contribution to the district and the effect on the district if the designation is removed. 

B.    Owner consent.

1.    Historic landmarks. For historic landmark properties, the property owner at the time of designation must have objected, on the record, to the historic designation. 

2.    Historic districts. For properties in historic districts, the property owner at the time of designation must have objected, on the record, to inclusion in the district. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.110 RELOCATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE

Moving a historic structure is generally discouraged. However, in some cases relocation is preferable to loss of the structure. The following requirements apply to the relocation of historic resources. 

A.    Assessment of relocation. The approval authority shall require to the extent feasible, that the structure be located on the new site in a manner that does not change its historic orientation to the street, relationship to adjacent properties, and the overall site. In making the determination, considerations shall include: 

1.    Setbacks. Maintaining relatively similar setbacks, side yard conditions, and relationship to other structures on the site;

2.    Site characteristics. Maintaining character similar to the historic site in terms of neighboring structures, materials, site relationships and age (for example, it should not be moved to the back of a lot if that was not the character of the historic location, nor should it be located on a corner lot if historically it was on an interior lot); and 

3.    Economic and physical feasibility. Demonstrating that it is not economically or physically feasible to locate the structure on a site that meets the characteristics in (1) and (2); if so, an alternate site may be considered.

B.    Written commitment. There must be a written commitment accepted by the City Attorney to complete the relocation and subsequent rehabilitation of the structure and its new site. Bonding or other assurances may be required. Temporary relocations for interim construction may be necessary and must require a plan for protecting the structure at the interim site as well as a commitment to a schedule for completion of relocation to the proposed new site. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.120 DEMOLITION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE

A permit for demolition of a historic resource is required and shall not be issued without approval by the approval authority; provided, nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted as giving permission for any person to violate an order of the Building Official to remove or demolish a structure that the Building Official has designated as dangerous to life, health, or property. 

A.    Approval criteria.

1.    Historic landmark or primary contributing structure. An application for the demolition of a historic landmark or primary contributing structure shall be approved if the following criteria are met:

a.    The value to the community of the proposed use of the property outweighs the value of retaining the designated historic resource on the present site; 

b.    The designated historic resource is not capable of generating a reasonable economic return and the demolition is economically necessary;

c.    The owner has documented a good faith effort to sell or relocate the designated resource; and

d.    No practicable alternative exists to rehabilitate and reuse the designated resource in its present location.

2.    Non-contributing or not in period primary structure, accessory structure. An application for the demolition of a non-contributing or not in period primary structure or an accessory structure shall be approved if it is determined that the property does not have historic significance based on its architectural style, construction method or materials, or other pertinent factors as determined by the approval authority. 

B.    Issuance of permits. A demolition permit for a historic resource shall not be issued prior to historic design review and any other required approval of plans for the site, if applicable, or the submittal of building plans for a permit for the site. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.130 DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT

All properties designated as historic resources shall comply with this section. 

A.    Criteria for determination of demolition by neglect. If one or more of the following is promoted, allowed to occur, or exist in a historic resource, the property is determined to meet the criteria for demolition by neglect and enforcement action to remedy the applicable criteria may be taken pursuant to Chapter 106 CDC, Enforcement:

1.    Structural integrity. Faults, defects, or other conditions which render the structure or resource structurally unsafe or not properly watertight.

2.    Walls and other support members.

a.    Walls or support members that are deteriorated due to failure to paint or otherwise maintain the structure or resource; 

b.    Members of walls, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; and/or

c.    Members of walls, or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety.

3.    Windows and doors. Failure to keep windows and doors secured in a manner that prevents entry by unauthorized persons. 

4.    Security.

a.    Failure to maintain parts of the resource so they are securely attached and will not fall or injure persons or property. 

b.    Failure to secure the resource from vandals, animals, or pests. 

c.    Failure to prevent infiltration of water through inadequate gutters, landscaping or other site features.

5.    Foundation. Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.

6.    Floor supports. Deteriorated floor supports or floor supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety.

7.    Ceiling and roof supports.

a.    Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.

b.    Members of ceilings, roofs, or their supports, or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety.

8.    Fireplaces or chimneys. Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration.

B.    Abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the abatement of the unsafe or dangerous condition of a historic resource that constitutes an imminent and serious threat to public safety. If a historic resource is destroyed, it may be rebuilt on the original building footprint. (Ord. 1614 § 6, 2013)


25.140 HISTORIC RESOURCE MAP

The Historic Resource Map, shown in Figure 1 below, identifies the Willamette Historic District, as shown on the Zoning Map; the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District, as identified in CDC 58.030(C); and the historic landmarks identified on the Zoning Map.

FIGURE 1
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1638 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 26 HISTORIC LANDMARKS

(Repealed by Ord. 1614)


Chapter 27 FLOOD MANAGEMENT AREAS

Sections:

27.010    PURPOSE

27.020    APPLICABILITY

27.030    EXEMPTIONS

27.040    PROHIBITED USES

27.045    CRITICAL FACILITIES

27.050    APPLICATION

27.060    APPROVAL CRITERIA

27.065    INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD BOUNDARIES

27.070    CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS

27.080    RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION

27.090    NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION

27.100    SUBDIVISION PROPOSAL

27.110    MANUFACTURED HOMES

27.120    ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSES

27.130    VARIANCES

27.140    ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS

27.150    WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY

27.160    MAP ADMINISTRATION

27.170    CONSISTENCY


27.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to create a Flood Management Area Overlay Zone in order to protect flood management areas that are identified on the flood management area map incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. Flood management areas contain land identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Clackamas County, Oregon, and incorporated areas,” dated June 17, 2008, with accompanying Flood Insurance Maps; the area of inundation for the February 1996 flood based on data provided by Metro; and lands that have physical or documented evidence of flooding within recorded history. Flood management areas provide the following functions: protect life and property from dangers associated with flooding; flood storage, reduction of flood velocities, reduction of flood peak flows and reduction of wind and wave impacts; maintain water quality by reducing and sorting sediment loads, process chemical and organic wastes and reduce nutrients; recharge, store, and discharge groundwater; provide plant and animal habitat; and support riparian ecosystems. (Ord. 1522, 2005; Ord. 1565, 2008)


27.020 APPLICABILITY

A flood management area permit is required for all development in the Flood Management Area Overlay Zone. The standards that apply to flood management areas apply in addition to State or federal restrictions governing floodplains or flood hazard areas.


27.030 EXEMPTIONS

This chapter does not apply to work necessary to protect, repair, or maintain existing public or private structures, utility facilities, roadways, driveways, accessory uses, and exterior improvements, or replace small public structures, utility facilities, or roadways in response to emergencies. Within 30 days after the work has been completed, the party responsible for the work shall initiate a flood management permit designed to analyze any changes effectuated during the emergency and mitigate adverse impacts. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.040 PROHIBITED USES

Prohibited uses in flood management areas include the following:

A.    Any use prohibited in the base zone.

B.    Uncontained areas of hazardous materials as defined by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.


27.045 CRITICAL FACILITIES

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the greatest extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities shall only be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.


27.050 APPLICATION

Applications for a flood management area permit must include the following:

A.    A pre-application conference as a prerequisite to the filing of the application.

B.    An application initiated by the property owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, and accompanied by the appropriate fee.

C.    An application submittal that includes the completed application form, one copy of written responses addressing CDC 27.060, 27.070, 27.080 (if applicable), and 27.090 (if applicable), one copy of all maps and plans at the original scale, one copy of all maps and plans reduced to a paper size not greater than 11 inches by 17 inches, and a copy in a digital format acceptable to the City.

D.    A map of the property indicating the nature of the proposed alteration and its relationship to property zones, structures, trees, and any other pertinent features.

E.    Information regarding the elevation of the site prior to development, the base flood elevation data for subdivisions (if applicable), and a description of water course alterations, if proposed.

F.    A topographic map of the site at contour intervals of five feet or less showing a delineation of the flood management area, which includes, but is not limited to, areas shown on the Flood Management Area map. The City Engineer or Building Official, as applicable, may, at his/her discretion, require the map to be prepared by a registered land surveyor to ensure accuracy. A written narrative explaining the reason why the owner wishes to alter the floodplain shall accompany the site plan map.

G.    The elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures.

H.    The elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood-proofed (non-residential only). (Ord. 1622 § 10, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 24, 2014)


27.060 APPROVAL CRITERIA

The Planning Director shall make written findings with respect to the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application for development in flood management areas:

A.    Development, excavation, and fill shall be performed in a manner to maintain or increase flood storage and conveyance capacity and not increase design flood elevations.

B.    No net fill increase in any floodplain is allowed. All fill placed in a floodplain shall be balanced with an equal amount of soil material removal. Excavation areas shall not exceed fill areas by more than 50 percent of the square footage. Any excavation below the ordinary high water line shall not count toward compensating for fill.

C.    Excavation to balance a fill shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the fill unless it is not reasonable or practicable to do so. In such cases, the excavation shall be located in the same drainage basin and as close as possible to the fill site, so long as the proposed excavation and fill will not increase flood impacts for surrounding properties as determined through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis.

D.    Minimum finished floor elevations must be at least one foot above the design flood height or highest flood of record, whichever is higher, for new habitable structures in the flood area.

E.    Temporary fills permitted during construction shall be removed.

F.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development in floodways unless certification by a professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oregon is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

G.    All proposed improvements to the floodplain or floodway which might impact the flood-carrying capacity of the river shall be designed by a professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oregon.

H.    New culverts, stream crossings, and transportation projects shall be designed as balanced cut and fill projects or designed not to significantly raise the design flood elevation. Such projects shall be designed to minimize the area of fill in flood management areas and to minimize erosive velocities. Stream crossings shall be as close to perpendicular to the stream as practicable. Bridges shall be used instead of culverts wherever practicable.

I.    Excavation and fill required for the construction of detention facilities or structures, and other facilities, such as levees, specifically shall be designed to reduce or mitigate flood impacts and improve water quality. Levees shall not be used to create vacant buildable land.

J.    The applicant shall provide evidence that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. (Ord. 1522, 2005; Ord. 1635 § 15, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 25, 2014)


27.065 INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD BOUNDARIES

The Planning Director shall make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between mapped boundaries and the actual filed condition). Any person contesting the location of the boundary may appeal the Planning Director’s interpretation pursuant to CDC 01.060. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.070 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS

A.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

B.    Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

C.    New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.

D.    New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.

E.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

F.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.


27.080 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION

A.    New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

B.    Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by either a professional civil engineer or an architect licensed to practice in the State of Oregon, and must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

1.    A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

2.    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

3.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry or exit of floodwaters.

4.    Fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall only be used for parking, access, and limited storage.

5.    Service equipment (e.g., furnaces, water heaters, washer/dryers, etc.) is not permitted below the base flood elevation.

6.    All walls, floors, and ceiling materials located below the base flood elevation must be unfinished and constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.

C.    Crawlspaces. Crawlspaces are a commonly used method of elevating buildings in special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) to or above the base flood elevation (BFE), and are allowed subject to the following requirements:

1.    The building is subject to the Flood-Resistant Construction provisions of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

2.    They shall be designed by a professional engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Oregon to meet the standards contained in the most current Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Bulletin.

3.    The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

4.    Flood vent openings shall be provided on at least two sides that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The total area of the flood vent openings must be no less than one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. For guidance on flood openings, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-93, Openings in Foundation Walls.

5.    Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls (studs and sheathing), but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. For more detailed guidance on flood-resistant materials see FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93, Flood-Resistant Materials Requirements.

6.    Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters. For further guidance on the placement of building utility systems in crawlspaces, see FEMA 348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage. Flood-resistant materials and utilities, access, and ventilation openings in crawlspaces are further addressed in this bulletin.

7.    The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG).

8.    The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. This limitation will also prevent these crawlspaces from being converted into habitable spaces.

9.    There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as low-point drains, perforated pipes, drainage tiles, or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity.

10.    The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used.

11.    For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01 or the most current edition.

12.    The use of below-grade crawlspaces to elevate the building to one foot above the BFE may cause an increase in flood insurance premiums, which are beyond the control of the City. 

D.    A poured slab placed over fill can be used to elevate the lowest floor of a structure above the base flood elevation. However, when a building site is filled, it is still in the floodplain and no basements are permitted.

E.    Placing a structure on piers, piles, and posts is allowed provided supporting members are designed to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces. (Ord. 1565, 2008)


27.090 NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION

New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

A.    Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls impermeable to the passage of water;

B.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

C.    Be certified by a professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oregon that the design and methods of construction shall prevent seepage, collapse or cracking of basement walls, prevent buckling of basement floors, prevent backup of water from sewer lines, and have all openings located one foot above the base flood elevation. In addition, all protective features must operate automatically without human intervention;

D.    Non-residential construction that is elevated, but not flood-proofed (i.e., the foundation is not at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation) shall also comply with the standards set forth in CDC 27.080. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.100 SUBDIVISION PROPOSAL

A.    All subdivision proposals shall be designed to minimize flood damage and not increase flood levels;

B.    Lowest floor of all structures must be at least one foot above the base flood elevation;

C.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

D.    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage and streets should drain rapidly; and

E.    Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for any land division proposal. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.110 MANUFACTURED HOMES

A.    All manufactured homes must be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movements, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

B.    All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system.

C.    Recreational vehicles shall be on site for less than 180 consecutive days, or be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or be elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation and meet manufactured home standards. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.120 ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSES

A.    The applicant shall meet the requirements of Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection, or Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection, as applicable, in addition to this chapter’s requirements.

B.    A comparison by a professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oregon shall be made between the existing channel capacity and the proposed capacity and the changes assessed. The alteration or modification must maintain the carrying capacity of the watercourse and not increase the base flood elevation.

C.    The Planning Director shall notify adjacent communities and the State of Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

D.    The Planning Director shall require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.

E.    The Planning Director shall require that alterations of watercourses must allow fish passage and preserve fish habitat.

F.    The applicant shall submit a copy of a permit from the Oregon Division of State Lands and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that allows the alteration, or states that it is exempt.


27.130 VARIANCES

This section applies in addition to the standards governing variance proposals found in Chapter 75 CDC. The purpose of this section is to ensure that compliance with this chapter does not cause unreasonable hardship. To avoid such instances, the requirements of this chapter may be varied. Variances are also allowed when strict application of this chapter would deprive an owner of all economically viable use of land. The Planning Director may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to limit any adverse impacts that may result from granting relief. Flood hazard applications that are submitted on or before the effective date of this chapter, and deemed complete within 180 days of submittal, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. To vary from the requirements of this chapter, the applicant must demonstrate the following:

A.    The variance does not increase danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion;

B.    The impact of the increase in flood hazard, which will result from the variance, will not prevent the City from meeting the requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall have a professional civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Oregon document the expected height, velocity, and duration of flood waters, and estimate the rate of increase in sediment transport of the flood waters expected both downstream and upstream as a result of the variance;

C.    The variance will not increase the cost of providing and maintaining public services during and after flood conditions so as to unduly burden public agencies and taxpayers;

D.    The proposed use complies with the standards of the base zone;

E.    The proposed use shall not result in any increase of flood levels during the base flood ordinary high water mark discharge within a designated floodway; 

F.    If the variance allows a structure to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, the applicant has been given written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.140 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS

This chapter must be complied with in addition to any other applicable code provision, ordinance, statute, easement, covenant, or deed restriction. It is not intended to repeal any existing restriction. If any provision of this chapter and any other code provision, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlay, the provision containing the more stringent restriction shall prevail. All development within the Willamette River Greenway must comply with Chapter 28 CDC and all development within the Tualatin River Protection zone must comply with Chapter 28 CDC.


27.150 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of West Linn, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.


27.160 MAP ADMINISTRATION

The purpose of this section is to provide a process for amending the flood management area map.

A.    Within 90 days of receiving information establishing a possible error in the existence or location of a flood management area, the Planning Director shall provide notice to interested parties of a public hearing at which the City Council will review the information as set forth in CDC 99.060(C).

B.    The City Council shall amend the flood management area map if the information demonstrates that the boundaries of the flood management area have changed since adoption of the flood management area map.

C.    Amendments to the flood management area map that would result in a reduction to the 100-year floodplain shown on the flood insurance area map shall not take effect until successful completion of the National Flood Insurance Program map amendment or map revision process. (Ord. 1522, 2005)


27.170 CONSISTENCY

Where the provisions of this chapter are less restrictive or conflict with comparable provisions of the zoning ordinance, regional, State, or federal law, the provisions that are more restrictive shall govern. Where this chapter imposes restrictions that are more stringent than regional, State and federal law, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.


Chapter 28 WILLAMETTE AND TUALATIN RIVER PROTECTION

Sections:

28.010    PURPOSE

28.020    REPEALED

28.030    APPLICABILITY

28.040    EXEMPTIONS/USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT

28.050    PROHIBITED USES

28.060    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

28.070    PLANNING DIRECTOR VERIFICATION OF METRO HABITAT PROTECTION MAP BOUNDARIES

28.080    TIME LIMIT ON APPROVAL

28.090    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS: APPLICATION

28.100    ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED, WAIVER OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

28.110    APPROVAL CRITERIA

28.120    SITE PLAN

28.130    GRADING PLAN

28.140    ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS

28.150    LANDSCAPE PLAN

28.160    MITIGATION PLAN

28.170    PENALTIES

Prior legislation: Ordinances 1474 and 1549.


28.010 PURPOSE

The purposes of the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Area are the following:

A.    Protect, conserve, enhance, and maintain the natural, scenic, historical, economic, and recreational qualities of lands along the Willamette and Tualatin Rivers.

B.    Implement the policies of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan and the State of Oregon’s Willamette River Greenway program.

C.    Establish standards and requirements for the existing and future use of lands within the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Areas.

D.    Provide for the review of any intensification of use, change of use, or development within the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Areas.

E.    Encourage local stewardship of the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Areas.

F.    Protect, preserve and expand legal public use and access to and along the shoreline and river, while recognizing and preserving private property rights.

G.    Create incentives to direct development to areas where it is most appropriate.

H.    Protect and enhance riparian habitat for native flora, fish, and wildlife within the Willamette and Tualatin Rivers and along their banks. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.020 DEFINITIONS

Repealed by Ord. 1604. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.030 APPLICABILITY

A.    The Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Area is an overlay zone. The zone boundaries are identified on the City’s zoning map, and include:

1.    All land within the City of West Linn’s Willamette River Greenway Area.

2.    All land within 200 feet of the ordinary low water mark of the Tualatin River, and all land within the 100-year floodplain of the Tualatin River.

3.    In addition to the Willamette Greenway and Tualatin River Protection Area boundaries, this chapter also relies on the HCA Map to delineate where development should or should not occur. Specifically, the intent is to keep out of, or minimize disturbance of, the habitat conservation areas (HCAs). Therefore, if all, or any part, of a lot or parcel is in the Willamette Greenway and Tualatin River Protection Area boundaries, and there are HCAs on the lot or parcel, a Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Area permit shall be required unless the development proposal is exempt per CDC 28.040.

B.    At the confluence of a stream or creek with either the Tualatin or Willamette River, the standards of this chapter shall apply only to those portions of the lot or parcel fronting the river. Meanwhile, development in those portions of the property facing or adjacent to the stream or creek shall meet the transition, setbacks and other provisions of Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection.

C.    All uses permitted under the provisions of the underlying base zone and within the Willamette and Tualatin River Protection Area zone are allowed in the manner prescribed by the base zone subject to applying for and obtaining a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter unless specifically exempted per CDC 28.040.

D.    The construction of a structure in the HCA or the expansion of a structure into the HCA when the new intrusion is closer to the protected water feature than the pre-existing structure. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 21, 2011; Ord. 1636 § 26, 2014)


28.040 EXEMPTIONS/USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT

The following development activities do not require a permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Other permits may still be required.)

A.    Customary dredging and channel maintenance conducted under permit from the State of Oregon.

B.    Seasonal increases in gravel operations under permit from the State of Oregon and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.

C.    Scenic easements and their maintenance.

D.    Replacement-in-kind or minor modification by public utilities for pump stations, public bathrooms, utilities, existing utility lines, wires, fixtures, equipment, circuits, appliances, and conductors and similar facilities.

E.    Flood emergency procedures and the maintenance and repair of existing flood control facilities.

F.    Signs, markers, announcements, etc., placed by a public agency to serve the public.

G.    Maintenance or repair of existing residential houses, structures and docks, provided the work does not involve expansion of building square footage or building footprint.

H.    Storage of equipment or material associated with uses permitted, providing that the storage complies with applicable provisions of this chapter.

I.    A change of use of a building or other structure which does not substantially alter or affect the land or water upon which it is situated.

J.    Landscaping with native or existing vegetative materials only (excluding nuisance or prohibited plants on the Metro Native Plant List).

K.    Routine repair and maintenance of legally established structures, utilities, roads, and manmade water control facilities such as constructed ponds or lakes, wastewater facilities, and stormwater treatment facilities that do not alter the location or footprint of the structure, utility, or road.

L.    Reasonable emergency procedures necessary for the safety or protection of property.

M.    Minor modifications. A modification shall be considered “minor” when it results in a change in the approved design that is equal to or less than a 10 percent increase in the length, width or height of the facility. A change of location by under 20 feet laterally for any part of the structure, ramp, dock, etc., also constitutes a minor modification.

N.    The action of any City officer or employee of any public utility to remove or alleviate from immediate danger to life or property, to restore existing utility service or to reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic; provided, that after the emergency has passed, adverse impacts are mitigated in accordance with CDC 32.070.

O.    Routine maintenance activities such as removing dead or dying vegetation that constitutes a hazard to life or property, pollutants, trash, eroded material, etc.

P.    Wetland, riparian and upland enhancement or restoration projects done with approval of City staff and regulatory agency personnel (e.g., ODFW, DSL).

Q.    Temporary and minor clearing not to exceed 200 square feet for the purpose of site investigations and pits for preparing soil profiles; provided, that such areas are restored to their original condition when the investigation is complete. For wetlands, such clearing shall not occur within the actual wetland itself, but only within the adjacent wetland transition area. While such temporary and minor clearing is exempt from the provisions of this chapter, it is subject to all other City codes, including provisions for erosion control and tree removal.

R.    Removal of plants identified as nuisance or prohibited plants on the Metro Native Plant List and the planting or propagation of plants identified as native plants on the Metro Native Plant List. Handheld tools must be used to remove nuisance or prohibited plants, and after such removal all open soil areas greater than 25 square feet must be replanted.

S.    In cases where the required development standards of this chapter are applied and met with no encroachment into HCAs, and also meeting subsections T and U of this section, where applicable, then no permit under the provisions of this chapter will be required. For example, if the proposed development or action will be located in the “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” and keeps out of the habitat conservation areas, a Willamette or Tualatin River Protection Area permit shall not be required. Floodplain management area or other permits may still be required.

T.    The construction, remodeling or additions of home and accessory structures that take place completely within the “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” shall be exempt from a Willamette or Tualatin River Protection Area permit. Where the “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” goes to the edge of a clearly defined top of bank, the applicant’s home and accessory structures shall be set back at least 15 feet from top of bank. At-grade patios and deck areas within 30 inches of grade may extend to within five feet from top of bank. No overhang or cantilevering of structures is permitted over HCA or over setback area. If these terms are met then no permit will be required under this chapter.

U.    Maintenance, alteration, expansion, repair and replacement of existing structures are exempt, provided impermeable surfaces do not exceed 5,000 square feet and that it complies with the provisions of Chapters 27 and 28 CDC. The following standards shall also apply:

1.    Rebuilding of existing residential and non-residential structures within the same foundation lines as the original structure(s) including, but not limited to, those damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural hazards; or

2.    The alteration, expansion, repair and replacement of a house or structure per the standards of CDC 28.110(E) not to exceed 5,000 square feet of impermeable surface per that section; or

3.    The alteration, expansion, repair and replacement of a house or structure vertically where the applicant is adding additional floors or expanding above the footprint of the existing structure regardless of whether the structure’s footprint is in an HCA or not.

V.    Maintenance of existing gardens, pastures, lawns, and landscape perimeters, irrigation systems within existing gardens, lawns, and landscape perimeters. New irrigation systems are not permitted where none existed before. The City encourages restoration of areas within the drainageway transition to native vegetation.

W.    Low impact public or private outdoor recreation facilities including, but not limited to, multi-use water-permeable paths and trails to a maximum width of four feet, picnic areas, interpretive displays, benches. Gazebos or similar structures must be out of the HCA areas to be exempt. No more than 500 square feet of new lot coverage allowed under this provision. 

X.    Interior remodeling.

Y.    Installation of new and/or replacement water-permeable driveways, paths and patios and two-track driveways outside of HCAs. Surface area cannot exceed amount allowed by lot coverage standards of underlying zone.

Z.    Accessory structures under 15 feet tall and 500 square feet located on the opposite side of the house or principal structure from the resource area requires only a building permit.

AA.    Lands that are designated as an HCA only due to a forested canopy shall be exempted since trees are already protected in the municipal code and Chapters 55 and 85 CDC. Development of lands that are designated as HCA due to other variables such as wetlands, flood areas and steep slopes shall still be regulated by the provisions of this chapter and not exempted.

BB.    Construction of a public pathway by dedication or easement accepted by the City.

CC.    A new dock subject to the approval criteria of this chapter.

DD.    Public docks, gangways, and other water related accessory facilities. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 §§ 22, 23, 24, 2011; Ord. 1635 § 16, 2014)


28.050 PROHIBITED USES

The following are prohibited:

1.    Residential floating structures, also known as floating homes or houseboats.

2.    Permanent ski jumps.

3.    More than one dock with or without a boat house per riverfront lot of record, except City-owned tax lots 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 of Assessor’s Map 21 East 24.

4.    The location of any dock under any water condition that prevents what would otherwise be historic, safe, uninterrupted water passage.

5.    Any new lawn area or garden area consisting primarily of non-native vegetation within HCA lands. A lawn area in the “Allowed Development” area is permitted.

6.    Planting of any species identified as nuisance or prohibited plants on the Metro Native Plant List.

7.    Non-permitted storage of hazardous materials as defined by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality and dumping of any materials of any kind.

8.    Excessive trimming or removal of existing native vegetation within the HCA unless it is to reestablish native vegetation in place of non-native or invasive vegetation. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.060 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

An application for a protection area permit shall be processed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 99 CDC, Procedures for Decision-Making: Quasi-Judicial. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.070 PLANNING DIRECTOR VERIFICATION OF METRO HABITAT PROTECTION MAP BOUNDARIES

A.    The HCA Map is the basis for identifying and designating the habitat conservation areas in the City. A copy of the latest, updated HCA Map is on file at the City and is adopted by reference for use with this chapter.

It is inevitable, given the large area that Metro’s HCA Map covers, that there may be some errors. In cases where, for example, three properties share the same contours and the same natural features but the map shows the middle lot with an HCA designation on it, it is reasonable to question the accuracy of that HCA designation. Using tree overstory as the sole basis for HCA designation will also allow a change in designation since trees are already protected in the municipal code and Chapters 55 and 85 CDC.

B.    The Planning Director shall verify the appropriate HCA or non-HCA designation by site visits or consultations with Metro or by other means. Determination is based on whether the Metro criteria are met or whether the Metro designation was based solely on tree overstory in which case a redesignation is appropriate. In cases where the determination is that the map is incorrect, the Planning Director will make a written finding of this as well as the site conditions that led to that conclusion.

C.    Class B public notice, per Chapter 99 CDC, shall be required prior to issuance of the redesignation decision if it involves redesignation of the HCA boundary to allow the construction of, or addition to, a house.

D.    This determination and findings shall become part of the City record and part of the record for any associated land use application. The Planning Director shall also include in the record the revised map boundary. The Planning Director’s determination and map revisions shall also be sent to Metro so that their map may be corrected as necessary.

E.    The Planning Director determination is appealable to the City Council per Chapter 99 CDC.

F.    Lands that are designated as an HCA only due to a forested overstory are exempt under CDC 28.040, Exemptions, since trees are already protected in the municipal code and Chapters 55 and 85 CDC. Similar exemptions apply to lands that exhibit no constraints. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1604 §§ 25 – 28, 2011)


28.080 TIME LIMIT ON APPROVAL

A.    Approval of a protection area permit shall be void if:

1.    Substantial work (e.g., piling installation, etc.) is not completed within three years of the approval date, unless an extension is granted per CDC 99.325.

2.    The site plan on which the approval is based is significantly modified or where actual construction deviates from the approved plans to the extent that it constitutes more than a minor modification as defined by this chapter. Any such change in the plan or conditions of approval shall require a new application and hearing pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter and Chapter 99 CDC. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


28.090 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS: APPLICATION

A.    An application for a protection area permit shall be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent. Evidence shall be provided to demonstrate that the applicant has the legal right to use the land above the OLW. The property owner’s signature is required on the application form.

B.    A prerequisite to the filing of an application is a pre-application conference at which time the Planning Director shall explain the provisions of this chapter and provide appropriate forms as set forth in CDC 99.030(B).

C.    An application for a protection area permit shall include the completed application and:

1.    Narrative which addresses the approval criteria of CDC 28.110.

2.    A site plan, with HCA boundaries shown and by low, moderate, high type shown (CDC 28.120).

3.    A grading plan if applicable (CDC 28.130).

4.    Architectural drawings if applicable (CDC 28.140).

5.    A landscape plan if applicable (CDC 28.150).

6.    A mitigation plan if applicable (CDC 28.160).

7.    A storm detention and treatment plan and narrative statement pursuant to CDC 92.010(E).

One original application form must be submitted. One copy at the original scale and one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. One copy of all other items, including the narrative, must be submitted. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the city. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Planning Director.

D.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fees.

E.    The applicant shall be responsible for, and shall apply for, all applicable State and/or federal permits.

F.    The applicant shall include a map, approved or acknowledged by DSL, of the preference rights and authorized areas if a water surface structure is proposed. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 11, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 4, 2017)


28.100 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED, WAIVER OF SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

A.    The Planning Director may require additional information as a part of the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(A).

B.    The Planning Director may waive any submittal requirement for the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(B) and (C). (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.110 APPROVAL CRITERIA

No application for development on property within the protection area shall be approved unless the decision-making authority finds that the following standards have been met or can be met by conditions of approval. The development shall comply with the following criteria as applicable:

A.    Development: All sites.

1.    Sites shall first be reviewed using the HCA Map to determine if the site is buildable or what portion of the site is buildable. HCAs shall be verified by the Planning Director per CDC 28.070 and site visit. Also, “tree canopy only” HCAs shall not constitute a development limitation and may be exempted per CDC 28.070(A). The municipal code protection for trees and Chapters 55 and 85 CDC tree protection shall still apply.

2.    HCAs shall be avoided to the greatest degree possible and development activity shall instead be directed to the areas designated “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs,” consistent with subsection (A)(3) of this section.

3.    If the subject property contains no lands designated “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” and development within HCA land is the only option it shall be directed towards the low HCA areas first, then medium HCA areas and then to high HCA as the last choice. The goal is to, at best, avoid or, at least, minimize disturbance of the HCAs. (Water-dependent uses are exempt from this provision.)

4.    All development, including exempted activities of CDC 28.040, shall have approved erosion control measures per Clackamas County Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, rev. 2008, in place prior to site disturbance and be subject to the requirements of CDC 32.070 and 32.080 as deemed applicable by the Planning Director.

B.    Single-family or attached residential. Development of single-family homes or attached housing shall be permitted on the following HCA designations and in the following order of preference with “a” being the most appropriate and “d” being the least appropriate:

 

	a	“Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs”

	b	Low HCA

	c	Moderate HCA

	d	High HCA

1.    Development of land classifications in “b,” “c” and “d” shall not be permitted if at least a 5,000-square-foot area of buildable land (“a”) exists for home construction, and associated impermeable surfaces (driveways, patios, etc.).

2.    If 5,000 square feet of buildable land (“a”) are not available for home construction, and associated impermeable surfaces (driveways, patios, etc.) then combinations of land classifications (“a,” “b” and “c”) totaling a maximum of 5,000 square feet shall be used to avoid intrusion into high HCA lands. Development shall emphasize area “a” prior to extending construction into area “b,” then “c” lands.

3.    The underlying zone FAR shall also apply as well as allowable lot coverage.

4.    Development may occur on legal lots and non-conforming lots of record located completely within the HCA areas or that have the majority of the lot in the HCA to the extent that the applicant has less than 5,000 square feet of non-HCA land.

Development shall disturb the minimum necessary area to allow the proposed use or activity, shall direct development to any available non-HCA lands and in any situation shall create no more than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface. (Driveways, paths, patios, etc., that are constructed of approved water-permeable materials will not count in calculating the 5,000-square-foot lot coverage.) The underlying zone FAR and allowable lot coverage shall also apply and may result in less than 5,000 square feet of lot coverage.

When only HCA land is available then the structure shall be placed as far away from the water resource area or river as possible. To facilitate this, the front setback of the structure or that side which is furthest away from the water resource or river may be reduced to a five-foot setback from the front property line without a variance. Any attached garage must provide a 20-foot by 20-foot parking pad or driveway so as to provide off-street parking exclusive of the garage. The setbacks of subsection C of this section shall still apply.

5.    Driveways, paths, patios, etc., that are constructed of approved water-permeable materials will be exempt from the lot coverage calculations of subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section and the underlying zone.

6.    Table showing development allowed by land classification:

 

	 	Development Allowed

	Non-HCA (“a”)	Yes

	Low-Medium HCA (“b” and “c”)	Yes, if less than 5,000 sq. ft. of non-HCA land available. Avoid “d.”

	High HCA (“d”)	Yes, but only if less than 5,000 sq. ft. of “a,” “b” and “c” land available.

	Non-conforming Structures (structures on HCA land)	Yes: vertically, laterally and/or away from river.

Avoid “d” where possible.

(The underlying zone FAR and allowable lot coverage shall also apply.)

C.    Setbacks from top of bank.

1.    Development of single-family homes or attached housing on lands designated as “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” shall require a structural setback of 15 feet from any top of bank that represents the edge of the land designated as “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs.”

2.    At-grade water-permeable patios or decks within 30 inches of grade may encroach into that setback but must keep five feet from top of bank and cannot cantilever over the top of bank or into the five-foot setback area.

3.    For properties that lack a distinct top of bank the applicant shall identify the boundary of the area designated as “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” which is closest to the river. A structural setback of 15 feet is required from that boundary line. That 15-foot measurement extends from the boundary line away from the river. At-grade water-permeable patios or decks within 30 inches of grade may encroach into that setback 10 feet but must keep five feet from the boundary and cannot cantilever into the five-foot setback area. For vacant lots of record that comprise no lands with “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” designation or insufficient lands with those designations so that the above setbacks cannot be met, the house shall be set back as far from river as possible to accommodate house as part of the allowed 5,000 square feet of impermeable surfaces.

D.    Development of lands designated for industrial, commercial, office, public and other non-residential uses.

1.    Development of lands designated for industrial, multi-family, mixed use, commercial, office, public and other non-single-family residential uses shall be permitted on the following land designations and in the following order of preference with “a” being the most appropriate for development and “d” being the least appropriate:

 

	a	“Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs”

	b	Low HCA

	c	Moderate HCA

	d	High HCA

2.    Developing HCA land.

a.    Where non-HCA or areas designated as “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” are lacking or are in such limited supply as to render uses allowed by the underlying zone (e.g., general industrial) functionally impractical, the HCA may be utilized and built upon but shall emphasize “b” and “c” designations.

b.    Where it is proposed that a “d” or high HCA classification be used, the property owner must demonstrate that the proposed use is clearly a water-dependent use. Proximity to the river for the purpose of views is not valid grounds. However, public interpretive facilities of historic facilities such as the government locks will be permitted as well as wildlife interpretive facilities and ADA-accessible platforms.

E.    Hardship provisions and non-conforming structures.

1.    For the purpose of this chapter, non-conforming structures are existing structures whose building footprint is completely or partially on HCA lands. Any additions, alterations, replacement, or rehabilitation of existing non-conforming non-water-related structures (including decks), roadways, driveways, accessory uses and accessory structures shall avoid encroachment upon the HCAs, especially high HCAs, except that:

a.    A 10-foot lateral extension of an existing building footprint is allowed if the lateral extension does not encroach any further into the HCA or closer to the river or water resource area than the portion of the existing footprint immediately adjacent.

b.    An addition to the existing structure on the side of the structure opposite to the river or water resource area shall be allowed. There will be no square footage limitation in this direction except as described in subsection (E)(1)(c) of this section.

c.    The same allowance for the use of, and construction of, 5,000 square feet of total impervious surface for sites in HCAs per subsections (B)(2) through (4) of this section shall apply to lots in this section.

d.    Vertical additions are permitted including the construction of additional floors.

e.    The provisions of Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures, shall not apply.

F.    Access and property rights.

1.    Private lands within the protection area shall be recognized and respected.

2.    Where a legal public access to the river or elsewhere in the protection area exists, that legal public right shall be recognized and respected.

3.    To construct a water-dependent structure such as a dock, ramp, or gangway shall require that all pre-existing legal public access or similar legal rights in the protection area be recognized and respected. Where pre-existing legal public access, such as below the OLW, is to be obstructed by, for example, a ramp, the applicant shall provide a reasonable alternate route around, over or under the obstruction. The alternate route shall be as direct as possible. The proposed route, to include appropriate height clearances under ramps/docks and specifications for safe passage over or around ramps and docks, shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director for adequacy.

4.    Any public or private water-dependent use or facility shall be within established DSL-authorized areas.

5.    Legal access to, and along, the riverfront in single-family residential zoned areas shall be encouraged and pursued especially when there are reasonable expectations that a continuous trail system can be facilitated. The City recognizes the potential need for compensation where nexus and proportionality tests are not met. Fee simple ownership by the City shall be preferred. The trail should be dimensioned and designed appropriate to the terrain it traverses and the user group(s) it can reasonably expect to attract. The City shall be responsible for signing the trail and delineating the boundary between private and public lands or access easements.

G.    Incentives to encourage access in industrial, multi-family, mixed use, commercial, office, public and non-single-family residential zoned areas.

1.    For all industrial, multi-family, mixed use, commercial, office, public and other non-single-family residential zones, this section encourages the dedication or establishment of access easements to allow legal public access to, and along, the river. Support for access may be found in the Parks Master Plan, a neighborhood plan or any applicable adopted sub-area plans. The emphasis will be upon locating paths where there is a reasonable expectation that the path can be extended to adjacent properties to form a connective trail system in the future, and/or where the trail will provide opportunities for appreciation of, and access to, the river.

2.    Height or density incentives may be available to developers who provide public access. Specifically, commercial, industrial, multi-family, mixed use, and public projects may be constructed to a height of 60 feet. No variance is required for the 60-foot height allowance regardless of the underlying zone height limitations; however, the following conditions must be met:

a.    Provide a minimum 20-foot-wide all-weather public access path along the project’s entire river frontage (reduced dimensions would only be permitted in response to physical site constraints such as rock outcroppings, significant trees, etc.); and

b.    Provide a minimum 10-foot-wide all-weather public access path from an existing public right-of-way to that riverfront path or connect the riverfront path to an existing riverfront path on an adjoining property that accesses a public right-of-way.

c.    Fencing may be required near steep dropoffs or grade changes.

H.    Partitions, subdivisions and incentives.

1.    When dividing a property into lots or parcels, an applicant shall verify the boundaries of the HCA on the property.

2.    Applicant shall partition or subdivide the site so that all lots or parcels have a buildable site or envelope available for home construction located on non-HCA land or areas designated “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” per the HCA Map.

3.    Development of HCA-dominated lands shall be undertaken as a last resort. A planned unit development (PUD) of Chapter 24 CDC may be required.

4.    Incentives are available to encourage provision of public access to, and/or along, the river. By these means, planned unit developments shall be able to satisfy the shared outdoor recreation area requirements of CDC 55.100(F). Specifically, for every square foot of riverfront path, the applicant will receive credit for two square feet in calculating the required shared outdoor recreation area square footage. Applicants shall also be eligible for a density bonus under CDC 24.150(B). To be eligible to receive either of these incentives, applicants shall:

a.    Provide a minimum 20-foot-wide all-weather public access path along the project’s entire river frontage (reduced dimensions would only be permitted in response to physical site constraints such as rock outcroppings, significant trees, etc.); and

b.    Provide a minimum 10-foot-wide all-weather public access path from an existing public right-of-way to that riverfront path or connect the riverfront path to an existing riverfront path on an adjoining property that accesses a public right-of-way;

c.    Fencing may be required near steep dropoffs or grade changes.

I.    Docks and other water-dependent structures.

1.    Once the preference rights area is established by DSL, the property owner identifies where the water-dependent use will be located within the authorized portion of the preference rights area. The water-dependent use should be centered or in the middle of the preference rights/authorized area or meet the side yard setbacks of the underlying zone.

Private and public non-commercial docks are permitted where dredging is required so long as all applicable federal and State permits are obtained. Dredging is encouraged if deposits silt up under an existing dock. Dredging is seen as preferable to the construction of longer docks/ramps.

2.    Both joint and single use docks shall not extend into the water any further than necessary to provide four feet between the ship’s keel or fixed propeller/rudder and the bottom of the water at any time during the water’s lowest point.

3.    In no case except as provided in this section shall a private ramp and private dock extend more than 100 feet from OLW towards the center of the river or slough. In the case of L‑shaped docks, the 100 feet shall be measured from the OLW to the furthest part of the private dock closest to the center of the river.

4.    Docks on sloughs and similar channels shall not extend more than 30 percent of the distance between two land masses at OHW, such as between the mainland and an island or peninsula, measured in a lineal manner at right angle to the dominant shoreline. In no way shall a dock impede existing public usage or block navigation of a channel.

5.    Boat storage associated with a rail launch facility shall be located above the OHW, either vertically raised above the ordinary high water line or set back behind the OHW. Such boat storage structure will be natural wood colors or similar earth tones. Private railed launch facilities are permitted for individual boat owners. The onshore setback of the storage structure is equal distance on both sides as extended perpendicular to the thread of the stream, or seven and one-half feet, whichever is the greater setback.

6.    The width of each deck section shall be no more than 12 feet wide.

7.    For only single-user and joint-user docks, pilings shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet above the 100-year flood elevation.

8.    A single user non-commercial dock shall not exceed 400 square feet in deck area. The boat slip is not included in the calculation of this square footage limitation.

9.    Private non-commercial boat houses are allowed but only if they are within 50 feet of OLW and/or in locations sufficiently screened from view so that they do not have a significant visual impact on views from adjacent and nearby homes. Building and roof colors shall be brown, gray, beige, natural or similar earth tones. Non-commercial boat houses shall not exceed 12 feet in height measured from the boat house deck level to the roof peak. The size of the boat house shall be sized to accommodate one boat only and shall not exceed a footprint greater than 500 square feet. Boatlifts are permitted within the boat house. The above provisions also apply to open-walled boat shelters with or without boatlifts.

J.    Joint docks.

1.    Joint use boat docks may be permitted by the reviewing authority where the applicants are riverfront property owners, ideally owners of adjacent lots of record.

2.    Co-owners of the joint dock use shall be prohibited from having their own non-joint dock.

3.    A joint use agreement shall be prepared which will be included in the application for review by the reviewing authority and subsequently recorded. A copy of the recorded document with the County Recorder’s stamp shall be submitted to the City.

4.    A condition of approval for any joint use permit shall be that the dock must be used to serve the same lots of record for which the dock permit was issued. Joint use cannot be transferred to, or used by, any party other than the original applicants or the future owners of those properties.

5.    Joint docks may go on the common property line between the two landowners who are sharing the dock. Unless agreed to by the adjoining owner, joint docks not being shared with the adjacent property owner must be at least 15 feet from the preference rights area side lines or centered in the middle of the preference rights area.

K.    Non-conforming docks and other water-related structures. Pre-existing non-conforming structures, including docks, ramps, boat houses, etc., as defined in this chapter may remain in place. Replacement in kind (e.g., replacement of decking and other materials) will be allowed provided the replacement meets the standards of this chapter. However, if any non-conforming structure that is damaged and destroyed or otherwise to be replaced to the extent that the rebuilding or replacing (including replacement in kind) would exceed 50 percent of the current replacement cost of the entire structure, the owner shall be required to meet all the standards of this chapter.

L.    Roads, driveways, utilities, or passive use recreation facilities. Roads, driveways, utilities, public paths, or passive use recreation facilities may be built in those portions of HCAs that include wetlands, riparian areas, and water resource areas when no other practical alternative exists but shall use water-permeable materials unless City engineering standards do not allow that. Construction to the minimum dimensional standards for roads is required. Full mitigation and revegetation is required, with the applicant to submit a mitigation plan pursuant to CDC 32.070 and a revegetation plan pursuant to CDC 32.080. The maximum disturbance width for utility corridors is as follows:

1.    For utility facility connections to utility facilities, no greater than 10 feet wide.

2.    For upgrade of existing utility facilities, no greater than 15 feet wide.

3.    For new underground utility facilities, no greater than 25 feet wide, and disturbance of no more than 200 linear feet of water quality resource area, or 20 percent of the total linear feet of water quality resource area, whichever is greater.

M.    Structures. All buildings and structures in HCAs and riparian areas, including all exterior mechanical equipment, should be screened, colored, or surfaced so as to blend with the riparian environment. Surfaces shall be non-polished/reflective or at least expected to lose their luster within a year. In addition to the specific standards and criteria applicable to water-dependent uses (docks), all other provisions of this chapter shall apply to water dependent uses, and any structure shall be no larger than necessary to accommodate the use.

N.    Water-permeable materials for hardscapes. The use of water-permeable materials for parking lots, driveways, patios, and paths as well as flow-through planters, box filters, bioswales and drought tolerant plants are strongly encouraged in all “a” and “b” land classifications and shall be required in all “c” and “d” land classifications. The only exception in the “c” and “d” classifications would be where it is demonstrated that water-permeable driveways/hardscapes could not structurally support the axle weight of vehicles or equipment/storage load using those areas. Flow through planters, box filters, bioswales, drought tolerant plants and other measures of treating and/or detaining runoff would still be required in these areas.

O.    Signs and graphics. No sign or graphic display inconsistent with the purposes of the protection area shall have a display surface oriented toward or visible from the Willamette or Tualatin River. A limited number of signs may be allowed to direct public access along legal routes in the protection area.

P.    Lighting. Lighting shall not be focused or oriented onto the surface of the river except as required by the Coast Guard. Lighting elsewhere in the protection area shall be the minimum necessary and shall not create off-site glare or be omni-directional. Screens and covers will be required.

Q.    Parking. Parking and unenclosed storage areas located within or adjacent to the protection area boundary shall be screened from the river in accordance with Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas. The use of water-permeable material to construct the parking lot is either encouraged or required depending on HCA classification per CDC 28.110(N)(4).

R.    Views. Significant views of the Willamette and Tualatin Rivers shall be protected as much as possible as seen from the following public viewpoints: Mary S. Young Park, Willamette Park, Cedar Oak Park, Burnside Park, Maddox Park, Cedar Island, the Oregon City Bridge, Willamette Park, and Fields Bridge Park.

Where options exist in the placement of ramps and docks, the applicant shall select the least visually intrusive location as seen from a public viewpoint. However, if no options exist, then the ramp, pilings and dock shall be allowed at the originally proposed location.

S.    Aggregate deposits. Extraction of aggregate deposits or dredging shall be conducted in a manner designed to minimize adverse effects on water quality, fish and wildlife, vegetation, bank stabilization, stream flow, visual quality, noise and safety, and to promote necessary reclamation.

T.    Changing the landscape/grading.

1.    Existing predominant topographical features of the bank line and escarpment shall be preserved and maintained except for disturbance necessary for the construction or establishment of a water related or water dependent use. Measures necessary to reduce potential bank and escarpment erosion, landslides, or flood hazard conditions shall also be taken.

Any construction to stabilize or protect the bank with rip rap, gabions, etc., shall only be allowed where there is clear evidence of erosion or similar hazard and shall be the minimum needed to stop that erosion or to avoid a specific and identifiable hazard. A geotechnical engineer’s stamped report shall accompany the application with evidence to support the proposal.

2.    The applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the approval authority that steps have been taken to minimize the impact of the proposal on the riparian environment (areas between the top of the bank and the low water mark of the river including lower terrace, beach and river edge).

3.    The applicant shall demonstrate that stabilization measures shall not cause subsequent erosion or deposits on upstream or downstream properties.

4.    Prior to any grading or development, that portion of the HCA that includes wetlands, creeks, riparian areas and water resource area shall be protected with an anchored chain link fence (or approved equivalent) at its perimeter and shall remain undisturbed except as specifically allowed by an approved Willamette and Tualatin River Protection and/or water resource area (WRA) permit. Such fencing shall be maintained until construction is complete. That portion of the HCA that includes wetlands, creeks, riparian areas and water resource area shall be identified with City-approved permanent markers at all boundary direction changes and at 30- to 50-foot intervals that clearly delineate the extent of the protected area.

5.    Full erosion control measures shall be in place and approved by the City Engineer prior to any grading, development or site clearing.

U.    Protect riparian and adjacent vegetation. Vegetative ground cover and trees upon the site shall be preserved, conserved, and maintained according to the following provisions:

1.    Riparian vegetation below OHW removed during development shall be replaced with indigenous vegetation, which shall be compatible with and enhance the riparian environment and approved by the approval authority as part of the application.

2.    Vegetative improvements to areas within the protection area may be required if the site is found to be in an unhealthy or disturbed state by the City Arborist or his or her designated expert. “Unhealthy or disturbed” includes those sites that have a combination of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover on less than 80 percent of the water resource area and less than 50 percent tree canopy coverage in the primary and secondary habitat conservation area to be preserved. “Vegetative improvements” will be documented by submitting a revegetation plan meeting CDC 28.160 criteria that will result in the primary and secondary habitat conservation area to be preserved having a combination of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover on more than 80 percent of its area, and more than 50 percent tree canopy coverage in its area. The vegetative improvements shall be guaranteed for survival for a minimum of two years. Once approved, the applicant is responsible for implementing the plan prior to final inspection.

3.    Tree cutting shall be prohibited in the protection area except that:

a.    Diseased trees or trees in danger of falling may be removed with the City Arborist’s approval; and

b.    Tree cutting may be permitted in conjunction with those uses listed in CDC 28.030 with City Arborist approval; to the extent necessary to accommodate the listed uses;

c.    Selective cutting in accordance with the Oregon Forest Practices Act, if applicable, shall be permitted with City Arborist approval within the area between the OHW and the greenway boundary provided the natural scenic qualities of the greenway are maintained. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 §§ 29 – 36, 2011; amended during July 2014 supplement; Ord. 1635 § 17, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 27, 2014)


28.120 SITE PLAN

A.    All site plans and maps shall include the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, a lineal scale of the plot plan, a north arrow and a vicinity map.

B.    The applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to an appropriate scale (in order of preference: one inch equals 10 feet to one inch equals 30 feet), which contains the following information:

1.    Assessor’s Map number and tax lot number.

2.    The lot or parcel boundaries, dimensions and gross area.

3.    The applicant’s property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant’s property and proposed development to the adjacent property and development.

4.    The location, dimensions, and names of all existing and platted streets and other public ways and easements on adjacent property and on the site.

5.    The location, dimensions and setback distances of all:

a.    Existing structures, improvements, utility facilities and drainageways on site and on adjoining properties;

b.    Proposed structures or changes to existing structures, improvements, utility facilities and drainageways on the site.

6.    All developments shall define and map existing public access rights on, and adjacent to, the subject property.

7.    A slope contour map at minimum two-foot intervals showing slope classifications of zero to 25 percent and greater than 25 percent.

8.    If a wetland on the West Linn Local Wetland Inventory is identified on the property and the proposed activity is expected to encroach within 25 feet of the wetland, a delineation of the precise boundaries of that wetland prepared by a wetland biologist.

9.    The location of the ordinary high water mark and the ordinary low water mark on the property and on abutting properties.

10.    The delineation of areas designated “Habitat and Impact Areas Not Designated as HCAs” and HCA areas by low, medium and high designation shall be mapped based on the HCA Map and any necessary verification shall be done by the Planning Director. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 37, 2011; Ord. 1636 § 28, 2014)


28.130 GRADING PLAN

The grading plan shall be at the same scale as the site plan (CDC 28.120) and shall show or attach:

A.    The location and extent to which grading will take place indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed.

B.    Tables and maps identifying acreage, location and type of development constraints due to site characteristics such as slope, drainage and geologic hazards. For Type I, II, and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), the applicant must provide a geologic report, with text, figures and attachments as needed to meet the industry standard of practice, prepared by a certified engineering geologist and/or a geotechnical professional engineer, that includes:

1.    Site characteristics, geologic descriptions and a summary of the site investigation conducted;

2.    Assessment of engineering geological conditions and factors;

3.    Review of the City of West Linn’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan and applicability to the site; and

4.    Conclusions and recommendations focused on geologic constraints for the proposed land use or development activity, limitations and potential risks of development, recommendations for mitigation approaches and additional work needed at future development stages including further testing and monitoring.

C.    Sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the plan. 

D.    Identification information, including the name and address of the owner, developer, project designer, and the project engineer. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1635 § 18, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 5, 2017)


28.140 ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS

A.    Architectural drawings shall be submitted at the same scale as the site plan scale, as described in the site plan, showing:

1.    Elevations of structure(s). For additions, the drawings should clearly distinguish between existing structure and proposed addition and show distance from addition and existing structure to the protected water resource.

2.    The exterior building materials: type, color, and texture.

3.    For docks, all pilings and their heights shall be shown. The applicant shall indicate the depth from the end of the dock to the river bottom during typical summer months. The applicant shall also provide any available product literature and photographs from the manufacturer or installer.

4.    For docks, the applicant shall provide a plan view of the structure in relation to the shoreline and river. The plans shall also indicate graphically the OLW and the OHW and the DSL’s preference rights and authorized areas. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.150 LANDSCAPE PLAN

A.    The landscape plan shall be prepared per site plan standards (CDC 28.120) and in addition shall show:

1.    The location, size and type of existing trees and location and type of vegetation to be removed and to be retained;

2.    The location and design of landscaped areas;

3.    The varieties and sizes of trees and materials to be planted;

4.    The location and height of fences and other buffering or screening materials; and

5.    The location, materials, dimensions and design of terraces, decks, patios, shelters, footpaths, retaining walls and play areas.

B.    Revegetation plan per CDC 32.080. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.160 MITIGATION PLAN

If any HCA is permanently disturbed as a result of the proposed development of any uses or structures, the applicant shall prepare and implement a revegetation and mitigation plan pursuant to the provisions of CDC 32.070 and 32.080. (Ord. 1576, 2008)


28.170 PENALTIES

Violation of any provision or requirement of this chapter or conditions of approval is a Class A violation, and shall also constitute a public nuisance. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. In addition, the City retains the authority to require any water resource area which has been altered illegally to have erosion control measures put in place and be reestablished to its natural condition, including replanting trees, shrubs, etc., and reseeding open areas at the owner’s expense. In addition, the City Attorney may institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or cure any problems resulting from violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1576, 2008; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


Chapter 32 WATER RESOURCE AREA PROTECTION

Sections:

32.010    PURPOSES

32.020    APPLICABILITY

32.030    PROHIBITED USES

32.040    EXEMPTIONS

32.050    APPLICATION

32.060    APPROVAL CRITERIA (STANDARD PROCESS)

32.070    ALTERNATE REVIEW PROCESS

32.080    APPROVAL CRITERIA (ALTERNATE REVIEW PROCESS)

32.090    MITIGATION PLAN

32.100    RE-VEGETATION PLAN REQUIREMENTS

32.110    HARDSHIP PROVISIONS

32.120    WRA MAP


32.010 PURPOSES

The purposes of this chapter are to:

A.    Comply with Title 13 and Title 3 of Metro’s Urban Growth Management Functional Plan while balancing resource protection with property rights and development needs.

B.    Protect or improve water quality by filtering sediment and pollutants and absorbing excess nutrients for the protection of public health, safety and the environment and to comply with both state and federal laws and regulations, including the Clean Water Act and the Endangered Species Act. 

C.    Moderate storm water impacts by slowing, storing, filtering and absorbing storm water and to maintain storm water storage and conveyance to prevent or minimize flooding and erosion for the protection of public health and safety. 

D.    Prevent erosion and minimize sedimentation of water bodies by protecting root masses along streams that resist erosion and stabilize the stream bank and by protecting vegetation on steep slopes to maintain their stability. 

E.    Protect and improve the following functions and values of WRAs that enhance the value of fish and wildlife habitat:

1.    Natural stream corridors that provide habitat and habitat connectivity for terrestrial wildlife;

2.    Microclimate habitats that support species adapted to those conditions;

3.    Shade to maintain healthy stream temperatures;

4.    Vegetation to absorb and filter pollution and sediment that would otherwise contaminate the water body;

5.    Sources of organic material that support the food chain;

6.    Recruitment of large wood that enhances the habitat of fish bearing streams;

7.    Moderation of stream flow by storing and delaying storm water runoff; and

8.    Vegetated areas surrounding wetlands that, together with the wetland, provide vital habitat for birds, amphibians, and other species. 

F.    Provide mitigation standards and guidance to address water quality values and ecological functions and values lost through development within WRAs. 

G.    Encourage the use of habitat friendly development practices.

H.    Minimize construction of structures and improvements where they are at risk of flooding, to enable natural stream migration and channel dynamics, and protect water resources from the potential harmful impacts of development. 

I.    Provide for uses and activities in WRAs that have negligible impact on such areas; and to provide for other uses that must be located in such areas in a way that will avoid or, when avoidance is not possible, minimize potential impacts. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.020 APPLICABILITY

A.    This chapter applies to all development, activity or uses within WRAs identified on the WRA Map. It also applies to all verified, unmapped WRAs. The WRA Map shall be amended to include the previously unmapped WRAs. 

B.    The burden is on the property owner to demonstrate that the requirements of this chapter are met, or are not applicable to the land, development activity, or other proposed use or alteration of land. The Planning Director may make a determination of applicability based on the WRA Map, field visits, and any other relevant maps, site plans and information, as to:

1.    The existence of a WRA;

2.    The exact location of the WRA; and/or 

3.    Whether the proposed development, activity or use is within the WRA boundary. 

In cases where the location of the WRA is unclear or disputed, the Planning Director may require a survey, delineation, or sworn statement prepared by a natural resource professional/wetland biologist or specialist that no WRA exists on the site. Any required survey, delineation, or statement shall be prepared at the applicant’s sole expense. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.030 PROHIBITED USES

Alteration, development, or use of real property designated as, and within, a WRA is strictly prohibited except as specifically allowed or exempted in this chapter.

Table 32-1: Summary of Where Development and Activities May Occur in Areas Subject to This Chapter 

	Type of Development or Activity	In Water Resource	Water Resource Area

	New house, principal structure(s)	No	No, except by hardship, CDC 32.100. Geotechnical study may reduce WRA width per Table 32-2 (footnote 4).

	Additions to existing house, principal structure(s) and replacement in kind (replacement in kind does not count against the 500 sq. ft. limit so long as it remains within the existing footprint) 	No	Yes, so long as it gets no closer to the WRA than building footprint that existed January 1, 2006. Max. 500 sq. ft. of addition(s) to side or 500 sq. ft. to side of building footprint furthest from WRA. No limit on vertical additions within existing footprint. (CDC 32.040(C)). Geotechnical study may reduce the WRA width per Table 32-2 (footnote 4).

	New cantilevered decks (over 30 inches), balconies, roof overhangs and pop outs towards the WRA from existing house or principal structure(s)	No	Yes, but only 5 ft. into the WRA. Foundation or supports of structure cannot extend vertically to grade in the WRA. Geotechnical study may reduce the WRA width per Table 32-2 (footnote 4).

	Decks within 30 inches of grade, at grade patios	No	Yes, but only to within 50 ft. of the water resource or 10 ft. behind the top of slope (ravine), whichever is greater.1 Geotechnical study may reduce the WRA width per Table 32-2 (footnote 4). 

	New accessory structure under 120 sq. ft. and 10 ft. tall	No	Yes, but only if it is a minimum of 50 ft. from the water resource or 10 ft. behind the top of slope (ravine), whichever is greater.1

	Repair and maintenance to existing accessory structures	No	Yes, but no increase in footprint or height.

	Storm water treatment and detention (e.g., rain gardens, storm outfall/energy dissipaters)	No	Yes, private and public facilities including outfall and energy dissipaters are permitted if no reasonable alternatives exist.

	Driveways/streets/bridges and parking lots 	No, unless a WRA crossing is the only available route. No parking lots.	No, unless a WRA crossing is the only available route, or it is part of a hardship application. Parking lots only allowed in hardship cases the maximum distance from water resource.

	New fence(s)	No markers or posts in a water resource.	Yes, but only to within 50 ft. of the water resource or behind the top of slope (ravine), whichever is greater.1 In remainder of a WRA, only City approved property markers or posts every 25 ft. to delineate property. 

	Demolition of structure and/or removal of impervious surfaces in the WRA 	Yes, restoration and re-vegetation required.	Yes, restoration and re-vegetation required.

	Exterior lighting	No	No, except on existing buildings, additions or hardship cases, but light must be directed away from the WRA and less than 12 ft. high.

	Public passive recreation facilities	No, except for bridges and utility crossings. 	Yes, but only soft or permeable surface trails, bridges and elevated paths, interpretive facilities and signage. Hard surface ADA trails are allowed in WRA above top of slope associated with well-defined ravine WRAs. 

	Public active recreation facilities	No, except for bridges and utility crossings. 	Yes, but natural surface playing fields and playground areas only in WRA above top of slope associated with well-defined ravine WRAs. 

	Grading, fill (see also TDAs)	No, except for bridges and utility crossings. 	Yes, after a WRA permit is obtained. Restoration and re-vegetation required.

	Temporarily disturbed areas (TDAs) (e.g., buried utilities) 	No, except as allowed by WRA permit. 	Yes, restoration and re-vegetation required.

	Removal of existing vegetation or planting new vegetation	No, except invasive plants and hazard trees per CDC 32.040(A)(2) or per CDC 32.100.	Yes, if it is replaced by native vegetation. Exemption CDC 32.040(A)(3) applies.

	Realigning water resources	Yes, after “alternate review” process 	Not applicable 

1    Development to within 50 feet of the water resource applies to Table 32-2 WRA types (A), (C), (D), and (H). Development behind top of slope (ravine) applies to WRA type (B). 

(Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.040 EXEMPTIONS

The following development, activities or uses are exempt from a WRA permit but must conform to any applicable requirements of this section. 

A.    Vegetation maintenance, planting and removal.

1.    The routine maintenance of any existing WRA, consistent with the provisions of this chapter such as, but not limited to, removing pollutants, trash, unauthorized fill, and dead or dying vegetation that constitutes a hazard to life or property. 

2.    Removal of plants identified as nuisance, invasive or prohibited plants; provided, that after plant removal, re-vegetation of disturbed areas is performed pursuant to CDC 32.100.

3.    The planting or propagation of plants identified as native plants on the Portland Plant List. 

4.    Maintenance of existing gardens, pastures, lawns, and landscape perimeters, including the installation of new irrigation systems within existing gardens, lawns, and landscape perimeters. 

5.    The use of pesticides and herbicides with applicable state (e.g., Oregon DEQ) permits.

B.    Building, paving, grading, and testing.

1.       Maintenance. Routine repair, maintenance and replacement of legally established above and below ground utilities and related components (including storm water catch basins, intakes, etc.), roads, driveways, paths, trails, fences and manmade water control facilities such as constructed ponds, wastewater facilities, and storm water treatment facilities that do not expand the disturbed area at grade or footprint, provided re-vegetation of disturbed areas or corridors is performed pursuant to CDC 32.100.

2.    Trails. The establishment of unpaved trails constructed of non-hazardous, pervious materials with a maximum width of four feet in generalized corridors approved in a parks or trails master plan; provided, that:

a.    The trail is set back from the water resource at least 30 feet, except at stream crossing points or at points were the topography forces the trail closer to the stream.

b.    Foot bridge crossings shall be kept to a minimum. When the stream bank adjacent to the foot bridge is accessible (e.g., due to limited vegetation or topography), fences or railings shall be installed from the foot bridge and extend 15 feet beyond the terminus of the foot bridge to discourage trail users and pets from accessing the stream bank, disturbing wildlife and habitat areas, and causing vegetation loss, stream bank erosion and stream turbidity. 

c.    Trails shall be designed to minimize disturbance to existing vegetation, work with natural contours, avoid the fall line on slopes where possible, and avoid areas with evidence of slope failure to ensure that trail runoff does not create channels in the WRA.

3.    Site investigations. Temporary and minor clearing outside of wetlands not to exceed 200 square feet per acre or site, whichever is more; provided, that no individual area is greater than 200 feet in size, for the purpose of site investigations and pits for preparing soil profiles; provided, that such areas are restored to their original condition when the investigation is complete. While such temporary and minor clearing is exempt from the provisions of this chapter, it is subject to all other City codes, including provisions for erosion control and tree removal.

4.    Support structures for overhead power or communication lines where the support structures are outside of the WRA.

5.    The installation, within the developed portions of street rights-of-way, of new utilities, the maintenance or replacement of existing utilities and street repaving projects. 

C.    Non-conforming structures.

1.    Expansion of the principal non-conforming structure. Additions to the existing building footprint of a principal non-conforming structure within, or partially within, the WRA are exempt, and additionally exempt from Chapter 66 CDC, Non-Conforming Structures, as long as the addition(s) meets the following restrictions:   

a.    Re-vegetation of temporarily disturbed areas will be performed per CDC 32.100 after the addition is completed; 

b.    There is no net increase in storm water runoff flowing toward the water resource as a result of the addition(s); 

c.    The addition to the principal structure is not closer to the water resource than the existing principal structure;

d.    If it is a lateral addition, it does not extend more than 25 feet laterally from the side of the existing principal structure;

e.    The addition does not increase the footprint of the existing principal structure by more than 500 square feet, at any one time or incrementally;

f.    Lateral additions to decks cannot come closer to the water resource than the existing deck;

g.    Vertical additions to existing principal structures that comply with the maximum height requirements of the underlying zone are exempt. 

2.    Repair, replacement and removal of non-conforming structures.

a.    Interior remodeling of a non-conforming structure.

b.    Repair, maintenance, rehabilitation and replacement of non-conforming structures, accessory structures, utilities and related components, roads, driveways, paths, trails, fences, and manmade water and storm water control facilities that do not expand the disturbed area or footprint. Re-vegetation of temporarily disturbed areas or corridors pursuant to CDC 32.100 is required. 

c.    This section also applies in the event that a non-conforming structure burned down or was otherwise damaged by natural or other disaster. The structure could be re-built so long as the structure did not expand the original footprint and the original access driveway (PDA) was used.

d.    Demolition and removal of non-conforming structure’s impervious surfaces are exempt as long as the affected areas are restored with native vegetation pursuant to CDC 32.100.

D.    New construction activities allowed in the WRA.

1.    Structures shall be located out of the WRA, except that eaves, balconies, decks, “pop outs,” and similar additions, may cantilever over the outer boundary of the WRA a maximum of five feet. No vertical supports may extend down to grade within the WRA. 

2.    Construction of an accessory structure, less than 120 square feet in size and under 10 feet tall, may be constructed to within 50 feet of the water resource or 10 feet behind the top of slope (ravine, per Figure 32-4), whichever is greater. No more than one accessory structure is permitted in the WRA. Accessory structures in the WRA that existed prior to January 1, 2006, may remain in place and not count against the limitation in new accessory structures.

3.    Construction of a water permeable patio or deck within 30 inches of the original grade and construction of approved water permeable footpaths may be constructed to within 50 feet of the water resource or 10 feet behind the top of slope (ravine, per Figure 32-4), whichever is greater. 

4.    Fences may be built to within 50 feet of the water resource or behind the top of slope (ravine), whichever is greater. 

Figure 32-1: Additions to Non-Conforming Principal Structures within the WRA Boundary
[IMAGE]


E.    Emergency activities. Actions authorized by the City Manager that must be taken immediately or within a period of time too short to fully comply with this chapter to:

1.    Prevent immediate danger to life or property;

2.    Prevent immediate threat of serious environmental degradation;

3.    Restore existing utility service; or 

4.    Reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic.

However, after the emergency has passed any disturbed area shall be restored, pursuant to CDC 32.100. 

F.    Exempt areas.

1.    The Tualatin or Willamette Rivers are regulated by Chapter 28 CDC and are not subject to this chapter. However, wetlands and buffers, regardless of their proximity to these rivers, are subject to this chapter. In areas where there is overlap with Chapter 28 CDC, this chapter shall prevail.

2.    Existing enclosed or piped sections of streams, including any development at right angles to the enclosed or piped sections. 

G.    Metro Code Chapter 3.07 Urban Growth Management Functional Plan – Exempt uses and conditioned activities. Where construction of a residence was completed before January 1, 2006, the owners or residents shall not be restricted from engaging in any development that was allowed prior to September 22, 2005; unless such development required obtaining a land use decision, or a building, erosion control, or grading permit. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 4, 2016)


32.050 APPLICATION

A.    An application requesting approval for a use or activity regulated by this chapter shall be initiated by the property owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, and shall include an application form and the appropriate deposit or fee as indicated on the master fee schedule.

B.    A pre-application conference shall be a prerequisite to the filing of the application.

C.    The applicant shall submit maps and diagrams at 11 by 17 inches and a written narrative addressing the approval criteria and requirements of this chapter, and any additional copies required by the Planning Director. 

D.    Where review of soil maps, Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI) maps, or on-site inspection by the City Engineer reveals evidence of slope failures or that WRA slopes are potentially unstable or prone to failure, geotechnical studies may be required to demonstrate that the proposed development will not cause, or contribute to, slope failure or increased erosion or sedimentation in the WRA or adversely impact surface or modify groundwater flow or hydrologic conditions. These geotechnical studies shall include all necessary measures to avoid or correct the potential hazard.

E.    Applications proposing that streets or utilities cross water resources, or any other development that modifies the water resource, shall present evidence in the form of adopted utility master plans or transportation master plans, or findings from a registered Oregon civil engineer, certified engineering geologist or similarly qualified professional to demonstrate that the development or improvements are consistent with accepted engineering practices.

F.    Site plan. The applicant shall submit a site plan which contains the following information, as applicable: 

1.    The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the scale (lineal) of the plan, and a north arrow. 

2.    Property lines, rights-of-way, easements, etc.

3.    A storm detention and treatment plan and narrative statement pursuant to CDC 92.010(E).

4.    Tables and maps identifying acreage, location and type of development constraints due to site characteristics such as slope, drainage and geologic hazards. For Type I, II, and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), the applicant must provide a geologic report, with text, figures and attachments as needed to meet the industry standard of practice, prepared by a certified engineering geologist and/or a geotechnical professional engineer, that includes:

a.    Site characteristics, geologic descriptions and a summary of the site investigation conducted;

b.    Assessment of engineering geological conditions and factors;

c.    Review of the City of West Linn’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan and applicability to the site; and

d.    Conclusions and recommendations focused on geologic constraints for the proposed land use or development activity, limitations and potential risks of development, recommendations for mitigation approaches and additional work needed at future development stages including further testing and monitoring.

5.    Boundaries of the WRA, specifically delineating the water resource, and any riparian corridor boundary. If the proposal includes development of a wetland, a wetlands delineation prepared by a professional wetland specialist will be required. The wetland delineation may be required to be accepted or waived through the Department of State Lands (DSL) delineation review process.

6.    Location of existing and proposed development, including all existing and proposed structures, accessory structures, any areas of fill or excavation, water resource crossings, alterations to vegetation, or other alterations to the site’s natural state. 

7.    Identify the location and square footage of previously disturbed areas, areas that are to be temporarily disturbed, and area to be permanently disturbed or developed.

8.    When an application proposes development within the WRA, an inventory of vegetation within the WRA, sufficient to categorize the existing condition of the WRA, including:

a.    The type and general quality of ground cover, including the identification of dominant species and any occurrence of non-native, invasive species;

b.    Square footage of ground cover; and

c.    Square footage of tree canopy as measured either through aerial photographs or by determining the tree drip lines. Where only a portion of a WRA is to be disturbed, the tree inventory need only apply to the impacted area. The remaining treed area shall be depicted by outlining the canopy cover.

9.    Locations of all significant trees as defined by the City Arborist. 

10.    Identify adopted transportation, utility and other plan documents applicable to this proposal.

11.    For cases processed under CDC 32.110 (hardship), provide the maximum disturbed area (MDA) calculations.   

G.    Construction management plan. The applicant shall submit a construction management plan which includes the following: 

1.    The location of proposed TDAs (site ingress/egress for construction equipment, areas for storage of material, construction activity areas, grading and trenching, etc.) that will subsequently be restored to original grade and replanted with native vegetation, shall be identified, mapped and enclosed with fencing per subsection (G)(3) of this section.

2.    Appropriate erosion control measures consistent with Clackamas County Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, rev. 2008, and a tentative schedule of work.

3.    The WRA shall be protected, prior to construction, with an anchored chain link fence (or equivalent approved by the City) at its perimeter that shall remain undisturbed, except as specifically authorized by the approval authority. Additional fencing to delineate approved TDAs may be required. Fencing shall be mapped and identified in the construction management plan and maintained until construction is complete.

H.    Mitigation plan prepared in accordance with the requirements in CDC 32.090.

I.    Re-vegetation plan prepared in accordance with the requirements in CDC 32.100.

J.    The Planning Director may modify the submittal requirements per CDC 99.035.

K.    The following additional requirements apply to applications being submitted under the alternative review process pursuant to CDC 32.070 and 32.080.

1.    Identify the affected WRA and describe the functions it performs (see Table 32-4).

2.    Provide a scaled map that delineates the proposed WRA boundaries determined to be sufficient to sustain the functions occurring at the site and a narrative that justifies the proposal, consistent with CDC 32.080.

3.    Identify the recommended WRA boundary at the site with colored tape, survey markers or other easily identified means for field inspection by staff. 

4.    Consultant required for alternate review process.

a.    The narrative and analysis required by CDC 32.070 and 32.080 shall be prepared and signed by a qualified natural resource professional, such as a wildlife biologist, botanist, or hydrologist. The Planning Director shall determine the scope of work and specific products required from the consultant. The Planning Director may require a mitigation plan pursuant to CDC 32.090 and/or a re-vegetation plan pursuant to CDC 32.100.

b.    The Planning Director may waive the consultant requirement for simple or minor projects if he or she determines that it is not necessary in order to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 6, 2017)


32.060 APPROVAL CRITERIA (STANDARD PROCESS)

No application for development on property containing a WRA shall be approved unless the approval authority finds that the proposed development is consistent with the following approval criteria, or can satisfy the criteria by conditions of approval:

A.    WRA protection/minimizing impacts.

1.    Development shall be conducted in a manner that will avoid or, if avoidance is not possible, minimize adverse impact on WRAs.

2.    Mitigation and re-vegetation of disturbed WRAs shall be completed per CDC 32.090 and 32.100, respectively.

B.    Storm water and storm water facilities.

1.    Proposed developments shall be designed to maintain the existing WRAs and utilize them as the primary method of storm water conveyance through the project site unless:

a.    The surface water management plan calls for alternate configurations (culverts, piping, etc.); or 

b.    Under CDC 32.070, the applicant demonstrates that the relocation of the water resource will not adversely impact the function of the WRA including, but not limited to, circumstances where the WRA is poorly defined or not clearly channelized. 

Re-vegetation, enhancement and/or mitigation of the re-aligned water resource shall be required as applicable. 

2.    Public and private storm water detention, storm water treatment facilities and storm water outfall or energy dissipaters (e.g., rip rap) may encroach into the WRA if:

a.    Accepted engineering practice requires it;

b.    Encroachment on significant trees shall be avoided when possible, and any tree loss shall be consistent with the City’s Tree Technical Manual and mitigated per CDC 32.090;

c.    There shall be no direct outfall into the water resource, and any resulting outfall shall not have an erosive effect on the WRA or diminish the stability of slopes; and

d.    There are no reasonable alternatives available. 

A geotechnical report may be required to make the determination regarding slope stability.

3.    Roadside storm water conveyance swales and ditches may be extended within rights-of-way located in a WRA. When possible, they shall be located along the side of the road furthest from the water resource. If the conveyance facility must be located along the side of the road closest to the water resource, it shall be located as close to the road/sidewalk as possible and include habitat friendly design features (treatment train, rain gardens, etc.).

4.    Storm water detention and/or treatment facilities in the WRA shall be designed without permanent perimeter fencing and shall be landscaped with native vegetation. 

5.    Access to public storm water detention and/or treatment facilities shall be provided for maintenance purposes. Maintenance driveways shall be constructed to minimum width and use water permeable paving materials. Significant trees, including roots, shall not be disturbed to the degree possible. The encroachment and any tree loss shall be mitigated per CDC 32.090. There shall also be no adverse impacts upon the hydrologic conditions of the site.

6.    Storm detention and treatment and geologic hazards. Per the submittals required by CDC 32.050(F)(3) and 92.010(E), all proposed storm detention and treatment facilities must comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards, there will be no adverse off-site impacts caused by the development (including impacts from increased intensity of runoff downstream or constrictions causing ponding upstream), and the applicant must provide sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the submitted plan. 

C.    Repealed by Ord. 1647.

D.    WRA width. Except for the exemptions in CDC 32.040, applications that are using the alternate review process of CDC 32.070, or as authorized by the approval authority consistent with the provisions of this chapter, all development is prohibited in the WRA as established in Table 32-2 below:

Table 32-2. Required Width of WRA

	Protected WRA Resource (see Chapter 2 CDC, Definitions)	Slope Adjacent to Protected Water Resource1, 3	Starting Point for Measurements from Water Resource1, 3	Width of WRA on Each Side of the Water Resource

	A. Water Resource 	0% - 25% 	OHW or delineated edge of wetland	65 feet

	B. Water Resource (Ravine) 	over 25% to a distinct top of slope2	OHW or delineated edge of wetland	From water resource to top of slope2 (30-foot minimum), plus an additional 50 feet4

	C. Water Resource 	Over 25% for more than 30 feet, and no distinct top of slope for at least 150 feet	OHW or delineated edge of wetland	200 feet

	D. Riparian Corridor 	Any	OHW 	100 feet 

	E. Formerly Closed Drainage Channel Reopened 	Any	OHW 	15 feet 

	F. Ephemeral Stream 	Any	Stream thread or centerline 	15 feet with treatment or vegetation (see CDC 32.050(G)(1)) 

	G. Fish Bearing Streams per Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) or 2003-2004 Survey	Applies to all that stream section where fish were inventoried and upstream to the first known barrier to fish passage.	OHW or delineated edge of wetland	100 feet when no greater than 25% slope. See B or C above for steeper slopes

	H. Re-aligned Water Resource 	See A, B, C, D, F, or G, above	OHW or delineated edge of wetland	See A, B, C, D, F, or G, above

1    The slope is the average slope in the first 50 feet as measured from bankfull stage or OHW.

2    Where the protected water resource is confined by a ravine or gully, the top of slope is the location (30-foot minimum) where the slope breaks to less than 15 percent for at least 50 feet.

3    At least three slope measurements along the water resource, at no more than 100-foot increments, shall be made for each property for which development is proposed. Depending upon topography, the width of the protected corridor may vary.

4    The 50-foot distance may be reduced to 25 feet if a geotechnical study by a licensed engineer or similar accredited professional demonstrates that the slope is stable and not prone to erosion. 

Table 32-3


[IMAGE]


Figure 32-2


[IMAGE]


Figure 32-3


[IMAGE]


Figure 32-4


[IMAGE]


Figure 32-5


[IMAGE]


Figure 32-6


[IMAGE]


E.    Per the submittals required by CDC 32.050(F)(4), the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed methods of rendering known or potential hazard sites safe for development, including proposed geotechnical remediation, are feasible and adequate to prevent landslides or other damage to property and safety. The review authority may impose conditions, including limits on type or intensity of land use, which it determines are necessary to mitigate known risks of landslides or property damage. 

F.    Roads, driveways and utilities.

1.    New roads, driveways, or utilities shall avoid WRAs unless the applicant demonstrates that no other practical alternative exists. In that case, road design and construction techniques shall minimize impacts and disturbance to the WRA by the following methods:

a.    New roads and utilities crossing riparian habitat areas or streams shall be aligned as close to perpendicular to the channel as possible.

b.    Roads and driveways traversing WRAs shall be of the minimum width possible to comply with applicable road standards and protect public safety. The footprint of grading and site clearing to accommodate the road shall be minimized. 

c.    Road and utility crossings shall avoid, where possible:

1)    Salmonid spawning or rearing areas;

2)    Stands of mature conifer trees in riparian areas;

3)    Highly erodible soils;

4)    Landslide prone areas;

5)    Damage to, and fragmentation of, habitat; and 

6)    Wetlands identified on the WRA Map. 

2.    Crossing of fish bearing streams and riparian corridors shall use bridges or arch-bottomless culverts or the equivalent that provides comparable fish protection, to allow passage of wildlife and fish and to retain the natural stream bed. 

3.    New utilities spanning fish bearing stream sections, riparian corridors, and wetlands shall be located on existing roads/bridges, elevated walkways, conduit, or other existing structures or installed underground via tunneling or boring at a depth that avoids tree roots and does not alter the hydrology sustaining the water resource, unless the applicant demonstrates that it is not physically possible or it is cost prohibitive. Bore pits associated with the crossings shall be restored upon project completion. Dry, intermittent streams may be crossed with open cuts during a time period approved by the City and any agency with jurisdiction. 

4.    No fill or excavation is allowed within the ordinary high water mark of a water resource, unless all necessary permits are obtained from the City, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL). 

5.       Crossings of fish bearing streams shall be aligned, whenever possible, to serve multiple properties and be designed to accommodate conduit for utility lines. The applicant shall, to the extent legally permissible, work with the City to provide for a street layout and crossing location that will minimize the need for additional stream crossings in the future to serve surrounding properties.

G.    Passive recreation. Low impact or passive outdoor recreation facilities for public use including, but not limited to, multi-use paths and trails, not exempted per CDC 32.040(B)(2), viewing platforms, historical or natural interpretive markers, and benches in the WRA, are subject to the following standards: 

1.    Trails shall be constructed using non-hazardous, water permeable materials with a maximum width of four feet or the recommended width under the applicable American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards for the expected type and use, whichever is greater.

2.    Paved trails are limited to the area within 20 feet of the outer boundary of the WRA, and such trails must comply with the storm water provisions of this chapter. 

3.    All trails in the WRA shall be set back from the water resource at least 30 feet except at stream crossing points or at points where the topography forces the trail closer to the water resource. 

4.    Trails shall be designed to minimize disturbance to existing vegetation, work with natural contours, avoid the fall line on slopes where possible, avoid areas with evidence of slope failure and ensure that trail runoff does not create channels in the WRA. 

5.    Foot bridge crossings shall be kept to a minimum. When the stream bank adjacent to the foot bridge is accessible (e.g., due to limited vegetation or topography), where possible, fences or railings shall be installed from the foot bridge and extend 15 feet beyond the terminus of the foot bridge to discourage trail users and pets from accessing the stream bank, disturbing wildlife and habitat areas, and causing vegetation loss, stream bank erosion and stream turbidity. Bridges shall not be made of continuous impervious materials or be treated with toxic substances that could leach into the WRA.

6.    Interpretive facilities (including viewpoints) shall be at least 10 feet from the top of the water resource’s bankfull flow/OHW or delineated wetland edge and constructed with a fence between users and the resource. Interpretive signs may be installed on footbridges. 

H.    Daylighting Piped Streams.

1.    As part of any application, covered or piped stream sections shown on the WRA Map    are encouraged to be “daylighted” or opened. Once it is daylighted, the WRA will be limited to 15 feet on either side of the stream. Within that WRA, water quality measures are required which may include a storm water treatment system (e.g., vegetated bioswales), continuous vegetative ground cover (e.g., native grasses) at least 15 feet in width that provides year round efficacy, or a combination thereof.    

2.    The re-opened stream does not have to align with the original piped route but may take a different route on the subject property so long as it makes the appropriate upstream and downstream connections and meet the standards of subsections (H)(3) and (4) of this section. 

3.    A re-aligned stream must not create WRAs on adjacent properties not owned by the applicant unless the applicant provides a notarized letter signed by the adjacent property owner(s) stating that the encroachment of the WRA is permitted. 

4.    The evaluation of proposed alignment and design of the reopened stream shall consider the following factors:

a.    The ability of the reopened stream to safely carry storm drainage through the area without causing significant erosion.

b.    Continuity with natural contours on adjacent properties, slope on site and drainage patterns.

c.    Continuity of adjacent vegetation and habitat values.

d.    The ability of the existing and proposed vegetation to filter sediment and pollutants and enhance water quality. 

e.    Provision of water temperature conducive to fish habitat.

5.       Any upstream or downstream WRAs or riparian corridors shall not apply to, or overlap, the daylighted stream channel.

6.    When a stream is daylighted the applicant shall prepare and record a legal document describing the reduced WRA required by subsections (H)(1) and (5) of this section. The document will be signed by a representative of the City and recorded at the applicant’s expense to better ensure long term recognition of the reduced WRA and reduced restrictions for the daylighted stream section.

I.    The following habitat friendly development practices shall be incorporated into the design of any improvements or projects in the WRA to the degree possible:

1.    Restore disturbed soils to original or higher level of porosity to regain infiltration and storm water storage capacity.

2.    Apply a treatment train or series of storm water treatment measures to provide multiple opportunities for storm water treatment and reduce the possibility of system failure.

3.    Incorporate storm water management in road rights-of-way.

4.    Landscape with rain gardens to provide on-lot detention, filtering of rainwater, and groundwater recharge.

5.    Use multi-functional open drainage systems in lieu of conventional curb-and-gutter systems.

6.    Use green roofs for runoff reduction, energy savings, improved air quality, and enhanced aesthetics.

7.    Retain rooftop runoff in a rain barrel for later on-lot use in lawn and garden watering.

8.    Disconnect downspouts from roofs and direct the flow to vegetated infiltration/filtration areas such as rain gardens.

9.    Use pervious paving materials for driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, patios, and walkways.

10.    Reduce sidewalk width to a minimum four feet. Grade the sidewalk so it drains to the front yard of a residential lot or retention area instead of towards the street.

11.    Use shared driveways.

12.    Reduce width of residential streets and driveways, especially at WRA crossings.

13.    Reduce street length, primarily in residential areas, by encouraging clustering.

14.    Reduce cul-de-sac radii and use pervious and/or vegetated islands in center to minimize impervious surfaces.

15.    Use previously developed areas (PDAs) when given an option of developing PDA versus non-PDA land. 

16.    Minimize the building, hardscape and disturbance footprint. 

17.    Consider multi-story construction over a bigger footprint. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 19, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 5, 2016; Ord. 1662 § 7, 2017)


32.070 ALTERNATE REVIEW PROCESS

This section establishes a review and approval process that applicants can use when there is reason to believe that the width of the WRA prescribed under the standard process (CDC 32.060(D)) is larger than necessary to protect the functions of the water resource at a particular site. It allows a qualified professional to determine what water resources and associated functions (see Table 32-4 below) exist at a site and the WRA width that is needed to maintain those functions. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.080 APPROVAL CRITERIA (ALTERNATE REVIEW PROCESS)

Applications reviewed under the alternate review process shall meet the following approval criteria:

A.    The proposed WRA shall be, at minimum, qualitatively equal, in terms of maintaining the level of functions allowed by the WRA standards of CDC 32.060(D).

B.    If a WRA is already significantly degraded (e.g., native forest and ground cover have been removed or the site dominated by invasive plants, debris, or development), the approval authority may allow a reduced WRA in exchange for mitigation, if:   

1.    The proposed reduction in WRA width, coupled with the proposed mitigation, would result in better performance of functions than the standard WRA without such mitigation. The approval authority shall make this determination based on the applicant’s proposed mitigation plan and a comparative analysis of ecological functions under existing and enhanced conditions (see Table 32-4). 

2.    The mitigation project shall include all of the following components as applicable. It may also include other forms of enhancement (mitigation) deemed appropriate by the approval authority. 

a.    Removal of invasive vegetation. 

b.    Planting native, non-invasive plants (at minimum, consistent with CDC 32.100) that provide improved filtration of sediment, excess nutrients, and pollutants. The amount of enhancement (mitigation) shall meet or exceed the standards of CDC 32.090(C). 

c.    Providing permanent improvements to the site hydrology that would improve water resource functions. 

d.    Substantial improvements to the aquatic and/or terrestrial habitat of the WRA. 

C.    Identify and discuss site design and methods of development as they relate to WRA functions. 

D.    Address the approval criteria of CDC 32.060, with the exception of CDC 32.060(D). 

Table 32-4 Ecological Functions of WRA 

	Ecological Function	Landscape Features Potentially Providing the Function

	Stream flow moderation and/or water storage	A wetland or other water body with a hydrologic connection to a stream or flood area, the presence of fallen trees and density of vegetation in the WRA that slows the flow of storm water and increases its ability to retain sediment and infiltrate storm water, and the porosity of the WRA’s surface to enable it to infiltrate storm water. 

	Sediment or pollution control 	Vegetation within 100 feet of a WRA on gentle slopes and up to 200 feet of a WRA if the slope is greater than 25%. The presence of fallen trees and other material that slows the flow of water and increase the ability to retain sediment, absorb pollutants and infiltrate storm water; the composition and density of vegetation; slope; and soils.

	Bank stabilization	Root masses, existing large rocks or anchored large wood along the stream bank.

	Large wood recruitment for a fish bearing section of stream 	Forest canopy within 50 to 150 feet of a fish bearing stream.

	Organic material sources	Forest canopy or woody vegetation within 100 feet of a water resource; or within a flood area.

	Shade (water temperature moderation) and microclimate 	Forest canopy or woody vegetation within 100 feet of the water resource. Roughly 300 feet of continuous canopy for microclimate. 

	Stream flow that sustains in-stream and adjacent habitats 	Seasonal or perennial flow.

	Other terrestrial habitat 	Forest canopy natural vegetation contiguous to and within 100 to 300 feet of the water resource. 

(Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.090 MITIGATION PLAN

A    A mitigation plan shall only be required if development is proposed within a WRA (including development of a PDA). (Exempted activities of CDC 32.040 do not require mitigation unless specifically stated. Temporarily disturbed areas, including TDAs associated with exempted activities, do not require mitigation, just grade and soil restoration and re-vegetation.) The mitigation plan shall satisfy all applicable provisions of CDC 32.100, Re-Vegetation Plan Requirements. 

B.    Mitigation shall take place in the following locations, according to the following priorities (subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section): 

1.    On-site mitigation by restoring, creating or enhancing WRAs. 

2.    Off-site mitigation in the same sub-watershed will be allowed, but only if the applicant has demonstrated that:

a.    It is not practicable to complete mitigation on-site, for example, there is not enough area on-site; and

b.    The mitigation will provide equal or superior ecological function and value.

3.    Off-site mitigation outside the sub-watershed will be allowed, but only if the applicant has demonstrated that:

a.    It is not practicable to complete mitigation on-site, for example, there is not enough area on-site; and

b.    The mitigation will provide equal or superior ecological function and value. 

4.    Purchasing mitigation credits though DSL or other acceptable mitigation bank. 

C.    Amount of mitigation.

1.    The amount of mitigation shall be based on the square footage of the permanent disturbance area by the application. For every one square foot of non-PDA disturbed area, on-site mitigation shall require one square foot of WRA to be created, enhanced or restored. 

2.    For every one square foot of PDA that is disturbed, on-site mitigation shall require one half a square foot of WRA vegetation to be created, enhanced or restored. 

3.    For any off-site mitigation, including the use of DSL mitigation credits, the requirement shall be for every one square foot of WRA that is disturbed, two square feet of WRA shall be created, enhanced or restored. The DSL mitigation credits program or mitigation bank shall require a legitimate bid on the cost of on-site mitigation multiplied by two to arrive at the appropriate dollar amount.

D.    The Planning Director may limit or define the scope of the mitigation plan and submittal requirements commensurate with the scale of the disturbance relative to the resource and pursuant to the authority of Chapter 99 CDC. The Planning Director may determine that a consultant is required to complete all or a part of the mitigation plan requirements. 

E.    A mitigation plan shall contain the following information:

1.    A list of all responsible parties including, but not limited to, the owner, applicant, contractor, or other persons responsible for work on the development site. 

2.    A map showing where the specific adverse impacts will occur and where the mitigation activities will occur.

3.    A re-vegetation plan for the area(s) to be mitigated that meets the standards of CDC 32.100.

4.    An implementation schedule, including timeline for construction, mitigation, mitigation maintenance, monitoring, and reporting. All in-stream work in fish bearing streams shall be done in accordance with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 

5.    Assurances shall be established to rectify any mitigation actions that are not successful within the first three years. This may include bonding or other surety. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.100 RE-VEGETATION PLAN REQUIREMENTS

A.    In order to achieve the goal of re-establishing forested canopy, native shrub and ground cover and to meet the mitigation requirements of CDC 32.090 and vegetative enhancement of CDC 32.080, tree and vegetation plantings are required according to the following standards: 

1.    All trees, shrubs and ground cover to be planted must be native plants selected from the Portland Plant List. 

2.    Plant size. Replacement trees must be at least one-half inch in caliper, measured at six inches above the ground level for field grown trees or above the soil line for container grown trees (the one-half inch minimum size may be an average caliper measure, recognizing that trees are not uniformly round), unless they are oak or madrone which may be one gallon size. Shrubs must be in at least a one-gallon container or the equivalent in ball and burlap and must be at least 12 inches in height.

3.    Plant coverage. 

a.    Native trees and shrubs are required to be planted at a rate of five trees and 25 shrubs per every 500 square feet of disturbance area (calculated by dividing the number of square feet of disturbance area by 500, and then multiplying that result times five trees and 25 shrubs, and rounding all fractions to the nearest whole number of trees and shrubs; for example, if there will be 330 square feet of disturbance area, then 330 divided by 500 equals 0.66, and 0.66 times five equals 3.3, so three trees must be planted, and 0.66 times 25 equals 16.5, so 17 shrubs must be planted). Bare ground must be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs. Non-native sterile wheat grass may also be planted or seeded, in equal or lesser proportion to the native grasses or herbs.

b.    Trees shall be planted between eight and 12 feet on center and shrubs shall be planted between four and five feet on center, or clustered in single species groups of no more than four plants, with each cluster planted between eight and 10 feet on center. When planting near existing trees, the dripline of the existing tree shall be the starting point for plant spacing measurements. 

4.    Plant diversity. Shrubs must consist of at least two different species. If 10 trees or more are planted, then no more than 50 percent of the trees may be of the same genus.

5.    Invasive vegetation. Invasive non-native or noxious vegetation must be removed within the mitigation area prior to planting.

6.    Tree and shrub survival. A minimum survival rate of 80 percent of the trees and shrubs planted is expected by the third anniversary of the date that the mitigation planting is completed.

7.       Monitoring and reporting. Monitoring of the mitigation site is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner. Plants that die must be replaced in kind. 

8.       To enhance survival of tree replacement and plantings, the following practices are required:

a.    Mulching. Mulch new plantings a minimum of three inches in depth and 18 inches in diameter to retain moisture and discourage weed growth.

b.    Irrigation. Water new plantings one inch per week between June 15th to October 15th, for the three years following planting.

c.    Weed control. Remove, or control, non-native or noxious vegetation throughout maintenance period.

d.    Planting season. Plant bare root trees between December 1st and February 28th, and potted plants between October 15th and April 30th.

e.    Wildlife protection. Use plant sleeves or fencing to protect trees and shrubs against wildlife browsing and resulting damage to plants.

B.    When weather or other conditions prohibit planting according to schedule, the applicant shall ensure that disturbed areas are correctly protected with erosion control measures and shall provide the City with funds in the amount of 125 percent of a bid from a recognized landscaper or nursery which will cover the cost of the plant materials, installation and any follow up maintenance. Once the planting conditions are favorable the applicant shall proceed with the plantings and receive the funds back from the City upon completion, or the City will complete the plantings using those funds. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.110 HARDSHIP PROVISIONS

The purpose of this section is to ensure that compliance with this chapter does not deprive an owner of reasonable use of land. To avoid such instances, the requirements of this chapter may be reduced. The decision-making authority may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to limit any adverse impacts that may result from granting relief. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the standards of this chapter, including Table 32-2, Required Width of WRA, will deny the applicant “reasonable use” of his/her property.

A.    The right to obtain a hardship allowance is based on the existence of a lot of record recorded with the County Assessor’s Office on, or before, January 1, 2006. The lot of record may have been, subsequent to that date, modified from its original platted configuration but must meet the minimum lot size and dimensional standards of the base zone.

B.    For lots described in subsection A of this section that are located completely or partially inside the WRA, development is permitted, consistent with this section. The maximum disturbed area (MDA) of the WRA shall be determined on a per lot basis. The MDA shall be the greater of:

1.    Five thousand square feet of the WRA; or

2.    Thirty percent of the total area of the WRA.

C.    The MDA shall be located as follows: 

1.    In areas where the development will result in the least square footage encroachment into the WRA. 

2.    The applicant shall demonstrate, through site and building design, that the proposed development is the maximum practical distance from the water resource based on the functional needs of the proposed use.

3.    The minimum distance from a water resource shall be 15 feet. 

4.    Access driveways shall be the minimum permitted width; select an alignment that is least impactful upon the WRA; and shall share use of the driveway, where possible. 

D.    The MDA shall include: 

1.    The footprints of all structures, including accessory structures, decks and paved water impermeable surfaces including sidewalks, driveways, parking pads, paths, patios and parking lots, etc. Only 75 percent of water permeable surfaces at grade shall be included in the MDA. 

2.    All graded, disturbed or modified areas that are not subsequently restored to their original grade and replanted with native ground cover per an approved plan. 

E.    The MDA shall not include: 

1.    Temporarily disturbed areas (TDAs) adjacent to an approved structure or development area for the purpose of grading, material storage, construction activity, trenched or buried utilities and other temporary activities so long as these areas are subsequently restored to the original grades and soil permeability, and re-vegetated with native plants per CDC 32.100, such that they are at least equal in functional value to the area prior to the initiation of the permitted activity; 

2.    Bay windows and similar cantilevered elements (including decks, etc.) of the principal or secondary structure so long as they do not extend more than five feet towards the WRA from the vertical plane of the house, and have no vertical supports from grade;

3.    PDAs that are not built upon as part of the development proposal will not count in the MDA (e.g., use of an existing access driveway). (Conversely, PDAs that are built upon as part of the development proposal will count in the MDA.);

4.    The installation of public streets and public utilities that are specifically required to meet either the transportation system plan or a utility master plan so long as all trenched public utilities are subsequently restored to the original grades and soil permeability, and revegetated with native plants per CDC 32.100, such that they are at least equal in functional value to the area prior to the initiation of the permitted activity. All areas displaced by streets shall be mitigated for.

Table 32-5 MDA Calculation Summary 

	Type of Development	Square footage included in MDA calculation?

	All structures	YES

	Non-water permeable paved surfaces including driveways, parking lots, patios, and paths 	YES

	Approved water permeable paved surfaces including driveways, parking lots, patios, and paths	YES but at 75% of total water permeable surface square footage

	TDAs/graded areas that are restored and re-vegetated with native vegetation	NO

	TDAs/all utility trenches and buried utilities restored or re-vegetated with native vegetation	NO

	PDAs that are built upon or developed as part of the application	YES 

	PDAs that are not built upon or developed as part of the application	NO

	Storm water detention or treatment pond 	YES

	Rain garden or bioswale with the native plantings as part of re-vegetation plan	NO

	Storm water outfall, energy dissipaters (at, or above, grade)	YES

	Non-native landscaping	YES

	Sharing an existing driveway	NO

	Development of lands that are not within the WRA	NO

Figure 32-7


[IMAGE]


F.    Development allowed under subsection A of this section may use the following provisions:

1.    Setbacks required by the underlying zoning district may be reduced up to 50 percent where necessary to avoid construction within the WRA, as long as the development would otherwise meet the standards of this chapter. However, front loading garages shall be set back a minimum of 18 feet, while side loading garages shall be set back a minimum of three feet.

2.    Landscaping and parking requirements may be reduced for hardship properties but only if all or part of the WRA is dedicated pursuant to CDC 32.060(C) or if a restrictive deed covenant is established. These reductions shall be permitted outright and, to the extent that the practices are inconsistent with other provisions or standards of the West Linn CDC, this section is given precedence so that no variance is required. The allowable reductions include: 

a.    Elimination of landscaping for the parking lot interior. 

b.    Elimination of the overall landscape requirement (e.g., 20 percent for commercial uses). 

c.    Elimination of landscaping between parking lots and perimeter non-residential properties.

d.    Landscaping between parking lots and the adjacent right-of-way may be reduced to eight feet. This eight-foot-wide landscaped strip may be used for vegetated storm water detention or treatment.

e.    A 25 percent reduction in total required parking is permitted to minimize or avoid intrusion into the WRA. 

f.    Adjacent improved street frontage with curb and sidewalk may be counted towards the parking requirement at a rate of one parking space per 20 lineal feet of street frontage adjacent to the property, subject to City Engineer approval based on the street width and classification.

g.    The current compact and full sized parking mix may be modified to allow up to 100 percent compact spaces and no full sized spaces. However, any required ADA compliant spaces shall be provided. 

G.    Where a property owner owns multiple platted lots of record where each lot could be built upon under the hardship provisions, the property owner may either use the MDA for each lot on an individual lot by lot basis or may transfer 100 percent of the cumulative MDA of all the lots to those lots that are further away from, or less impactful upon, the WRA. Lot line adjustments may also be used to facilitate the density transfer. See Figure 32-8.

Figure 32-8


[IMAGE]


H.    Mitigation and re-vegetation of disturbed WRAs shall be completed per CDC 32.090 and 32.100 respectively. 

I.    Any further modification of the standards of this chapter or the underlying zone shall require approval of a variance pursuant to Chapter 75 CDC. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


32.120 WRA MAP

A.    The WRA Map, dated May 2014, is adopted as the official WRA Map. It is intended to identify WRA water features (wetlands, streams, ephemeral streams and riparian corridors). It is not intended to delineate the exact WRA boundaries or water feature alignment. That task will be carried out by staff in the course of site visits where the provisions of Table 32-2 shall apply. 

B.    Amendments to the WRA Map may be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 98 and 99 CDC. Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the document adopting the map amendment and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting documents, on file in the Planning Department. 

C.    The Planning Director shall maintain in his or her office, and available for public inspection, an up-to-date copy of the WRA Map. (Ord. 1623 § 1, 2014)


Chapter 33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. 1622)


Chapter 34 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS, AND ACCESSORY USES

Sections:

34.020    ACCESSORY USES

34.030    ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs)

34.040    SETBACK PROVISIONS FOR NOISE-PRODUCING ACCESSORY USES

34.050    BOAT HOUSES AND DOCKS

34.060    SETBACK PROVISIONS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES (NON-DWELLING)


34.020 ACCESSORY USES

Accessory uses are permitted uses which are customary and incidental to principal uses permitted in the zone and shall be permitted outright, or by prescribed conditions as identified below, and may be either attached or separated from the principal dwelling. Accessory uses on designated historic resources are subject to additional regulations in CDC 25.060(B).

A.    A greenhouse may be a maintained accessory to a dwelling provided the activity does not exceed that which requires a license under Chapter 571 of the Oregon Revised Statutes, Nurseries.

B.    A television disk or satellite dish larger than three feet in diameter, and any other non-commercial antennas over three feet in height (minor utility), may be a maintained accessory to a dwelling provided it is not located within the front yard or side yard abutting a street, it is mounted on the ground, is screened from view, as practical, with landscaping, and otherwise meets the requirements of CDC 34.060. The satellite dish shall not exceed a maximum height of 18 feet.

Where it can be demonstrated that these restrictions impose unreasonable limitations to the extent that the antenna/satellite dish’s reception or transmitting capability is significantly reduced, then roof-mounted (provided it is powder-coated with mesh or perforated construction) or alternate locations for the antenna/satellite dish may be allowed. (Ord. 1350, 1993; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1614 § 8, 2013)


34.030 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs)

A.    An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) may be allowed in conjunction with an existing primary single-family dwelling by conversion of existing space inside the primary dwelling; by means of an addition to an existing dwelling; by means of an addition as an accessory structure; or by converting or adding to an existing accessory structure, such as a garage, on the same lot with an existing primary dwelling, when the following conditions are met:

1.    One off-street parking space for the ADU shall be provided in addition to the required parking for the primary dwelling except in those cases where the abutting street has a paved width of 28 feet or more and allows on-street parking.

2.    Public services can serve both dwelling units.

3.    The number of occupants is limited to no more than one family as defined by the Community Development Code.

4.    The ADU does not exceed one bedroom and has an area between 250 and 1,000 square feet. If the ADU is located in an accessory structure, then it shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross square footage of the primary dwelling, except that an ADU may be a minimum of 250 square feet in size regardless of the size of the primary dwelling. No more than one ADU is allowed.

5.    The ADU is in conformance with the setback and lot coverage requirements of the underlying zone.

6.    The following minimum area standards shall be met:

 

	1 person – 250 square feet

	2 persons – 500 square feet

7.    Existing accessory structures such as large workshops, offices, garages, etc., constructed prior to January 2000, that exceed dimensional standards prescribed above for ADUs may be converted into ADUs in the future so long as the occupied or inhabited area is restricted to less than 1,000 square feet. Existing structures are not required to meet the design standards of subsections (B)(1) through (9) of this section, but shall conform to them to the greatest extent feasible.

B.    Design standards for both attached and detached ADUs are as follows:

1.    Exterior finish materials. The exterior finish material must be the same, or visually match in type, size, and placement, the exterior finish material of the primary dwelling.

2.    Roof pitch. The roof pitch must be the same as the predominant roof pitch of the primary dwelling.

3.    Trim. Trim on edges of elements on the addition must be the same in type, size, and location as the trim used on the rest of the primary dwelling.

4.    Windows. Windows must match those in the primary dwelling in proportion (relationship of width to height). Second-floor windows on the ADU should be placed and sized so as to achieve a reasonable amount of privacy for the abutting property owner(s).

5.    Eaves. Eaves must project from the building walls the same distance as the eaves on the rest of the primary dwelling.

6.    Setbacks. The detached ADU shall be at least 10 feet behind the front building line of the primary dwelling so as to maintain the primary status of the single-family home. The only exception allowed shall be for an ADU which is located above a detached garage, in which case, the setback of the ADU may be the same as that of the garage below.

7.    Height. The maximum height allowed for a detached ADU is 18 feet (as measured using Building Codes methodology). Attached ADUs may be higher than 18 feet, but cannot exceed the height of the existing primary dwelling.

8.    The main exterior entrance of the ADU shall be located on either the rear or side of the ADU so that the main entrance to the primary dwelling will not be in competition with the entrance to the ADU.

9.    Exterior stairs serving the ADU shall not face the front property line. (Ord. 1463, 2000)


34.040 SETBACK PROVISIONS FOR NOISE-PRODUCING ACCESSORY USES

Noise-producing accessory uses (for example: heat pumps, swimming pool motors or filter pumps) may be placed within the side, front or rear yard setback, but no closer than three feet to the property line. (Ord. 1675 § 34, 2018)


34.050 BOAT HOUSES AND DOCKS

Only side yard setback requirements apply to boat houses and docks.


34.060 SETBACK PROVISIONS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES (NON-DWELLING)

A.    Accessory structures shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except as provided in CDC 34.040 and where specifically modified by this code as follows.

B.    A side yard or rear yard requirement may be reduced to three feet for an accessory structure except for a side or rear yard abutting a street, with the exception of alleys platted and dedicated prior to September 30, 1984, as defined in this code; provided, that:

1.    The structure is erected more than 60 feet from the front lot line;

2.    The structure does not exceed one story or 15 feet in height;

3.    The structure does not exceed an area of 500 square feet; and

4.    The structure does not violate any existing utility easements. 

C.    Attached accessory structures. When an accessory structure is attached to the main structure (wall to wall or by any permanent attachment), including via a covered walkway, such accessory structure shall be considered as part of the main structure. (Ord. 1604 § 38, 2011)


Chapter 35 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES

Sections:

35.010    APPLICABILITY

35.020    EXEMPTIONS

35.030    TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS

35.050    DURATION OF TEMPORARY USES


35.010 APPLICABILITY

Notwithstanding the limitations of use established by this code, the approval authority can authorize temporary uses consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1613 § 6, 2013)


35.020 EXEMPTIONS 

The following temporary uses and structures are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Construction related uses including, but not limited to, trailers and staging areas, on sites approved for the associated development.

B.     Portable outdoor storage units or similar structures as are typically used for storing items in conjunction with a move, minor remodel, or construction project that will remain on site 14 days or less during a given calendar year. (Ord. 1613 § 6, 2013)


35.030 TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS

A.     Temporary uses shall be approved if they meet the following standards:

1.       Sites accommodating a temporary use shall be appropriate for the proposed use, as determined by the approval authority with consideration of the following: 

a.    The proposed site shall have adequate parking and circulation space consistent with Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas; safe ingress and egress consistent with Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation; and adequate line of sight and vision clearance per Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas. 

b.    The proposed site shall have a paved or graveled surface sufficient to avoid dust generation and mud tracking from anticipated traffic or erosion control measures, consistent with Clackamas County Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, rev. 2008, and shall be used to keep any mud, sediment and dust on site. 

c.    The proposed use shall conform to all applicable requirements of Chapter 27 CDC, Flood Management Areas; Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection; Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection; and other City regulations. 

d.    The proposed temporary use shall not be materially detrimental to the public welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the immediate vicinity. 

2.    The approval authority may require that structures and trailers allowed as temporary uses for more than 60 days be screened from the view of occupants of any abutting residential and commercial structures, consistent with Chapter 44 CDC, unless the applicant demonstrates that such screening is not needed. 

3.    Drop boxes, trailers, or structures that serve a similar function are allowed, consistent with subsection A of this section, for registered nonprofit, religious or benevolent groups, orders or associations, when they are proposed to be located in General Commercial, Office Business Center, Campus Industrial, General Industrial, or Neighborhood Commercial districts. 

Drop boxes and structures serving a similar function, not including trailers, shall not exceed seven feet in height or have a footprint of more than 25 square feet on a single site. Their color shall be limited to earth tones. 

4.    The property owner has authorized the proposed temporary use in writing. 

B.    The approval authority may attach conditions to any temporary use approval as needed to achieve compliance with the applicable standards of this section or otherwise protect public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1613 § 6, 2013; amended during July 2014 supplement)


35.050 DURATION OF TEMPORARY USES

Temporary uses may be allowed for no more than one year, with one additional renewal for no greater duration than the original approval, except as follows: 

A.    Construction trailers and associated parking and staging areas beyond the site approved for the associated development may be allowed for the duration of active construction projects. 

B.     Drop boxes, structures serving a similar function, and trailers authorized under CDC 35.030(A) will be allowed indefinitely, but they will be revoked if they are unused or abandoned for a period of 60 days or if material is not contained by the drop box or trailer and allowed to accumulate outside of the drop box, structure, or trailer. 

Upon revocation of the approval, the applicant shall be responsible for removing the drop box, structure, or trailer unless it is abandoned; in that case, removal shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 1613 § 6, 2013; Ord. 1655 § 5, 2016)


Chapter 36 MANUFACTURED HOMES

Sections:

36.010    PURPOSE

36.020    MANUFACTURED HOMES STANDARDS

36.030    MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS STANDARDS


36.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of the manufactured homes provision is to establish criteria for the placement of manufactured home units on individual lots and in manufactured home parks within the City of West Linn.


36.020 MANUFACTURED HOMES STANDARDS

Manufactured homes shall be subject to the following requirements in all of the zoning districts in which they are allowed:

A.    The unit shall satisfy the requirements for a manufactured home as defined in CDC 02.030.

B.    The unit shall be attached to a permanent foundation for which a building permit has been obtained.

C.    The unit shall have a roof with a minimum pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width with a minimum six-inch projection.

D.    The unit shall have eaves.

E.    The unit, if built subsequent to 1975, shall carry a State insignia indicating compliance with the “Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code.” Units built prior to 1976 shall carry the State insignia for such units reflecting compliance with applicable State standards.

F.    The unit shall be multi-sectioned (double-wide or wider) and have a minimum floor area of 1,000 square feet and be designed for occupancy by one family.

G.    The wheels, tongue and traveling lights of the unit shall be removed upon installation of the unit.

H.    Any extension or attachment to the unit which is not part of the original factory manufactured home, including space intended for storage purposes, will require a building permit.

I.    Exterior siding and roofing shall be similar in color, material and appearance to that used on surrounding dwellings within 300 feet of the lot.

J.    The unit shall not have bare metal siding or roofing. 

K.    Off-street parking shall be provided as required by CDC 46.090(A)(6). Garages’ or carports’ exterior materials must match the residential unit.

L.    The unit shall not be sited on a lot adjacent to any structure listed as an historic landmark or adjacent to an historic district.

M.    The exterior thermal envelope shall meet performance standards equivalent to those required for single-family dwellings under the State Building Code. (Ord. 1298, 1991; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1635 § 20, 2014)


36.030 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS STANDARDS

A.    Manufactured home parks are allowed under prescribing conditions in the R-5 and R-4.5 zoning districts. 

B.    Manufactured home parks are subject to the provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.

C.    In addition to the standards of the zoning district in which the project is located and other standards of this code, a manufactured home park proposal shall meet the following:

1.    Minimum area. A minimum of two acres shall be required for manufactured home parks. Land area less than two acres may be added to an approved manufactured home park when such land area is developed as a continuation of the approved manufactured home park. Continuous development shall include integrated vehicle and pedestrian circulation.

2.    Density. The density of units in a manufactured home park shall be subject to the density requirements of the zoning district.

3.    Space coverage. The maximum lot coverage per manufactured home space shall be 60 percent. The manufactured home space shall be exclusive of space provided for the common use of tenants, such as roadway, structures, guest parking, walkways, and areas for recreation purposes.

4.    Separations and setbacks. Building separations and setbacks from the park boundary for manufactured homes, accessory structures, and buildings shall conform to the following:

a.    A manufactured home shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any other manufactured home, or closer than 10 feet to a building.

b.    All structures shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from all park boundaries. Side and rear lines of a manufactured home space shall be determined with relation to a park street and the same as side and rear lot lines are determined with relation to a public street as provided in a zoning code.

c.    Accessory structures shall meet the standards of Chapter 34 CDC.

d.    Awnings and carports may be attached to the manufactured home and extend to within two feet of the manufactured home space line. A double carport or garage may extend across the space line to serve two adjacent manufactured homes.

e.    Manufactured homes shall be set back a minimum distance of eight feet from any adjacent sidewalk.

5.    Streets.

a.    Park streets shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width, curb to curb; provided, that if parking is to be allowed on either side of the street, the minimum width shall be increased by eight feet for each side of the street on which parking is to be allowed. Parking shall be parallel. The point of access to the street shall be at least 32 feet in width.

b.    Streets shall be paved with cement or asphaltic concrete, and designed and constructed to adequately support traffic loads and provide adequate drainage, all as approved by the City Engineer.

c.    Each manufactured home space within the park shall have direct access to a park street or to a public residential street. The driveway shall be an unobstructed area, not less than 10 feet in width, and shall be constructed of concrete or asphaltic concrete and well-drained, and all as approved by the City Engineer.

d.    There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces provided for each manufactured home space.

6.    Storm drainage. All spaces shall be provided with adequate storm drainage and connected to the storm drainage system. Where a public street is to be dedicated or improved by the applicant, such drainage systems shall be designed and constructed according to City code standards and specifications.

7.    Sewage disposal. All spaces shall be served by the sanitary sewer system of the City. Such sewer systems shall be designed and constructed according to City code standards and specifications.

8.    Water supply. All spaces shall be served by the water system of the City. Such water supply systems shall be designed and constructed according to City code standards and specifications.

9.    Utilities. All manufactured home lots and spaces shall be provided with storm drainage, sanitary sewer, electricity, telephone, and potable water utility services with easements dedicated where necessary to provide such services. All such utilities shall be located underground. (Ord. 1291, 1990)


Chapter 37 HOME OCCUPATIONS

Sections:

37.010    PURPOSE

37.020    GENERAL STANDARDS

37.030    SPECIFIC HOME OCCUPATION USES PROHIBITED

37.040    THE APPLICATION

37.050    PERMITS

37.060    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL STANDARDS

37.070    APPROVAL AND STRICT COMPLIANCE REQUISITE FOR BUSINESS LICENSE

37.080    REVOCATION


37.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for home occupations in residential zones as a means of providing convenient employment opportunities and decreasing the dependence on the auto. The standards contained in this chapter are intended to assure that home occupations will be compatible and consistent with the residential uses, and will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring properties. (Ord. 1396, 1996)


37.020 GENERAL STANDARDS

A.    A home occupation shall comply with all the following operating standards:

1.    The home occupation shall be a secondary use to the primary use of the house as a residence.

2.    In no way shall the appearance of the residential structure or yard be altered, or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, show windows, signs, or advertising visible outside the premises to attract customers or clients, other than a sign as permitted per subsection (A)(9) of this section. 

3.    There shall be no outdoor use or storage of material or mechanical equipment that is not part of the residential use.

4.    An accessory building which meets the provisions of Chapter 34 CDC may be used for the home occupation.

5.    Any parking generated by patrons shall be accommodated on site.

6.    Off-street parking areas with three or more spaces shall be screened by a fence constructed per Chapter 44 CDC specifications, topography, vegetation, or a combination of these methods. Screening vegetation must be in place by the time the applicant submits a home occupation application, or be reasonably expected to provide effective screening within one and one-half years of approval of said application.

7.    No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noise, odor, smoke, fumes, fallout, vibration, heat, glare, or electrical interference resulting detectable to the normal senses off the lot.

8.    No more than three employees, other than the residents, shall be engaged in service on the premises at any given time.

9.    The use of signs shall meet the requirements of Chapter 52 CDC unless modified by this chapter.

10.    Occupied or unoccupied vehicles associated with the home occupation shall not have engines idling at any time, except during the immediate loading or unloading of cargo, mail, packages or passengers. Vehicles associated with the home occupation shall not be loaded or unloaded between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. Other noise-generating machinery associated with conducting a home occupation shall also follow these guidelines.

11.    The owner of the business must reside in the primary structure on the premises.

12.    Only one vehicle no larger than a three-quarter-ton truck may be used by the occupant, directly or indirectly, in connection with a home occupation. An off-street parking space shall be provided for this vehicle.

13.    The use creates no more than eight total vehicle trips per day including employees, all deliveries, and customers. One trip is equal to one vehicle entering the site and exiting the site. Home occupations with pupils or students, such as, but not limited to, dance, music or language classes, are exempt from the vehicle trip limitation. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1606 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1675 § 35, 2018)


37.030 SPECIFIC HOME OCCUPATION USES PROHIBITED

A.    Repealed by Ord. 1635. 

B.    Any home occupation involving the on-site sale or resale of automobiles, trucks, boats, trailers, or other motorized vehicles. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1635 § 21, 2014)


37.040 THE APPLICATION

A.    A home occupation application shall be initiated by the occupant. If the occupant is not the owner of the premises, the signature of the owner is required on the application. 

B.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1547, 2007)


37.050 PERMITS

A.    A home occupation permit shall be required for a home occupation, subject to the provisions of this chapter, prior to issuance of a business license.

B.    A copy of each home occupation permit, including the permit number, shall be kept by the Planning and Building Department and on the premises of the business.

C.    A home occupation permit is non-transferable to any other person or any other property, and shall expire upon discontinuance of the home occupation by the person to whom it is issued. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1604 § 39, 2011)


37.060 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL STANDARDS

A.    Home occupations.

1.    A home occupation is a decision made by the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of CDC 99.060(A), except that no notice shall be required. 

2.    The Planning Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a home occupation in accordance with the standards set forth in CDC 37.020(A) for home occupations.

3.    The Director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council as provided in CDC 99.240(A). (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1565, 2008)


37.070 APPROVAL AND STRICT COMPLIANCE REQUISITE FOR BUSINESS LICENSE

No business license will be issued for a home occupation until the home occupation application is approved and the applicant certifies that the home occupation will be operated in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the conditions of approval.


37.080 REVOCATION

The Director may revoke a home occupation permit if the criteria of CDC 37.020(A), respectively, are violated. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1565, 2008)


Chapter 38 ADDITIONAL YARD AREA REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS; STORAGE IN YARDS; PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS

Sections:

38.020    NO YARD REQUIRED; STRUCTURE NOT ON PROPERTY LINE

38.030    SETBACK FROM STREET CENTERLINE REQUIRED

38.040    EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS

38.050    STORAGE IN FRONT YARD

38.060    PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS


38.020 NO YARD REQUIRED; STRUCTURE NOT ON PROPERTY LINE

In zones where a side yard or a rear yard setback is not required, a structure which is not to be built on the property line shall be set back from the property line by at least three feet, except as prescribed in CDC 58.090(C)(1). (Ord. 1675 § 36, 2018)


38.030 SETBACK FROM STREET CENTERLINE REQUIRED

A.    To assure improved light, air, and sight distance and to protect the public health, safety and welfare, a setback in addition to the yard requirements of the zone may be required where the right-of-way is inadequate. A determination shall be made based on the street standards contained in CDC 85.200(A).

B.    The minimum yard requirement shall be increased to provide for street widening in the event a yard abuts a street having a right-of-way width less than required by its functional classification on the City’s Comprehensive Plan Map, and in such case the setback shall be not less than the setback required by the zone plus one-half of the projected road width as required under CDC 85.200(A); however

C.    The minimum distance from the wall of any structure to the centerline of an abutting street shall not be less than 25 feet plus the yard required by the zone. This provision shall not apply to rights-of-way of 50 feet or greater in width.


38.040 EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS

A.    If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yard depths less than the required depth for the zone, the depth of the front yard for the intervening lot need not exceed the average depth of the front yards of the abutting lots.

B.    If there are garages on both abutting lots with front yard depths less than the required depth for the zone, the depth of the front yard for the garage for the intervening lot need not exceed the average depth of the front yards of the abutting lots.

C.    If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of less depth than the required depth for the zone, the front yard for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half way between the depth of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth.

D.    If there is a garage on one abutting lot with a front yard of less depth than the required depth for the zone, the front yard for the garage for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half between the depth of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth. (Ord. 1276, 1990)


38.050 STORAGE IN FRONT YARD

Boats, trailers, campers, camper bodies, house trailers, recreation vehicles or commercial vehicles in excess of three-quarter-ton capacity shall not be stored in a required front yard in a residential zone if the location creates an obstruction to the vision of passing motorists which constitutes a potential traffic hazard.


38.060 PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS

A.    Repealed by Ord. 1635.

B.    Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, canopies, or similar architectural features may extend or project into a required yard not more than 36 inches provided the width of such side yard is not reduced to less than three feet. Projections into the side yard may not include living space such as bay windows or overhanging breakfast nooks, etc.

C.    Projections that include living space such as bay windows or overhanging breakfast nooks, etc., may extend into the front or rear yard setbacks, but no more than two feet. The footprint or foundation of the house may not encroach into the front or rear setback area.

D.    Fireplace chimneys may project into a required front, side or rear yard not more than three feet, provided the width of such side yard is not reduced to less than three feet.

E.    The presence of an easement within a required yard is a limitation to projections. Uncovered open porches, decks, or balconies, not more than 30 inches in height above grade and not covered by a roof or canopy, may extend or project into a required front or rear yard until the projection reaches a utility easement or comes within five feet of the property line, whichever provides a greater distance from the property line. The uncovered deck, porch or balcony may go into side yard setback leaving at least three feet to the property line. Encroachment into a utility easement is not allowed, except as provided below:

1.    Uncovered open porches, decks, or balconies may extend into an existing utility easement, provided:

a.    A minimum vertical clearance of 12 feet is maintained between the lowest point of the deck and the ground; and

b.    That no posts are installed within the easement.

2.    These provisions do not apply in the Willamette Historic District. 

F.    Front and rear porches, covered porches, unroofed landings and stairs (over 30 inches in height) may encroach into the front or rear yard setback up to five feet. Homes on corner lots may have a front porch that wraps around to the side street side. The porch on the side street may also encroach five feet into the required street side setback area. Enclosed porches are not permitted to encroach. The roofline of the house may be extended to cover the porch but no living space shall be allowed inside the front yard setback (i.e., dormers). The Planning Director shall determine compliance with this section as provided by CDC 99.060(A)(3). These provisions do not apply in the Willamette Historic District. (Ord. 1291, 1990; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1635 § 22, 2014)


Chapter 40 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS, EXCEPTIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 1604)


Chapter 41 BUILDING HEIGHT, STRUCTURES ON STEEP LOTS, EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

41.005    DETERMINING HEIGHT OF BUILDING

41.010    FRONT YARD SETBACK EXCEPTION

41.020    HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS

41.030    PROJECTIONS NOT USED FOR HUMAN HABITATION

41.040    PLACES OF WORSHIP OR GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS


41.005 DETERMINING HEIGHT OF BUILDING

A.    For all zoning districts, building height shall be the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the highest gable, ridgeline or peak of a pitched or hipped roof, not including projections above roofs such as cupolas, towers, etc. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building.

1.    For relatively flat sites where there is less than a 10-foot difference in grade between the front and rear of the building, the height of the building shall be measured from grade five feet out from the exterior wall at the front of the building; or

2.    For steeper lots where there is more than a 10-foot difference in grade between the front and rear of the building, the height of the building is measured from grade at a point five feet out from the exterior wall on the lowest side (front or rear) of the building. One then measures vertically to the peak or ridgeline of the roof to determine the height.

3.    Buildings on cross slopes or side slopes are measured at either the front or rear of the building using methods described in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this definition only.

Even if the cross slope creates a tall elevation on the side, the method of determining height is not modified.

Also see CDC 41.020, Height Exceptions.

Figure 1.

 

	
[IMAGE]
	Height of building on relatively flat lot is measured from grade at front of house to peak of roof.

	
[IMAGE]
	Height of building on steep lots where there is more than a 10-foot difference in elevation between the front and rear of the building is measured from grade at a point five feet out from the front or rear exterior wall on the lowest side of the house to the peak of the building.

	
[IMAGE]
	Height of building with a cross slope is still measured at either the front or rear by methods described in subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this definition.

(Ord. 1604 § 42, 2011)


41.010 FRONT YARD SETBACK EXCEPTION

If the average slope of a building site is 25 percent or greater, as measured along the planes of the proposed structure, the minimum front yard setback for the garage shall be three feet. All structures other than the garage shall meet the setback requirement of the underlying zone, or as otherwise specified in this code.

When a garage is situated less than 20 feet from the front property line or less than 15 feet from a side property line facing a street, the following siting conditions shall apply:

A.    Where lot width allows, the garage shall be set parallel to the street (i.e., the garage doors shall be perpendicularly oriented to the street), and at least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided as specified in Chapter 46 CDC (i.e., paved).

B.    If the lot width prohibits the parallel siting required above, the garage may be sited perpendicular to the street (i.e., the garage door or doors facing directly onto the street), provided, in addition to the sheltered parking spaces, two off-street parking spaces are provided on site. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1276, 1990)


41.020 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS

A.    If the highest grade of a building site which fronts on the downslope side of the street is greater than 10 feet above the lowest grade as measured along the planes of the proposed structure, the total building height may not exceed 45 feet as measured from the lowest grade at a point five feet downhill from the rear of the building, provided the building height does not project more than 24 feet above the average grade of the street. In the R-15, R-20, and R-40 zones the 45-foot height may be increased to 50 feet.

B.    If the highest grade of a building site which fronts on the upslope side of the street is greater than 10 feet above the lowest grade, as measured along the planes of the proposed structure, the total building height shall not exceed 45 feet. In the R-15, R-20, and R-40 zones the 45-foot height may be increased to 50 feet.

Height of buildings on uphill slopes where there is more than a 10-foot difference between the rear and front elevation is measured from a point five feet downhill from the front of the building to the peak or dominant ridgeline and shall not exceed 45 feet (50 feet in the R-15, R-20 and R-40 zones).

Figure 2. Height exceptions


[IMAGE]


Height of buildings on downhill slopes where there is more than a 10-foot difference between the rear and front elevation is measured from a point five feet downhill from the rear of the building to the peak or dominant ridgeline and shall not exceed 45 feet (50 feet in the R-15, R-20 and R-40 zones). Front house height cannot be more than 24 feet above average street grade. (Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1604 § 43, 2011)


41.030 PROJECTIONS NOT USED FOR HUMAN HABITATION

Projections such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housings, towers, aerials, flag poles, and other similar objects not used for human occupancy are not subject to the building height limitations of this code. (Ord. 1604 § 44, 2011)


41.040 PLACES OF WORSHIP OR GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS

The height of a place of worship or governmental building may be built to a maximum height of 50 feet provided:

A.    The total floor area of the building does not exceed one and one-half times the area of the site;

B.    The yard dimensions in each case are equal to at least two-thirds of the building height of the principal structure; and

C.    The approval of this exception is a part of the approval of the conditional use allowed under Chapter 60 CDC. (Ord. 1604 § 45, 2011)


Chapter 42 CLEAR VISION AREAS

Sections:

42.020    CLEAR VISION AREAS REQUIRED, USES PROHIBITED

42.030    EXCEPTIONS

42.040    COMPUTATION; STREET AND ACCESSWAY 24 FEET OR MORE IN WIDTH

42.050    COMPUTATION; ACCESSWAY LESS THAN 24 FEET IN WIDTH


42.020 CLEAR VISION AREAS REQUIRED, USES PROHIBITED

A.    A clear vision area shall be maintained on the corners of all property adjacent to an intersection as provided by CDC 42.040 and 42.050.

B.    A clear vision area shall contain no planting, fence, wall, structure or temporary or permanent obstruction (except for an occasional utility pole or tree) exceeding three feet in height, measured from the top of the curb, or, where no curb exists, from the street centerline grade, except that trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches below eight feet are removed. (Ord. 1192, 1987)


42.030 EXCEPTIONS

The following described area in Willamette shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. The units of land zoned General Commercial which abut Willamette Falls Drive, located between 10th and 16th Streets. Beginning at the intersection of Willamette Falls Drive and 11th Street on 7th Avenue to 16th Street; on 16th Street to 9th Avenue; on 9th Avenue to 14th Street to the Tualatin River; following the Tualatin River and Willamette River to 12th Street; on 12th Street to 4th Avenue; on 4th Avenue to 11th Street; on 11th Street to Willamette Falls Drive. This described area does not include the northerly side of Willamette Falls Drive. (Ord. 1636 § 29, 2014)


42.040 COMPUTATION; STREET AND ACCESSWAY 24 FEET OR MORE IN WIDTH

The clear vision area for all street intersections and street and accessway intersections (accessways having 24 feet or more in width) shall be that triangular area formed by the right-of-way or property lines along such lots and a straight line joining the right-of-way or property line at points which are 30 feet distant from the intersection of the right-of-way line and measured along such lines.

Clear vision area for corner lots and driveways 24 feet or more in width:


[IMAGE]



42.050 COMPUTATION; ACCESSWAY LESS THAN 24 FEET IN WIDTH

The clear vision area for street and accessway intersections (accessways having less than 24 feet in width) shall be that triangular area whose base extends 30 feet along the street right-of-way line in both directions from the centerline of the accessway at the front setback line of a single-family and two-family residence, and 30 feet back from the property line on all other types of uses.

Clear vision area for corner lots and driveways less than 24 feet in width:


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1291, 1990)


Chapter 43 SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL SIDE-YARD TRANSITIONS

Sections:

43.010    PURPOSE

43.020    APPLICABILITY

43.030    ADMINISTRATION

43.040    GENERAL PROVISIONS

43.050    VARIANCE


43.010 PURPOSE

New homes, both infill and in new subdivisions, particularly new homes around the perimeter of the new subdivision, need to be compatible with adjacent existing homes, especially when the new house is bigger than the existing one. To this end, transitions shall be required to avoid a monolithic and overbearing sidewall. (Ord. 1538, 2006)


43.020 APPLICABILITY

These provisions shall apply to all new home construction and remodels in West Linn except designated historic resources. (Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1614 § 9, 2013)


43.030 ADMINISTRATION

The Planning Director shall apply the standards of this chapter during the administrative review of building permits. No notice is required. In the event that an individual or other party wants to appeal the Planning Director’s decision relative to this chapter, they may appeal the decision to the City Council within 14 days of the final decision per CDC 99.140. For the purpose of determining the date of the final decision it shall be the Community Development Department’s stamped approval date on the plans. (Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


43.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS

New house construction or remodels to the side wall of existing homes shall transition to homes on either side, or satisfy one of the exemptions.

A.    The side elevation of the house must be divided into smaller areas or planes to minimize the appearance of bulk when viewed from the neighboring properties or a side street. When the side elevation of the house is more than 700 square feet in area, the elevation must be divided into distinct planes of 700 square feet or less. For the purpose of this standard, a distinct plane is created when there is a recessed or projecting section of the structure, that projects or recedes at least two feet, for a length of at least six feet (see example in Figure 1).


[IMAGE]


Figure 1

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Exempt the side of homes that are built 20 feet or more from the side lot line.

2.    Exempt homes on steep lots where the peak of the roof would be no more than 24 feet above the average street grade.

3.    Exempt homes on narrow lots 50 feet wide or less shall be allowed a minimum side-to-side width of 30 feet for floors above the first floor. The 30-foot-wide floor shall be able to accommodate a nine-foot floor-to-ceiling measurement on the second floor.

4.    Exempt homes whose side yards are contiguous to an open space, unbuildable area, or non-residentially zoned lands are exempt. (No exemption if adjacent to a park.)

5.    Exempt houses that have the gable end facing the side lot line.

6.    Replacement in kind of building materials on the sidewall of an existing house shall be exempt. For example, the replacement of siding would be exempt.

7.    The height of the sidewall shall not exceed 22 feet as measured from grade at the mid-point of the sidewall to the eaves. Sidewall can resume vertically after minimum seven-and-one-half-foot setback (see example in Figure 2).


[IMAGE]


Figure 2

 

EXEMPTIONS FROM SIDE WALL STANDARD 

	Homes on steep lots where the roof would be no more than 24' above average street grade	
[IMAGE]


	Homes on lots 50' wide or less can have second floor width of at least 30 feet	
[IMAGE]


	Homes next to open space, etc.	
[IMAGE]


	Homes with the gable end facing the side lot line	
[IMAGE]


	Homes that are built 20' or more from the side lot line	
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1538, 2006; Ord. 1675 § 37, 2018)


43.050 VARIANCE

In cases where the sidewall transitions and/or exemptions do not reasonably accommodate a house design, the applicant may apply for a Class II variance under Chapter 75 CDC. (Ord. 1538, 2006)


Chapter 44 FENCES

Sections:

44.020    SIGHT-OBSCURING FENCE; SETBACK AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS

44.030    SCREENING OF OUTDOOR STORAGE

44.040    LANDSCAPING

44.050    STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION


44.020 SIGHT-OBSCURING FENCE; SETBACK AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS

A.    A sight- or non-sight-obscuring fence may be located on the property line or in a yard setback area subject to the following:

1.    The fence is located within:

a.    A required front yard area, and it does not exceed three feet, except pillars and driveway entry features subject to the requirements of Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas, and approval by the Planning Director; 

b.    A required side yard which abuts a street and it is within that portion of the side yard which is also part of the front yard setback area and it does not exceed three feet;

c.    A required side yard which abuts a street and it is within that portion of the side yard which is not also a portion of the front yard setback area and it does not exceed six feet provided the provisions of Chapter 42 CDC are met;

d.    A required rear yard which abuts a street and it does not exceed six feet; or

e.    A required side yard area which does not abut a street or a rear yard and it does not exceed six feet.

B.    Fence or wall on a retaining wall. When a fence is built on a retaining wall or an artificial berm, the following standards shall apply:

1.    When the retaining wall or artificial berm is 30 inches or less in height from finished grade, the maximum fence or wall height on top of the retaining wall shall be six feet.

2.    When the retaining wall or earth berm is greater than 30 inches in height, the combined height of the retaining wall and fence or wall from finished grade shall not exceed eight and one-half feet.

3.    Fences or walls located on top of retaining walls or earth berms in excess of 30 inches above finished grade may exceed the total allowed combined height of eight and one-half feet; provided, that the fence or wall is located a minimum of two feet from the retaining wall and the fence or wall height shall not exceed six feet.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1192, 1987; Ord. 1291, 1990, Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1635 § 23, 2014)


44.030 SCREENING OF OUTDOOR STORAGE

A.    All service, repair, and storage activities carried on in connection with any commercial, business or industrial activity and not conducted within an enclosed building shall be screened from view of all adjacent properties and adjacent streets by a sight-obscuring fence.

B.    The sight-obscuring fence shall be in accordance with provisions of Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas, and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.


44.040 LANDSCAPING

Landscaping which is located on the fence line and which impairs sight vision shall not be located within the clear vision area as provided in Chapter 42 CDC.


44.050 STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION

A.    The structural side of the fence shall face the owner’s property; and

B.    The sides of the fence abutting adjoining properties and the street shall be maintained. (Ord. 1291, 1990)


Chapter 46 OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND RESERVOIR AREAS

Sections:

46.010    PURPOSE

46.020    APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

46.030    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

46.040    APPROVAL STANDARDS

46.050    JOINT USE OF A PARKING AREA

46.060    STORAGE IN PARKING AND LOADING AREAS PROHIBITED

46.070    MAXIMUM DISTANCE ALLOWED BETWEEN PARKING AREA AND USE

46.080    COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES AND LOADING AREA

46.090    MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS

46.100    PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR UNLISTED USES

46.110    RESERVOIR AREAS REQUIRED FOR DRIVE-IN USES

46.120    DRIVEWAYS REQUIRED ON SITE

46.130    OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES

46.140    EXEMPTIONS TO PARKING REQUIREMENTS

46.150    DESIGN AND STANDARDS


46.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the number and arrangement of parking, loading, and reservoir areas. Most of these provisions relate to commercial, office, and industrial uses. Parking lot design has often been criticized for creating large expanses of paved areas, separating the business from the public street. That arrangement makes it less attractive for pedestrians to access these buildings. The challenge is balancing the business community’s desire for ample visible parking to attract prospective customers with the community interest of encouraging safe, non-vehicular access, minimizing the visual impact of parking, and creating a more attractive streetscape and urban environment.

Most parking facilities in non-residential developments contain spaces which are infrequently used, available for the few days a year when parking is at a premium. For these spaces, permeable parking surfaces provide a suitable parking surface which can reduce surface runoff and increase water quality, as well as improve the aesthetic appearance of the parking lot. West Linn encourages the use of permeable parking surfaces in appropriate situations. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1622 § 25, 2014)


46.020 APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.    At the time a structure is erected or enlarged, or the use of a structure or unit of land is changed within any zone, parking spaces, loading areas and reservoir areas shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter unless other requirements are otherwise established as a part of the development approval process.

B.    The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces are the continuing obligation of the property owner.

C.    No building or other permit shall be issued until plans are approved that show the property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space as required by this chapter.

D.    Required parking spaces and loading areas shall be improved to the standards contained in this chapter and shall be available for use at the time of the final building inspection except as provided in CDC 46.150. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1622 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 30, 2014)


46.030 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

For any application requiring design review approval, which includes parking areas, the applicant shall submit, within the design review package, a plan drawn to scale showing all the elements necessary to indicate that the requirements of Chapter 55 CDC are met and it shall include but not be limited to:

A.    The delineation of individual parking and loading spaces and their dimensions;

B.    The identification of compact parking spaces;

C.    The location of the circulation area necessary to serve spaces;

D.    The access point(s) to streets, alleys, and properties to be served;

E.    The location of curb cuts;

F.    The location and dimensions of all landscaping, including the type and size of plant material to be used, as well as any other landscape material incorporated into the overall plan;

G.    The proposed grading and drainage plans and the slope (percentage) of parking lot;

H.    Specifications as to signs and bumper guards;

I.    Identification of disabled parking spaces;

J.    Location of pedestrian walkways and crossings; and

K.    Location of bicycle racks. (Ord. 1463, 2000)


46.040 APPROVAL STANDARDS

Approval shall be based on the standards set forth in this chapter and Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation; Chapter 52 CDC, Signs; and Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping. (Ord. 1463, 2000)


46.050 JOINT USE OF A PARKING AREA

A.    Joint use of required parking spaces may occur where two or more uses on the same or separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. Joint use of required parking spaces is allowed if the following documentation is submitted in writing to the Planning Director as part of a building or zoning permit application or land use review:

1.    The names and addresses of the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking and the uses at those locations;

2.    The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;

3.    An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of both uses; and

4.    A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees access to the parking for all uses.

B.    If a joint use arrangement is subsequently terminated, the requirements of this chapter will apply to each use separately. (Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1622 § 25, 2014)


46.060 STORAGE IN PARKING AND LOADING AREAS PROHIBITED

Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only, and the required parking spaces shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks connected with the business or use with the exception of small (under one-ton) delivery trucks or cars.


46.070 MAXIMUM DISTANCE ALLOWED BETWEEN PARKING AREA AND USE

A.    Off-street parking spaces for single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling.

B.    Off-street parking spaces for uses not listed in subsection A of this section shall be located not farther than 200 feet from an entryway to the building or use they are required to serve, measured in a straight line from the building, with the following exceptions:

1.    Shared parking areas for commercial uses which require more than 40 parking spaces may provide for the spaces in excess of the required 40 spaces up to a distance of 300 feet from the entryway to the commercial building or use. 

2.    Industrial and manufacturing uses which require in excess of 40 spaces may locate the required spaces in excess of the 40 spaces up to a distance of 300 feet from the entryway to the building.

3.    Employee parking areas for carpools and vanpools shall be located closer to the entryway to the building than general employee parking.

4.    Stacked or valet parking is allowed if an attendant is present to move vehicles. If stacked parking is used for required parking spaces, the applicant shall ensure that an attendant will always be present when the lot is in operation. The requirements for minimum or maximum spaces and all parking area development standards continue to apply for stacked parking.

5.    All disabled parking shall be placed closest to building entrances than all other parking. Appropriate ADA curb cuts and ramps to go from the parking lot to the ADA-accessible entrance shall be provided unless exempted by ADA code. (Ord. 1547, 2007)


46.080 COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES AND LOADING AREA

A.    Where several uses occupy a single structure or unit of land, a combination of uses is included in one business, or a combination of uses in the same or separate buildings share a common parking area as in the case of a shopping center, the total off-street parking spaces and loading area shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses, computed separately. For example, parking for an auto sales and repair business would be calculated using the “retail-bulky” calculation for the sales area and the “service and repair” calculation for the repair area. In another example, parking for a shopping center with a grocery store, a restaurant, and a medical office would be calculated using the “general retail store” calculation for the grocery store, the “restaurant” calculation for the restaurant, and the “medical/dental clinics” calculation for the medical office. The total number of required parking spaces may be reduced by up to 10 percent to account for cross-patronage (when a customer visits several commercial establishments during one visit to the commercial center) of adjacent businesses or services in a commercial center with five or more separate commercial establishments.

B.    To calculate building square footage as a basis for determining how many parking spaces are needed, the area measured shall be gross floor area under the roof measured from the faces of the structure, including all habitable floors and excluding only space devoted to covered off-street parking or loading.

C.    Where employees are specified, the employees counted are the persons who work on the premises including proprietors, executives, professional people, production, sales, and distribution employees, during the largest shift.

D.    Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole space.

E.    On-street parking along the immediate property frontage(s) may be counted toward the minimum parking requirement with approval from the City Engineer. 

F.    When an office or commercial development is proposed which has yet to identify its tenants, the parking requirement shall be based upon the “office” or “general retail” categories, respectively.

G.    As permitted uses are replaced with new permitted uses within an existing commercial or business center, modification of the number of parking spaces relative to the new mix of uses is not required unless other modifications of the site which require design review approval pursuant to Chapter 55 CDC are proposed. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1622 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 31, 2014)


46.090 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS

 

	A.	Residential parking space requirements.

	 	1.	Single-family residences (attached or detached).	1 space for each dwelling unit; may or may not be in garage or carport.

	 	2.	Two-family residences and duplexes.	1 space for each dwelling unit; may or may not be in garage or carport.

	 	3.	Multi-family residences:

	 	 	a.	500 square feet or less.	1 space for each unit.

	 	 	b.	1 bedroom apartment.	1.25 spaces for each unit. Stacking one car behind the other is permitted only when the parking spaces are allocated to specific apartments. 

	 	 	c.	2 bedroom apartments.	1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit. Stacking one car behind the other is permitted only when the parking spaces are allocated to specific apartments.

	 	 	d.	3 (or more) bedroom apartment.	1.75 spaces for each dwelling unit. Stacking one car behind the other is permitted only when the parking spaces are allocated to specific apartments.

	 	 	e.	Visitor parking for multi-family residences.	1 space for every 3 apartment units evenly distributed throughout the complex. These spaces shall be clearly identified and signed as visitor spaces only. This number may be reduced by 1 space for every 18 feet of project abutting public street frontage where on-street parking is allowed.

	 	4.	Residential hotel, rooming and boarding houses.	1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.

	 	5.	Correctional institutions.	1 space for each 3 beds or patients, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.

	 	6.	Manufactured/mobile home.	Same as single-family.

	 	7.	Adult foster care, residential care facility, assisted living facility.	1 space for each 3 units plus 1 space for each employee working during the time period with the greatest number of employees on site.

	B.	Public and semi-public buildings/uses.

	 	1.	Hospitals/nursing facilities.	One space for each 3 beds plus 1 space per 2 employees.

	 	2.	Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly (except senior center and community center).	Spaces to meet the combination of uses, CDC 46.080(A). 

	 	3.	Library.	One space per 400 square feet of reading area, plus 1 space per 2 employees.

	 	4.	Religious institutions and community meeting rooms.	One space for every 4 fixed seats or every 8 feet of bench length or every 28 square feet where no permanent seats or benches are maintained (in main auditorium, sanctuary, or place of worship).

	 	5.	Museum, art gallery.	One space for each 500 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.

	 	6.	Primary school, middle school, or equivalent private or parochial school.	One space for every employee, plus 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.

	 	7.	Senior high, college, or commercial trade school, or equivalent private or parochial school.	0.2 spaces per staff and student.

	 	8.	Day care, kindergarten, or pre-school facilities.	One space per employee, plus one space for every 300 square feet of floor area.

	 	9.	Youth center or community center.	One space per 200 square feet of covered floor area and drop-off facilities where required by CDC 46.120.

	 	10.	Passive parks, open space areas.	One space per 5 acres to 1 space per acre unless the open space area is abutting a street with no intervening homes or land uses, and has at least 300 lineal feet of street frontage where on-street parking is allowed. 

	 	11.	Active parks, playgrounds.	Two to 5 spaces for each acre of active use area other than athletic fields. 

	 	12.	Athletic field (baseball, soccer, etc.).	40 spaces per athletic field.

	 	13.	Boat ramp.	40 spaces per launch ramp (50 percent at 9' X 20'; 50 percent at 10' X 40' marked “trailers only”).

	 	14.	Senior center.	One space per 150 square feet and drop-off facility per CDC 46.120.

	 	15.	Trailhead.	Four spaces (includes one handicapped space).

	C.	Commercial.

	 	1.	Restaurants: Eating and drinking establishments.

	 	 	a.	Cafes, diners, taverns, bars, lounges, full-service and fast food restaurants.	One space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area. Restaurants with drive-through window and reservoir areas may reduce their parking requirement by 5 spaces.

	 	 	b.	Take out facilities (i.e., delicatessen, coffee and pastry, pizza, Chinese food, etc.) with no more than 2 tables and 8 seats, or 12 feet of stand-up counter space, or combination thereof, so that not more than 8 persons could be accommodated at any one time.	One space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area. Take-out facilities with drive-through window and reservoir areas may reduce their parking requirement by 5 spaces.

	 	2.	General retail store, except as provided below.	One space for every 240 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	 	3.	Retail-bulky (i.e., automobiles, furniture, automotive parts, appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, etc.).	One space for every 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	 	4.	Service and repair shops.	One space for every 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	 	5.	Professional offices, banks and savings and loans, and government offices.	One space for every 370 sq. ft. of gross area.

	 	6.	Medical/dental clinics/day surgery.	One space for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area.

	 	7.	Hotel, motel, tourist court, or bed and breakfast. 	One space for each guest room (plus parking for convention center, as appropriate).

	 	8.	Convention, trade, or banquet center.	One space per 3 persons of the maximum capacity of the convention center.

	 	9.	Laundromat.	One space per 2 washing machines.

	 	10.	Tanning salon.	One space per tanning booth/bed, plus 1 per employee.

	D.	Commercial recreation.

	 	1.	Auditorium, stadium, gymnasium.	One space for each 4 seats, or 8 feet of bench length, or 1 space for each 40 square feet of floor area.

	 	2.	Bowling alley.	Five spaces for each alley, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.

	 	3.	Pool hall or billiard hall.	One space per table, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.

	 	4.	Dance hall or skating rink.	One space for each 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus space for each 2 employees.

	 	5.	Amusement park.	One space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross area, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.

	 	6.	Go-kart track.	One space per kart, plus one space per employee.

	 	7.	Country club and golf course.	Six spaces per golf hole, and 1 space per employee on largest shift.

	 	8.	Executive or 9-hole golf course.	Two spaces per golf hole, and space per employee on largest shift.

	 	9.	Theater or movie house.	One space per 4 seats, or 8 feet of bench length.

	 	10.	Racetrack or stadium.	One space per 6 seats, or 12 feet of bench length.

	 	11.	Shooting gallery.	One space per 500 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per 2 employees.

	 	12.	Swimming pool.	One space per 100 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per 2 employees.

	 	13.	Tennis/racquetball courts.	One space per court. 

	 	14.	Video arcade.	One space per 240 square feet.

	 	15.	Miniature golf course.	Two spaces per golf hole, plus 1 space per employee at largest shift.

	 	16.	Marina boat dock.	1.5 spaces per boat slip, plus 1 per each employee.

	 	17.	Health club.	One space per 230 square feet of gross floor area.

	E.	Industrial.

	 	1.	Manufacturing use; may include assembly and distribution.	One space per employee. (Multi-shift businesses only need to provide for peak shift number of employees on site at one time.)

	 	2.	Storage or wholesale use including personal storage facilities.	One space per employee plus one space/700 sq. ft. of patron serving area.

F.    Maximum parking. Parking spaces (except for single-family and two-family residential uses) shall not exceed the minimum required number of spaces by more than 10 percent.

G.    Parking reductions. An applicant may reduce parking up to 10 percent for development sites within one-quarter mile of a transit corridor or within a mixed-use commercial area, and up to 10 percent for commercial development sites adjacent to multi-family residential sites with the potential to accommodate more than 20 dwelling units.

H.    For office, industrial, and public uses where there are more than 20 parking spaces for employees on the site, at least 10 percent of the required employee parking spaces shall be reserved for carpool use before 9:00 a.m. on weekdays. The spaces will be the closest to the building entrance, except for any disabled parking and those signed for exclusive customer use. The carpool/vanpool spaces shall be clearly marked “Reserved – Carpool/Vanpool Before 9:00 a.m.”

I.    Existing developments along transit streets or near transit stops may redevelop up to 10 percent of the existing parking spaces to provide transit-oriented facilities, including bus pullouts, bus stops and shelters, park and ride stations, and other similar facilities.

J.       Development in water resource areas may reduce the required number of parking spaces by up to 25 percent. Adjacent improved street frontage with curb and sidewalk may also be counted towards the parking requirement at a rate of one parking space per 20 lineal feet of street frontage adjacent to the property. (Ord. 1291, 1990; Ord. 1391, 1996; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1499, 2003; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1622 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1623 § 4, 2014; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 1675 § 38, 2018)


46.100 PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR UNLISTED USES

A.    Upon application and payment of fees, the decision-making authority, as provided by CDC 99.060(B), may rule that a use not specifically listed in CDC 46.090 is a use similar to a listed use and that the same parking standards shall apply. The ruling on parking requirements shall be based on the requirements of Chapter 99 CDC and findings that:

1.    The use is similar to and of the same general type as a listed use;

2.    The use has similar intensity, density and off-site impacts as the listed use; and

3.    The use has similar impacts on the community facilities as the listed use.

B.    This section does not authorize the inclusion of a use in a zone where it is not listed, or a use which is specifically listed in another zone or which is of the same general type, and is similar to a use specifically listed in another zone.


46.110 RESERVOIR AREAS REQUIRED FOR DRIVE-IN USES

All uses providing drive-in service as defined by this code shall provide, on the same site, a reservoir space a minimum of 15 feet long for each car, as follows:

 

	Use	Reservoir Requirement

	Drive-in banks.	3 spaces/service terminal.

	Drive-in restaurants.	10 spaces/service window (measured from the last service window).

	Drive-in theaters.	10 percent of the theater capacity.

	Gasoline service stations.	2 spaces (25 feet long each) on each side of fueling island to include 2 spaces at each end of the island.

	Mechanical car washes.	3 spaces/washing unit.

	Parking facilities – free flow (no stop required) entry.	1 space/entry driveway.

	Automated ticket dispense entry.	2 spaces/entry driveway.

	Attendant ticket dispensing.	5 spaces/entry driveway.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1401, 1997)


46.120 DRIVEWAYS REQUIRED ON SITE

Any school or other meeting place which is designed to accommodate more than 25 people at one time shall provide a 15-foot-wide driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. Depending on functional requirements, the width may be increased with Planning Director approval.


46.130 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES

Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered, which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck, shall provide and maintain off-street loading and maneuvering space. The dimensional standard for loading spaces is a minimum of 14 feet wide by 20 feet long or proportionate to accommodate the size of delivery trucks that typically serve the proposed use as follows:

 

	 	Gross Floor Area

	Land Use	At Which First Berth Is Required	At Which Second Berth Is Required

	 	 	 

	Industrial:	 	 

	Manufacturing	5,000 sq. ft.	40,000 sq. ft.

	Warehouse	5,000	40,000

	Storage	10,000	100,000

	 	 	 

	Commercial:	 	 

	Wholesale	10,000	40,000

	Retail	10,000	20,000

	Service establishments	10,000	40,000

	Comm. recreational (incl. bowling alley)	10,000	100,000

	Restaurants	5,000	25,000

	Laundry	10,000	25,000

	Office building	10,000	100,000

	Hotel	10,000	100,000

	 	 	 

	Institutional:	 	 

	Schools	10,000	100,000

	Hospitals	10,000	100,000

	Other care facilities	10,000	100,000

	 	 	 

	Public buildings:	 	 

	Terminals	5,000	40,000

	Auditoriums	10,000	100,000

	Arenas	10,000	100,000

	Funeral homes	10,000	100,000


46.140 EXEMPTIONS TO PARKING REQUIREMENTS

To facilitate the design requirements of Chapter 58 CDC, properties in the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District, located between 10th and 16th Streets, shall be exempt from the minimum parking and off-street loading requirements as identified in this chapter. Any off-street parking or loading spaces voluntarily provided shall be designed and installed per the dimensional standards of this code. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1675 § 39, 2018)


46.150 DESIGN AND STANDARDS

The following standards apply to the design and improvement of areas used for vehicle parking, storage, loading, and circulation:

A.    Design standards.

1.    “One standard parking space” means a minimum for a parking stall of eight feet in width and 16 feet in length. These stalls shall be identified as “compact.” To accommodate larger cars, 50 percent of the required parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of nine feet in width and 18 feet in length (nine feet by 18 feet). When multi-family parking stalls back onto a main driveway, the stalls shall be nine feet by 20 feet. Parking for development in water resource areas may have 100 percent compact spaces.

2.    Disabled parking and maneuvering spaces shall be consistent with current federal dimensional standards and subsection B of this section and placed nearest to accessible building entryways and ramps.

3.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

4.    Service drives shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress, and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site.

5.    Each parking and/or loading space shall have clear access, whereby the relocation of other vehicles to utilize the parking space is not required.

6.    Except for single- and two-family residences, any area intended to be used to meet the off-street parking requirements as contained in this chapter shall have all parking spaces clearly marked using a permanent paint. All interior drives and access aisles shall be clearly marked and signed to show direction of flow and maintain vehicular and pedestrian safety. Permeable parking surface spaces may have an alternative delineation for parking spaces. 

7.    Except for residential parking, and parking for public parks and trailheads, at least 50 percent of all areas used for the parking and/or storage and/or maneuvering of any vehicle, boat and/or trailer shall be improved with asphalt or concrete surfaces according to the same standards required for the construction and acceptance of City streets. The remainder of the areas used for parking may use a permeable paving surface designed to reduce surface runoff. Parking for public parks or trailheads may use a permeable paving surface designed to reduce surface runoff for all parking areas. Where a parking lot contains both paved and unpaved areas, the paved areas shall be located closest to the use which they serve. 

8.    Off-street parking spaces for single- and two-family residences shall be improved with an asphalt or concrete surface, or a permeable parking surface designed to reduce surface runoff, to specifications as approved by the Building Official. Other parking facilities for two- and single-family homes that are to accommodate additional vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, and trailers, etc., need not be paved. All parking for multi-family residential development shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. Driveways shall measure at least 20 feet from the back of sidewalk to garage or the end of the parking pad to accommodate cars and sport utility vehicles without the vehicles blocking the public sidewalk.

9.    Access drives from the street to off-street parking or loading areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic and provide maximum safety for pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site. The number of access drives shall be limited to the minimum that will allow the property to accommodate and service the anticipated traffic. Access drives shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through use of rails, fences, walls, or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied by service drives.

10.    Access drives shall have a minimum vision clearance as provided in Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

11.    Parking spaces along the boundaries of a parking lot or adjacent to interior landscaped areas or sidewalks shall be provided with a wheel stop at least four inches high located two feet back from the front of the parking stall. Such parking spaces may be provided without wheel stops if the sidewalks or landscaped areas adjacent the parking stalls are two feet wider than the minimum width.

12.    Off-street parking and loading areas shall be drained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. Storm drainage at commercial sites may also have to be collected to treat oils and other residue.

13.    Artificial lighting on all off-street parking facilities shall be designed to deflect all light downward away from surrounding residences and so as not to create a hazard to the public use of any road or street.

14.    Directional arrows and traffic control devices which are placed on parking lots shall be identified.

15.    The maximum driveway grade for single-family housing shall be 15 percent. The 15 percent shall be measured along the centerline of the driveway only. Grades elsewhere along the driveway shall not apply. Variations require approval of a Class II variance by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 75 CDC. Regardless, the last 18 feet in front of the garage must maintain a maximum grade of 12 percent as measured along the centerline of the driveway only. Grades elsewhere along the driveway shall not apply.


[IMAGE]


16.    Visitor or guest parking must be identified by painted “GUEST” or “VISITOR.”

17.    The parking area shall have less than a five percent grade. No drainage across adjacent sidewalks or walkways is allowed.

18.    Commercial, office, industrial, and public parking lots may not occupy more than 50 percent of the main lot frontage of a development site. The remaining frontage shall comprise buildings or landscaping. If over 50 percent of the lineal frontage comprises parking lot, the landscape strip between the right-of-way and parking lot shall be increased to 15 feet wide and shall include terrain variations (e.g., one-foot-high berm) plus landscaping. The defensible space of the parking lot should not be compromised.

19.    Areas of the parking lot improved with asphalt or concrete surfaces shall be designed into areas of 12 or less spaces through the use of defined landscaped area. Groups of 12 or less spaces are defined as:

a.    Twelve spaces in a row, provided there are no abutting parking spaces, as in the case when the spaces are abutting the perimeter of the lot; or


[IMAGE]


b.    Twelve spaces in a group with six spaces abutting together; or


[IMAGE]


c.    Two groups of 12 spaces abutting each other, but separated by a 15-foot-wide landscape area including a six-foot-wide walkway.

 


[IMAGE]


d.    Parking areas improved with a permeable parking surface may be designed using the configurations shown in subsections (A)(19)(a), (b) and (c) of this section except that groups of up to 18 spaces are allowed. 

e.    The requirements of this chapter relating to total parking lot landscaping, landscaping buffers, perimeter landscaping, and landscaping the parking lot islands and interior may be waived or reduced pursuant to CDC 32.110(F) in a WRA application without a variance being required. 

20.    Pedestrian walkways shall be provided in parking areas having 20 or more spaces. Walkways or sidewalks shall be constructed between major buildings/activity areas (an example in multi-family housing: between recreation center, swimming pool, manager’s office, park or open space areas, parking lots, etc.) within a development, between adjacent developments and the new development, as feasible, and between major buildings/activity areas within the development and adjacent streets and all adjacent transit stops. Internal parking lot circulation and design should maintain ease of access for pedestrians from streets and transit stops. Walkways shall be constructed using a material that visually contrasts with the parking lot and driveway surface. Walkways shall be further identifiable to pedestrians and motorists by grade separation, walls, curbs, surface texture (surface texture shall not interfere with safe use of wheelchairs, baby carriages, shopping carts, etc.), and/or landscaping. Walkways shall be six feet wide. The arrangement and layout of the paths shall depend on functional requirements.


[IMAGE]


21.    The parking and circulation patterns are easily comprehended and defined. The patterns shall be clear to minimize traffic hazards and congestion and to facilitate emergency vehicles.

22.    The parking spaces shall be close to the related use.

23.    Permeable parking spaces shall be designed and built to City standards.

B.    Accessible parking standards for persons with disabilities. If any parking is provided for the public or visitors, or both, the needs of the people with disabilities shall be based upon the following standards or current applicable federal standards, whichever are more stringent:

1.    Minimum number of accessible parking space requirements (see following table):

 

	MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF TOTAL PARKING SPACES	TOTAL NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE SPACES	NUMBER OF VAN-ACCESSIBLE SPACES REQUIRED, OF TOTAL	SPACES SIGNED “WHEELCHAIR USE ONLY”

	1 – 25	1	1	–

	26 – 50	2	1	–

	51 – 75	3	1	–

	76 – 100	4	1	–

	101 – 150	5	–	1

	151 – 200	6	–	1

	201 – 300	7	–	2

	301 – 400	8	–	2

	401 –500	9	–	2

	501 – 999	2 percent of total spaces	–	1 in every 6 accessible spaces or portion thereof

	Over 1,000	20 spaces plus 1 for every 100 spaces, or fraction thereof, over 1,000	–	1 in every 6 spaces or portion thereof

2.    Location of parking spaces. Parking spaces for the individual with a disability that serve a particular building shall be located on the shortest possible accessible circulation route to an accessible entrance to a building. In separate parking structures or lots that do not serve a particular building, parking spaces for the persons with disabilities shall be located on the shortest possible circulation route to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.

3.    Accessible parking space and aisle shall meet ADA vertical and horizontal slope standards.

4.    Where any differences exist between this section and current federal standards, those standards shall prevail over this code section.

5.    One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches wide.

6.    Van-accessible parking spaces shall have an additional sign marked “Van Accessible” mounted below the accessible parking sign. A van-accessible parking space reserved for wheelchair users shall have a sign that includes the words “Wheelchair Use Only.” Van-accessible parking shall have an adjacent eight-foot-wide aisle. All other accessible stalls shall have a six-foot-wide aisle. Two vehicles may share the same aisle if it is between them. The vertical clearance of the van space shall be 96 inches.

C.    Landscaping in parking areas. Reference Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

D.    Bicycle facilities and parking.

1.    Provisions shall be made for pedestrian and bicycle ways if such facilities are shown on an adopted plan.

2.    Bicycle parking facilities shall either be lockable enclosures in which the bicycle is stored, or secure stationary racks which accommodate bicyclist’s locks securing the frame and both wheels. The bicycle parking shall be no more than 50 feet from the entrance to the building, well-lit, observable, and properly signed.

3.    Bicycle parking must be provided in the following amounts:

 

	LAND USE CATEGORY	MINIMUM REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING SPACES	MINIMUM COVERED AMOUNT

	Residential	 	 

	Multi-family Residential	1 space per unit	50%

	Institutional	 	 

	Schools – Elementary	2 spaces per classroom	50%

	Schools – Jr. High or Middle Schools	4 spaces per classroom	50%

	Schools – Sr. High	2 spaces per classroom 	50%

	College	1 space per 4 students	50%

	Transit Centers/Park & Ride Lots	5% of auto spaces, or 100% of demand, depending on location/accessibility to bicyclists	100%

	Religious Institutions	1 space per 40-seat capacity	25%

	Hospitals	1 space per 5 beds	50%

	Doctor, Dentist Offices	2, or 0.5 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft., whichever is greater	25%

	Libraries, Museums, Government Offices, etc.	2, or 1.5 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft., whichever is greater	25%

	Commercial	 	 

	Retail Sales	0.33 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	50%

	Auto-oriented Services (including 7-11s)	2, or 0.33 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft., whichever is greater	10%

	Groceries/Supermarkets	0.33 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft./bldg.	10%

	Office	2, or 0.5 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft., whichever is greater	10%

	Quality Restaurant	1 space per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	25%

	Drive-in Restaurant	2 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	25%

	Shopping Center (by size)	0.33 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft./bldg.	50%

	Financial Institutions	2, or 0.33 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	25%

	Theaters, Auditoriums, etc.	1 space per 30 seats	25%

	Industrial	 	 

	Industrial Park	2, or 0.5 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	50%

	Warehouse	2, or 0.1 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	50%

	Manufacturing, etc.	2, or 0.15 spaces per 1,000 gross sq. ft.	50%

E.    Office or industrial developments shall be allowed a 10 percent reduction in the number of required parking spaces when the property owner agrees to a demand management program that includes three or more of the following measures:

1.    Designate a transportation coordinator responsible for promoting public transit and ride-sharing among employees.

2.    Participate in region-wide ride matching program at the site.

3.    Provide free transit passes to employees.

4.    Provide showers and lockers for employees who commute by bicycle.

5.    Charge employees for monthly parking and provide a transportation allowance to employees equal to the parking charge.

6.    Install office technology, floorplans, and tenant regulations which are permanent, which effectively arrange for at least 10 percent of the employees to telecommute, thereby reducing employee automobile traffic by 10 percent.

The required demand management measures shall be included as conditions of approval for the proposed project. The property owner or manager shall file an annual affidavit with the City of West Linn stating that ongoing demand management measures required as conditions of approval have not been discontinued.

F.    (See Figures 1 and 2 below.)

Figure 1. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOT LAYOUT


[IMAGE]


Figure 2. MINIMUM DISTANCE FOR PARKING STALLS


[IMAGE]


 

	ANGLE OF PARKING	DIRECTION OF PARKING	AISLE WIDTH	DIMENSION ‘A’	DIMENSION ‘B’

	STALL WIDTH	STALL WIDTH	STALL WIDTH

	9.0'	8.0'	9.0'	8.0'	9.0'	8.0'

	30°	DRIVE-IN	12.5'	12.5'	16.8'	13.8'	18.0'	16.0'

	45°	DRIVE-IN	12.5'	12.5'	19.1'	17.0'	12.7'	11.3'

	60°	DRIVE-IN	19.0'	18.0'	20.1'	17.8'	10.4'	9.2'

	60°	BACK-IN	17.0'	17.0'	20.1'	17.8'	10.4'	9.2'

	90°	DRIVE-IN	23.0'	23.0'	18.0'	16.0'	9.0'	8.0'

	90°	BACK-IN	22.0'	22.0'	18.0'	16.0'	9.0'	8.0'

(Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1513, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 § 46, 2011; Ord. 1622 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1623 § 4, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 24, 2014)


Chapter 48 ACCESS, EGRESS AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

48.010    PURPOSE

48.020    APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

48.025    ACCESS CONTROL

48.030    MINIMUM VEHICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES

48.040    MINIMUM VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES

48.050    ONE-WAY VEHICULAR ACCESS POINTS

48.060    WIDTH AND LOCATION OF CURB CUTS AND ACCESS SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS

48.070    PLANNING DIRECTOR’S AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT ACCESS APPEAL PROVISIONS

48.080    BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION


48.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that efficient, safe, and well-directed vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian access, circulation, and egress are designed into development proposals. Access management seeks to balance mobility, the need to provide efficient, safe and timely travel with the ability to allow access to individual properties. Proper implementation of access management techniques should guarantee reduced congestion, reduced accident rates, less need for roadway widening, conservation of energy, and reduced air pollution. (Ord. 1584, 2008)


48.020 APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply where the provisions of the Transportation System Plan or land division chapter are applicable and set forth differing standards.

B.    All lots shall have access from a public street or from a platted private street approved under the land division chapter.

C.    No building or other permit shall be issued until scaled plans are presented to the City and approved by the City as provided by this chapter, and show how the access, egress, and circulation requirements are to be fulfilled. Access to State or County roads may require review, approval, and permits from the appropriate authority.

D.    Should the owner or occupant of a lot, parcel or building enlarge or change the use to which the lot, parcel or building is put, resulting in increasing any of the requirements of this chapter, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this code to begin or maintain such altered use until the provisions of this chapter have been met, and, if required, until the appropriate approval authority under Chapter 99 CDC has approved the change.

E.    Owners of two or more uses, structures, lots, parcels, or units of land may agree to utilize jointly the same access and egress when the combined access and egress of both uses, structures, or parcels of land satisfies the requirements as designated in this code; provided, that satisfactory legal evidence is presented to the City Attorney in the form of deeds, easements, leases, or contracts to establish joint use. Copies of said instrument shall be placed on permanent file with the City Recorder.

F.    Property owners shall not be compelled to access their homes via platted stems of flag lots if other driveways and easements are available and approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1636 § 32, 2014)


48.025 ACCESS CONTROL

A.    Purpose. The following access control standards apply to public, industrial, commercial and residential developments including land divisions. Access shall be managed to maintain an adequate level of service and to maintain the functional classification of roadways as required by the West Linn Transportation System Plan. 

B.    Access control standards.

1.    Traffic impact analysis requirements. The City or other agency with access jurisdiction may require a traffic study prepared by a qualified professional to determine access, circulation and other transportation requirements. (See also CDC 55.125, Transportation Impact Analysis.)

2.    The City or other agency with access permit jurisdiction may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), development of a frontage street, installation of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system. Access to and from off-street parking areas shall not permit backing onto a public street.

3.    Access options. When vehicle access is required for development (i.e., for off-street parking, delivery, service, drive-through facilities, etc.), access shall be provided by one of the following methods (planned access shall be consistent with adopted public works standards and TSP). These methods are “options” as approved by the City Engineer.

a)    Option 1. Access is from an existing or proposed alley or mid-block lane. If a property has access to an alley or lane, direct access to a public street is not permitted.

b)    Option 2. Access is from a private street or driveway connected to an adjoining property that has direct access to a public street (i.e., “shared driveway”). A public access easement covering the driveway shall be recorded in this case to assure access to the closest public street for all users of the private street/drive.

c)    Option 3. Access is from a public street adjacent to the development lot or parcel. If practicable, the owner/developer may be required to close or consolidate an existing access point as a condition of approving a new access. Street accesses shall comply with the access spacing standards in subsection (B)(6) of this section.

4.    Subdivisions fronting onto an arterial street. New residential land divisions fronting onto an arterial street shall be required to provide alleys or secondary (local or collector) streets for access to individual lots. When alleys or secondary streets cannot be constructed due to topographic or other physical constraints, access may be provided by consolidating driveways for clusters of two or more lots (e.g., includes flag lots and mid-block lanes).

5.    Double-frontage lots. When a lot or parcel has frontage onto two or more streets, access shall be provided first from the street with the lowest classification. For example, access shall be provided from a local street before a collector or arterial street. When a lot or parcel has frontage opposite that of the adjacent lots or parcels, access shall be provided from the street with the lowest classification.

6.    Access spacing. 

a.    The access spacing standards found in the adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP) shall be applicable to all newly established public street intersections and non-traversable medians. Deviation from the access spacing standards may be granted by the City Engineer if conditions are met as described in the access spacing variances section in the adopted TSP.

b.    Private drives and other access ways are subject to the requirements of CDC 48.060.

7.    Number of access points. For single-family (detached and attached), two-family, and duplex housing types, one street access point is permitted per lot or parcel, when alley access cannot otherwise be provided; except that two access points may be permitted corner lots (i.e., no more than one access per street), subject to the access spacing standards in subsection (B)(6) of this section. The number of street access points for multiple family, commercial, industrial, and public/institutional developments shall be minimized to protect the function, safety and operation of the street(s) and sidewalk(s) for all users. Shared access may be required, in conformance with subsection (B)(8) of this section, in order to maintain the required access spacing, and minimize the number of access points.

8.    Shared driveways. The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets shall be minimized by the use of shared driveways with adjoining lots where feasible. The City shall require shared driveways as a condition of land division or site design review, as applicable, for traffic safety and access management purposes in accordance with the following standards:

a.    Shared driveways and frontage streets may be required to consolidate access onto a collector or arterial street. When shared driveways or frontage streets are required, they shall be stubbed to adjacent developable parcels to indicate future extension. “Stub” means that a driveway or street temporarily ends at the property line, but may be extended in the future as the adjacent lot or parcel develops. “Developable” means that a lot or parcel is either vacant or it is likely to receive additional development (i.e., due to infill or redevelopment potential).

b.    Access easements (i.e., for the benefit of affected properties) shall be recorded for all shared driveways, including pathways, at the time of final plat approval or as a condition of site development approval.

c.    Exception. Shared driveways are not required when existing development patterns or physical constraints (e.g., topography, lot or parcel configuration, and similar conditions) prevent extending the street/driveway in the future.

C.    Street connectivity and formation of blocks required. In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the City, land divisions and large site developments shall produce complete blocks bounded by a connecting network of public and/or private streets, in accordance with the following standards:

1.    Block length and perimeter. The maximum block length shall not exceed 800 feet or 1,800 feet along an arterial.

2.    Street standards. Public and private streets shall also conform to Chapter 92 CDC, Required Improvements, and to any other applicable sections of the West Linn Community Development Code and approved TSP.

3.    Exception. Exceptions to the above standards may be granted when blocks are divided by one or more pathway(s), in conformance with the provisions of CDC 85.200(C), Pedestrian and Bicycle Trails, or cases where extreme topographic (e.g., slope, creek, wetlands, etc.) conditions or compelling functional limitations preclude implementation, not just inconveniences or design challenges. (Ord. 1635 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 33, 2014; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 1675 § 40, 2018)


48.030 MINIMUM VEHICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES

A.    Direct individual access from single-family dwellings and duplex lots to an arterial street, as designated in the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan, is prohibited for lots or parcels created after the effective date of this code where an alternate access is either available or is expected to be available by imminent development application. Evidence of alternate or future access may include temporary cul-de-sacs, dedications or stubouts on adjacent lots or parcels, or tentative street layout plans submitted at one time by adjacent property owner/developer or by the owner/developer, or previous owner/developer, of the property in question.

In the event that alternate access is not available as determined by the Planning Director and City Engineer, access may be permitted after review of the following criteria:

1.    Topography.

2.    Traffic volume to be generated by development (i.e., trips per day).

3.    Traffic volume presently carried by the street to be accessed.

4.    Projected traffic volumes.

5.    Safety considerations such as line of sight, number of accidents at that location, emergency vehicle access, and ability of vehicles to exit the site without backing into traffic.

6.    The ability to consolidate access through the use of a joint driveway.

7.    Additional review and access permits may be required by State or County agencies.

B.    When any portion of any house is less than 150 feet from the adjacent right-of-way, access to the home is as follows:

1.    One single-family residence, including residences with an accessory dwelling unit as defined in CDC 02.030, shall provide 10 feet of unobstructed horizontal clearance. Dual-track or other driveway designs that minimize the total area of impervious driveway surface are encouraged.

2.    Two to four single-family residential homes equals a 14- to 20-foot-wide paved or all-weather surface. Width shall depend upon adequacy of line of sight and number of homes.

3.    Maximum driveway grade shall be 15 percent. The 15 percent shall be measured along the centerline of the driveway only. Variations require approval of a Class II variance by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 75 CDC. Regardless, the last 18 feet in front of the garage shall be under 12 percent grade as measured along the centerline of the driveway only. Grades elsewhere along the driveway shall not apply. 

4.    The driveway shall include a minimum of 20 feet in length between the garage door and the back of sidewalk, or, if no sidewalk is proposed, to the paved portion of the right-of-way. 


[IMAGE]


C.    When any portion of one or more homes is more than 150 feet from the adjacent right-of-way, the provisions of subsection B of this section shall apply in addition to the following provisions.

1.    A turnaround may be required as prescribed by the Fire Chief.

2.    Minimum vertical clearance for the driveway shall be 13 feet, six inches.

3.    A minimum centerline turning radius of 45 feet is required unless waived by the Fire Chief.

4.    There shall be sufficient horizontal clearance on either side of the driveway so that the total horizontal clearance is 20 feet.

D.    Access to five or more single-family homes shall be by a street built to full construction code standards. All streets shall be public. This full street provision may only be waived by variance.

E.    Access and/or service drives for multi-family dwellings shall be fully improved with hard surface pavement:

1.    With a minimum of 24-foot width when accommodating two-way traffic; or

2.    With a minimum of 15-foot width when accommodating one-way traffic. Horizontal clearance shall be two and one-half feet wide on either side of the driveway.

3.    Minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet, six inches.

4.    Appropriate turnaround facilities per Fire Chief’s standards for emergency vehicles when the drive is over 150 feet long. Fire Department turnaround areas shall not exceed seven percent grade unless waived by the Fire Chief.

5.    The grade shall not exceed 10 percent on average, with a maximum of 15 percent.

6.    A minimum centerline turning radius of 45 feet for the curve.

F.    Where on-site maneuvering and/or access drives are necessary to accommodate required parking, in no case shall said maneuvering and/or access drives be less than that required in Chapters 46 and 48 CDC.

G.    The number of driveways or curb cuts shall be minimized on arterials or collectors. Consolidation or joint use of existing driveways shall be required when feasible.

H.    In order to facilitate through traffic and improve neighborhood connections, it may be necessary to construct a public street through a multi-family site.

I.    Gated accessways to residential development other than a single-family home are prohibited. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1513, 2005; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1636 § 34, 2014)


48.040 MINIMUM VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES

Access, egress, and circulation system for all non-residential uses shall not be less than the following:

A.    Service drives for non-residential uses shall be fully improved with hard surface pavement:

1.    With a minimum of 24-foot width when accommodating two-way traffic; or

2.    With a minimum of 15-foot width when accommodating one-way traffic. Horizontal clearance shall be two and one-half feet wide on either side of the driveway.

3.    Meet the requirements of CDC 48.030(E)(3) through (6).

4.    Pickup window driveways may be 12 feet wide unless the Fire Chief determines additional width is required. 

B.    All non-residential uses shall be served by one or more service drives as determined necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the property and designed according to CDC 48.030(A). In no case shall the design of the service drive or drives require or facilitate the backward movement or other maneuvering of a vehicle within a street, other than an alley.

C.    All on-site maneuvering and/or access drives shall be maintained pursuant to CDC 46.130.

D.    Gated accessways to non-residential uses are prohibited unless required for public safety or security. (Ord. 1408, 1998, Ord. 1463, 2000)


48.050 ONE-WAY VEHICULAR ACCESS POINTS

Where a proposed parking facility plan indicates only one-way traffic flow on the site, it shall be accommodated by a specific driveway serving the facility, and the entrance drive shall be situated closest to oncoming traffic, and the exit drive shall be situated farthest from oncoming traffic.


48.060 WIDTH AND LOCATION OF CURB CUTS AND ACCESS SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS

A.    Minimum curb cut width shall be 16 feet.

B.    Maximum curb cut width shall be 36 feet, except along Highway 43 in which case the maximum curb cut shall be 40 feet. For emergency service providers, including fire stations, the maximum shall be 50 feet.

C.    No curb cuts shall be allowed any closer to an intersecting street right-of-way line than the following:

1.    On an arterial when intersected by another arterial, 150 feet.

2.    On an arterial when intersected by a collector, 100 feet.

3.    On an arterial when intersected by a local street, 100 feet.

4.    On a collector when intersecting an arterial street, 100 feet.

5.    On a collector when intersected by another collector or local street, 35 feet.

6.    On a local street when intersecting any other street, 35 feet.

D.    There shall be a minimum distance between any two adjacent curb cuts on the same side of a public street, except for one-way entrances and exits, as follows:

1.    On an arterial street, 150 feet.

2.    On a collector street, 75 feet.

3.    Between any two curb cuts on the same lot or parcel on a local street, 30 feet.

E.    A rolled curb may be installed in lieu of curb cuts and access separation requirements.

F.    Curb cuts shall be kept to the minimum, particularly on Highway 43. Consolidation of driveways is preferred. The standard on Highway 43 is one curb cut per business if consolidation of driveways is not possible.

G.    Adequate line of sight pursuant to engineering standards should be afforded at each driveway or accessway. (Ord. 1270, 1990; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1636 § 35, 2014)


48.070 PLANNING DIRECTOR’S AUTHORITY TO RESTRICT ACCESS APPEAL PROVISIONS

A.    In order to provide for increased traffic movement on congested streets and eliminate turning movement problems, the Planning Director and the City Engineer, or his or her designee, may restrict the location of driveways on said street and require the location of driveways on adjacent streets upon the finding that the proposed access would:

1.    Provide inadequate access for emergency vehicles; or

2.    Cause or increase hazardous conditions to exist which would constitute a clear and present danger to the public health safety and general welfare.

B.    A decision by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(B).


48.080 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION

A.    Within all multi-family developments (except two-family/duplex dwellings), each residential dwelling shall be connected to vehicular parking stalls, common open space, and recreation facilities by a pedestrian pathway system having a minimum width of six feet and constructed of an all-weather material. The pathway material shall be of a different color or composition from the driveway. (Bicycle routes adjacent to the travel lanes do not have to be of different color or composition.)

B.    Bicycle and pedestrian ways within a subdivision shall be constructed according to the provisions in CDC 85.200(A)(3).

C.    Bicycle and pedestrian ways at commercial or industrial sites shall be provided according to the provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.


Chapter 52 SIGNS

Sections:

52.010    PURPOSE

52.020    REPEALED

52.101    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

52.102    TIME LIMIT ON SIGN APPROVAL

52.103    PERMIT

52.104    APPLICATION

52.105    BUSINESS LICENSE

52.106    SIGN IDENTIFICATION

52.107    MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY

52.108    NON-CONFORMING SIGNS

52.109    EXEMPTIONS

52.110    VARIANCES

52.200    PROHIBITED SIGNS

52.210    APPROVAL STANDARDS

52.300    PERMANENT SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS

52.310    TEMPORARY SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS

52.400    NEWLY ANNEXED LAND


52.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to maintain or improve the aesthetic quality of the City’s residential and business environment; to prevent the proliferation of signs and sign clutter; to minimize adverse visual safety factors to travelers on public roadways and private areas open to public vehicular travel; to provide for safe construction, location, erection and maintenance of signs; and to improve the effectiveness of signs in identifying and advertising businesses, all by classifying and regulating signs. (Ord. 1276, 1990)


52.020 DEFINITIONS

Repealed by Ord. 1604. (Ord. 1248, 1989; Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1385, 1996; Ord. 1514, 2005; Ord. 1539, 2006; Ord. 1599 § 2, 2011)


52.101 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A sign exempt from City approval does not require application with the City but shall conform to all other applicable provisions of this chapter.

B.    A sign subject to City approval is a sign for which approval will be granted by the Planning Director provided all conditions are satisfied; and

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060.

2.    The decision may be appealed to the City Council as prescribed by CDC 99.240(A). 

C.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Area.

2.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


52.102 TIME LIMIT ON SIGN APPROVAL

A.    Approval of a sign by the Planning Director shall be void after 90 days if:

1.    The sign has not been installed within that 90-day period; or

2.    The sign is a departure from the approval plan.

B.    The Planning Director shall, upon written request by the applicant, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed 30 days; provided, that:

1.    No changes are made on the original sign as approved by the Director.

2.    The applicant can show intent of initiating placement of the sign on the site within the 30-day extension period.

3.    There have been no changes in the applicable policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.


52.103 PERMIT

A.    No sign shall be erected, structurally altered, relocated, or replaced, except for maintenance of signs that conform with this chapter, without first obtaining a permit from the Community Development Department, paying the requisite fee, and otherwise complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter, unless a provision of this chapter specifically exempts a sign from the permit requirement.

B.    A copy of each sign permit, including the permit number, shall be kept by the Planning Director, business owner, person contracting for the erection of the sign, and by the sign company. (Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


52.104 APPLICATION

A.    Permanent sign permits.

1.    An application for a permanent sign permit shall be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

2.    An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Planning Director and shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The application shall include one copy of a sketch drawn to scale indicating the following:

a.    Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.

b.    Location by street number and legal description of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be installed or affixed.

c.    A drawing approximately to scale showing design of the sign including dimensions, height, sign area, materials, method of attachment, source of illumination, and showing the relationship to any building or structure to which it is or is proposed to be installed or affixed or to which it relates. For purposes of this section, “design” does not include text or copy, but an applicant may provide information concerning color, size and style of lettering.

d.    A site plan drawn to scale indicating the location of the sign relative to property lines, structures, other signs on premises, streets and sidewalks; and the location of any structures and freestanding signs on abutting properties.

3.    The applicant shall pay the required fee. When a sign is erected or placed prior to approval of a required sign permit, the sign permit application fee shall be doubled. Payment of the double fee shall not relieve an applicant from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter or from any penalties prescribed herein.

4.    After the applicant has installed his or her sign, he or she shall inform the Community Development Department of the sign’s completed installation.

B.    Temporary sign permits. An application for a temporary sign shall include the appropriate fee, as set by City Council resolution. The fee is nonrefundable. (Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1539, 2006; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 § 13, 2014)


52.105 BUSINESS LICENSE

Any person or firm in the business of hanging, rehanging, placing, constructing, installing, structurally altering, relocating, or painting any on premises signs, except those signs which do not require permits, shall have obtained a City of West Linn business license.


52.106 SIGN IDENTIFICATION

Each electrical sign shall have affixed to the sign the name of the sign fabricator or installer and the electrical power consumption stated in volts and amperes. Such information shall be in sufficient size and contrast to be readable upon close inspection.

Upon final approval of any temporary sign permit application, the City will issue an approval decal to be affixed to the sign. This decal shall be affixed in any corner of the approved sign and shall not be transferable to unapproved signs. (Ord. 1378, 1995)


52.107 MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY

A.    Each electrical sign shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the State Electrical Code.

B.    All signs, together with all of the supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition, free from rust, corrosion, peeling paint, or other surface deterioration.

C.    No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that any portion of its surface or its supports will interfere in any way with the free use or access to any fire escape, exit, or standpipe. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct any window so that light or ventilation is reduced below minimum standards required by any applicable law or building code.

D.    The Building Official may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. The Building Official shall give written notice, sent by certified mail, to the owner of the sign, or if the sign owner cannot be located, to the property owner. If the sign has not been removed or corrected within a 30-day period, the Building Official may requisition the removal of the sign and the charge for removal shall become a lien on the property. If the Building Official finds that any sign is in violation of this section to the extent that he or she deems it an immediate and serious danger to the public, he or she may order its immediate removal.


52.108 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS

A.    An existing sign shall be brought into conformance with this chapter if a change is made in design of the sign frame or supporting structure. A change in plastic face plate of a non-conforming sign will not require replacement of the total sign, but the new sign face shall conform as fully as possible to the standards of this chapter.

B.    Any sign which is structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall immediately be brought into compliance with all the provisions of this chapter, except the signs that are temporarily removed to allow remodeling of the premises and shall be allowed to be relocated upon the completion of remodeling.


52.109 EXEMPTIONS

A.    Signs placed inside windows are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Parking lot signs up to three square feet in area with a maximum height no greater than five feet above grade and directed to the interior of a parking lot and not to a right-of-way shall not require a sign permit.

C.    City signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 

D.    Sunday signs are allowed within City right-of-way in any residential district on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., subject to the following standards:

1.     Sunday signs shall conform to the following design standards:

a.    Each sign face shall be no larger than five square feet in area;

b.     The sign, including the support structure, shall be no taller than 30 inches;

c.    The sign owner’s name, address and telephone number shall be placed on the sign; and

d.     The sign shall not be attached or anchored in any way to trees, other objects or public property, including, but not limited to, utility or light poles or parking meters, with the exception of stake signs which can be placed in the ground.

2.    Sunday signs shall conform to the following locational standards:

a.    The sign shall be located entirely outside the paved roadway and any shoulder, median or traffic island;

b.     The sign shall be located entirely outside the area of a right-of-way that is between the lines created by extending the edges of any curb ramp to the property line. Where no curb exists, the sign shall be placed outside the roadway at least five feet from the edge of the roadway;

c.    The sign shall maintain a continuous pedestrian passageway of at least four feet in width;

d.     The sign shall not obstruct pedestrian and wheelchair access from the sidewalk to transit stops, designated disabled parking spaces, or building exits, including fire escapes;

e.     The sign shall not be placed in parking spaces or bicycle paths;

f.     The sign shall not be placed on any driveway; and

g.    The sign shall not be placed in any portion of the right-of-way abutting real property owned or controlled by the City or another public agency. 

E.    Signs that are oriented toward spectators at athletic fields or the interior of community recreation facilities are exempt; provided, that signs that are incidentally visible from the public right-of-way shall be no larger than 32 square feet in size. The signs shall be the same height, and the top of the signs shall be aligned horizontally to form a banner like appearance; the back side of such signs visible from the right-of-way shall be a uniform white, black, or earth tone color. 

F.    A-Frame Signs.

1.    Signs in the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District shall comply with standards in CDC 52.210(K).

2.    All other A-frame signs for businesses are subject to the following standards:

a.    The business is located in the General Commercial (GC) zoning district;

b.    The sign is professionally manufactured, maintained and in good repair. No attachments to the sign are permitted;

c.    No part of the sign may exceed 32 inches in width and 36 inches in height;

d.    The sign shall only be displayed during times that the business is open to the public; 

e.    The location of the sign must maintain four feet of unobstructed sidewalk width per CDC 53.030(A);

f.    One A-frame sign is permitted per business; and

g.    The sign must be located within 25 feet of an entrance to business being advertised. (Ord. 1276, 1990; Ord. 1378, 1995; Ord. 1514, 2005; Ord. 1539, 2006; Ord. 1599 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 7, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 22, 2014; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015)


52.110 VARIANCES

A.    Sign height and sign area variances shall be a Class II variance, and shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of subsection C of this section and Chapter 75 CDC.

B.    All other sign variances shall be treated as Class I variance, and shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of subsection C of this section and CDC 75.050.

C.    The granting authority may grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter if it is established that:

1.    The architectural design of a building, the location of a building site or location of building thereon, or some other circumstance relating to the sign proposal, is unusual or unique and that, because of this, a hardship will be created in that the applicant will be denied an opportunity to identify their business or location relatively equal to the opportunity accorded other members of the community not burdened with such unusual or unique architectural design, building site, or other circumstance;

2.    The design is consistent with the request and will not be injurious to the neighborhood in which the property is located or to property established to be affected by the request; and

3.    The request is the minimum variance necessary to provide reasonable signage for the property affected. (Ord. 1276, 1990)


52.200 PROHIBITED SIGNS

The following signs are prohibited:

A.    Signs in right-of-way. Signs shall not be located in or extended onto public rights-of-way. Traffic control signs and devices installed by the governmental entity responsible for the right-of-way and City signs are exempt from this prohibition.

B.    Mobile or portable signs. Mobile or portable signs are prohibited, except as specifically authorized by this chapter.

C.    Signs on roofs or above eaves. Signs mounted on roofs or that project above eaves or parapet walls of a building are prohibited.

D.    Traffic safety risks. Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal are prohibited in locations where they create a risk that they may be perceived as actual traffic signs or signals.

E.    Signs that obstruct passage. Signs may not be placed in locations where they may obstruct or substantially limit emergency egress from a building or may obstruct or substantially limit passage to or through any exit, door or window that may be used in case of fire or emergency.

F.    Noise-emitting signs. Signs that emit sounds audible from within a vehicle are prohibited as traffic safety risks.

G.    Moving devices. Signs that contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, balloons, strings of light bulbs, or spinners or other similar moving devices are prohibited, except as specifically permitted on temporary signs.

H.    Signs with movement. Signs that have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, reflectors, or other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color, other than permitted electronic changeable copy signs, are prohibited.

I.    Beacon lights. Beacon lights are prohibited. (Ord. 1539, 2006)


52.210 APPROVAL STANDARDS

All signs shall meet the following standards:

A.    The scale of the sign and its components shall be appropriate for its location and consistent with the applicable design standards.

B.    The size, location, or manner of illumination shall not create a traffic hazard and shall not hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal.

C.    The sign shall be located in compliance with Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Area.

D.    Signs and sign structures located over vehicular driveways and pedestrian walkways shall allow at least 15 feet of clearance over driveways and eight feet of clearance over walkways.

E.    The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, fully shielded such that no light is emitted above the horizontal plane, and directed or reduced so that glare is minimized.

F.    Signs shall be located to preserve existing trees, topography and natural drainage, to the extent possible consistent with the installation of the sign.

G.    All permanent signs shall be located within a landscaped area or installed on a wood, stone, or other base structure that meets the following standards:

1.    Signs shall be installed on a base with a maximum height of two feet, a minimum width at least one-half as wide as the sign face, and a depth equal to or greater than the depth of the sign. The sign height includes any portion of the base located above street grade (also refer to Sign Definitions – Grade).

2.    In the event a sign is erected on a multiple-pole or piling structure, the base required by subsection (G)(1) of this section shall be apportioned among each of the upright members.

3.    Any wood used in a base shall be treated against water damage and insect assault.


[IMAGE]


H.    Manual changeable copy signs shall be designed to minimize the opportunity for unauthorized personnel to change the sign copy.

I.    Electronic changeable copy signs are permitted in business centers only, either as separate signs or as part of a larger sign. The approval authority may impose conditions of approval regarding the frequency of copy change, the hours of operation, and the methods by which the message is changed in order to assure compliance with the standards of this section and this chapter. Electronic changeable copy signs are subject to the following requirements:

1.    The sign face for the electronic changeable copy sign or portion of a sign may not exceed 24 square feet; provided, however, that electronic changeable copy signs with greater than 24 square feet may be approved through the conditional use process.

2.    The design and placement of the sign shall not adversely affect vehicular and pedestrian safety.

3.    The sign shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.

J.    Where both sides of a sign may be viewed from a right-of-way, the signs shall be double-faced. 

K.    Signs in the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District. 

1.     Signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the square footage of the front elevation. The calculation of allowable signage is explained in CDC 52.300. The sign(s) shall be proportionate to buildings and signs on adjacent buildings. The “10 percent” shall be broken up into multiple signs. The sign(s) shall be mounted or painted on the second floor, on the valance of the awning, on the windows at pedestrian level, or on four-by-four awning posts. Signs shall not be of the internally lit can type or channel light type. No backlit awnings are allowed. Illumination by spotlight is permitted. Neon signs are permitted only inside the windows. No flashing signs are allowed. By temporary sign permit only, neon colored lettering or designs painted on windows or on paper or banners in the windows are allowed, but discouraged. Small signs or plaques which describe the building in a historical sense are exempt from the allowable square footage restrictions.


[IMAGE]


2.    Sign type face. Antique lettering as shown in the illustration is required. Variations are permitted where the lettering would not clash with the predominant font or style. “Gay Nineties” or “P.T. Barnum” type styles and other exaggerated styles are discouraged. Lettering may be horizontal, vertical, or slanting up from lower left to upper right. Semi-circle designs on windows are permitted. Window lettering should be white, black, or gold with black shading.


[IMAGE]


3.    Temporary signs. Temporary A-frame signs are allowed without a permit; however, they shall be designed to be consistent with the sign and type face provisions. (Ord. 1539, 2006; Ord. 1604 § 48, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 8, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 22, 2014; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1675 § 41, 2018)


52.300 PERMANENT SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS

 

	 	 	 	FREESTANDING SIGNS	ON-WALL SIGNS	PROJECTING SIGNS4

	 	City Appvl. Reqd.	Illumination	No. Allowed	Max. Sq. Ft.	Max Ht. (ft.)	ROW Setback (ft.)	No. Allowed	Max Sq. Ft.	Max Ht. (ft.)	No. Allowed	Max Sq. Ft.

	Residential Uses Including Home Occupations	No	No	1	2	4	5	or 1^	2	12	n/a	n/a

	Multi-family Complex	Yes	Yes	2	24 total*	8	5	or 2^	24 total*	12	n/a	n/a

	Subdivision Monument	Yes	Yes	5 per subdivision	32 total*	8	5	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a

	Industrial Zone Uses	Yes	Yes	10	32	8	5	3	10%	25	n/a	n/a

	Commercial Uses in Residential Zone	Yes	Yes	1	16	8	10	2	5%*	12	n/a	n/a

	Commercial Zone	Yes	Yes	11	322	8	5	3	10%*	25	1 sign per each business frontage with a customer entrance4	12

	Business Center	Yes	Yes	1	1503	20	15	3	10%*	25	1 sign per each business frontage with a customer entrance4	12

	Business Center Entryway	Yes	Yes	1 per entry	4	3	5	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a

	Public Uses	Yes	Yes	15	24	20	5	No limit	18 total	25	n/a	n/a

Notes for Permanent Sign Design Standards

* To calculate maximum area, numbers followed with the word “total” are the maximum total area of all signs combined. Standards expressed as a percentage represent the allowed percentage of area on a single building face that may be used as a wall sign. For example, a wall 10 feet tall by 30 feet wide has 300 square feet. If the standard is 10 percent, signs totaling 30 square feet are permitted. The maximum percentage is for the building – a building with multiple occupants is restricted to the stated percentage per building, not per occupant. 

^ For number of signs allowed, “or 1” and “or 2” designate that the total number of freestanding and wall signs cannot exceed the number stated. If the standard is “or 1,” the applicant may have one freestanding sign or one wall sign, but not both.

1Gas stations may have two freestanding signs.

2Restaurants with drive-through or take-out windows may have an additional 32 square feet.

3Up to 35 percent of the total sign area may be used as a changeable copy sign. Where business centers are located within 200 feet of I-205 right-of-way, the freestanding sign may be freeway-oriented. Freeway-oriented signs shall have a maximum total sign area of 210 square feet and a maximum height of 20 feet above the grade of the nearest lane or I-205 or 60 feet, whichever is less. Freeway-oriented signs shall be oriented to view from I-205. Freeway-oriented signs shall not be smaller than 80 square feet. The approval authority may allow a 10 percent increase in the total square footage in order to accommodate unique design problems.

4Projecting signs shall not extend above the roofline at the wall or the top of a parapet wall, whichever is higher. They shall not be located within 20 feet of another projecting sign in the same horizontal plane or project within two feet of the curb or, if there is no curb, the edge of the pavement. All projecting signs shall have clearance above the sidewalk consistent with CDC 52.210(D). Any illumination shall be external.

5Parks may have two signs per frontage. Signs in parks directed at pedestrians or cyclists within the parks are not limited in number or size. Schools may have two signs.

N/a means not applicable. (Ord. 1539, 2006; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 49, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 9, 2013)


52.310 TEMPORARY SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS

 

	 	 	 	FREESTANDING SIGNS	ON WALL SIGNS

	 	City Appvl. Reqd.	Illumination	No. Allwd.	Max. Sq. Ft.	Max. Ht. (ft.)	ROW setback (ft.)

See Figure 52-8 if ROW location unknown	No. Allwd.	Max. Sq. Ft.	Max. Ht. (ft.)

	Residential uses	No	No	5	24 total*	7	1	1	4	12

	Examples include: house for sale, apartment for rent, condo for lease signs (once these units are built), political signs, etc.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Commercial/Industrial Uses including religious institutions (signs per each business) in:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Non-Business Center or GC/OBC/NC zones (less than 4-acre shopping center)	Yes	No	1	32 total*	5	1	1	32	25

	Business Center

Shopping centers greater than 4 acres. (Examples include: Cascade Summit, Albertsons Shopping Center, 10th St. and 8th Ave. West side of 10th St., Bolton Shopping Center, Robinwood Shopping Center north of Hidden Springs Road.)	Yes	No	1	32 total*	5	1	2	32	25

	Public Uses	Yes	No	5	32 total*	25	1	No limit	32 total	25

	(including government buildings, schools, etc.)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Undeveloped/Developing Property Less than 1 Acre	No	No	2	6 each sign	9	1	 	 	 

	Applies to businesses without a certificate of occupancy or vacant/undeveloped subdivisions. Once built or after obtaining a certificate of occupancy, the residential, commercial and public use criteria for temporary signage listed above shall apply.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Undeveloped/Developing Property More than 1 Acre	No	No	2	24 sq. ft. max. each sign	12	20	n/a	n/a	n/a

	Applies to businesses without a certificate of occupancy or vacant/undeveloped subdivisions. Once built or after obtaining a certificate of occupancy, the residential, commercial and public use criteria for temporary signage listed above shall apply.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

Notes for Temporary Sign Dimensional Standards

*Total square footage of all signs on site.

1Temporary signs are limited to 60 days per calendar year. The 60-day period for temporary signs means that a business, for example, only has 60 days in total, during the calendar year, for any and all temporary signs. You may not have one sign for 60 days and then a different temporary sign for yet another 60 days. Also, the 60 days may be broken into shorter periods of time (e.g., 30 days at Christmas and 30 days in mid-summer). The specific dates must be on the application.

Freestanding temporary signs shall be located within 10 feet of the business structure. For business centers, a maximum of two temporary signs may be located outside of the 10-foot limit, but must be located on the same tax lot as the business. Freestanding temporary signs may remain in place until the close of the event (e.g., sale or lease of the building, an open house, or an election, etc.). 

2Temporary signs (including signs that are typically allowed in commercial, public and residential areas) may be located, with the permission of the property owner of the property fronting upon the street where the sign is to be placed, two feet from the adjacent sidewalk where one exists, or three feet from the edge of pavement where no sidewalk exists for an adjacent public right-of-way. This distance shall be measured perpendicularly from the appropriate right-of-way feature (e.g., sidewalk or the edge of pavement). Temporary signs shall also not be located within 10 feet of the intersection of two public rights-of-way, measured from either the edge of pavement or, if a sidewalk exists, the edge of sidewalk. The entire sign must meet these setback standards. No signs are allowed in the public right-of-way. 

3“N/A” means that this standard is not applicable for this type of sign or that no sign is allowed.

4All temporary signage must conform with the clear vision requirements of Chapter 42 CDC.

5Temporary Sunday signs are permitted subject to the requirements of CDC 52.109(E). 

FIGURE 52-8: ILLUSTRATION OF PROPER TEMPORARY SIGN PLACEMENT

Temporary Sign = •


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1506, 2004; Ord. 1539, 2006; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1599 § 4, 2011)


52.400 NEWLY ANNEXED LAND

All signs on land annexed to the City of West Linn shall comply with the relevant provisions of the sign ordinance within 30 days of the completion of the annexation. (Ord. 1180, 1986)


Chapter 53 SIDEWALK USE

Sections:

53.010    PURPOSE

53.020    PERMIT REQUIRED

53.030    STANDARDS

53.040    TIME LIMIT AND REVOCATION


53.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the display of merchandise or the service of food or beverages on sidewalks in the commercial zones. The standards contained in this chapter are intended to ensure that the use of sidewalks will not have a disruptive effect on pedestrians, vehicular traffic, or businesses. The provisions of this chapter apply to sidewalks in the public right-of-way.


53.020 PERMIT REQUIRED

A.    All sidewalk uses shall require a permit.

B.    Sidewalk use application shall be initiated by the business owner or authorized agent.

C.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee.

D.    The sidewalk use permit is a decision made by the Planning Director under provisions of CDC 99.060(A), except that no notice shall be required.

E.    The Planning Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for a sidewalk use permit by standards set forth in CDC 53.030.

F.    The Director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council as provided in CDC 99.240(A). (Ord. 1474, 2001)


53.030 STANDARDS

Displays and tables may be placed, and customer service may be conducted, on sidewalks subject to the following: 

A.     A pedestrian accessway, a minimum of four feet in width, shall be maintained free of obstructions on all sidewalks.

B.    Displays, tables, and customer service shall not extend beyond the frontage associated with the products or service, with the exception that businesses at street intersections with extended sidewalks may use the extended sidewalk consistent with this section.

C.     Permission from the Oregon Department of Transportation for use of sidewalks in state right-of-way. 

See CDC 52.310 regarding temporary signs and Chapter 42 CDC regarding clear vision triangle requirements. (Ord. 1613 § 10, 2013)


53.040 TIME LIMIT AND REVOCATION

A.    The Director may revoke a sidewalk use permit if any standards of CDC 53.030 or conditions of approval are violated. A sidewalk use permit shall be void one year following issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1172, 1985)


Chapter 54 LANDSCAPING

Sections:

54.010    PURPOSE

54.020    APPROVAL CRITERIA

54.030    PLANTING STRIPS FOR MODIFIED AND NEW STREETS

54.040    INSTALLATION

54.050    PROTECTION OF STREET TREES

54.060    MAINTENANCE

54.070    SPECIFICATION SUMMARY


54.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the design, selection, installation, and maintenance of landscaping. The landscaping is intended to provide an attractive natural balance to built areas, to reduce runoff, to provide shade, to screen or buffer uses, and to frame or complement views. The chapter also encourages the selection of plant materials that will provide long-term growth, a balance of year-round coverage and greenery, and a variety of species for a more healthy, disease-resistant plant inventory.


54.020 APPROVAL CRITERIA

A.    Every development proposal requires inventorying existing site conditions which include trees and landscaping. In designing the new project, every reasonable attempt should be made to preserve and protect existing trees and to incorporate them into the new landscape plan. Similarly, significant landscaping (e.g., bushes, shrubs) should be integrated. The rationale is that saving a 30-foot-tall mature tree helps maintain the continuity of the site, they are qualitatively superior to two or three two-inch caliper street trees, they provide immediate micro-climate benefits (e.g., shade), they soften views of the street, and they can increase the attractiveness, marketability, and value of the development.

B.    To encourage tree preservation, the parking requirement may be reduced by one space for every significant tree that is preserved in the parking lot area for a maximum reduction of 10 percent of the required parking. The City Parks Supervisor or Arborist shall determine the significance of the tree and/or landscaping to determine eligibility for these reductions.

C.    Developers must also comply with the municipal code chapter on tree protection.

D.    Heritage trees. Heritage trees are trees which, because of their age, type, notability, or historical association, are of special importance. Heritage trees are trees designated by the City Council following review of a nomination. A heritage tree may not be removed without a public hearing at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of removal. Development proposals involving land with heritage tree(s) shall be required to protect and save the tree(s). Further discussion of heritage trees is found in the municipal code.

E.    Landscaping – By type, location and amount.

1.    Residential uses (non-single-family). A minimum of 25 percent of the gross area including parking, loading and service areas shall be landscaped, and may include the open space and recreation area requirements under CDC 55.100. Parking lot landscaping may be counted in the percentage.

2.    Non-residential uses. A minimum of 20 percent of the gross site area shall be landscaped. Parking lot landscaping may be counted in the percentage.

3.    All uses (residential uses (non-single-family) and non-residential uses):

a.    The landscaping shall be located in defined landscaped areas which are uniformly distributed throughout the parking or loading area. There shall be one shade tree planted for every eight parking spaces. These trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot to provide shade. Parking lots with over 20 spaces shall have a minimum 10 percent of the interior of the parking lot devoted to landscaping. Pedestrian walkways in the landscaped areas are not to be counted in the percentage. The perimeter landscaping, explained in subsection (E)(3)(d) of this section, shall not be included in the 10 percent figure. Parking lots with 10 to 20 spaces shall have a minimum five percent of the interior of the parking lot devoted to landscaping. The perimeter landscaping, as explained above, shall not be included in the five percent. Parking lots with fewer than 10 spaces shall have the standard perimeter landscaping and at least two shade trees. Non-residential parking areas paved with a permeable parking surface may reduce the required minimum interior landscaping by one-third for the area with the permeable parking surface only.

b.    The landscaped areas shall not have a width of less than five feet.

c.    The soils, site, proposed soil amendments, and proposed irrigation system shall be appropriate for the healthy and long-term maintenance of the proposed plant species.

d.    A parking, loading, or service area which abuts a street shall be set back from the right-of-way line by perimeter landscaping in the form of a landscaped strip at least 10 feet in width. When a parking, loading, or service area or driveway is contiguous to an adjoining lot or parcel, there shall be an intervening five-foot-wide landscape strip. The landscaped area shall contain:


[IMAGE]


1)    Street trees spaced as appropriate to the species, not to exceed 50 feet apart on the average;

2)    Shrubs, not to reach a height greater than three feet, six inches, spaced no more than five feet apart on the average; or

3)    Vegetative ground cover such as grass, wildflowers, or other landscape material to cover 100 percent of the exposed ground within two growing seasons. No bark mulch shall be allowed except under the canopy of low level shrubs.

e.    If over 50 percent of the lineal frontage of the main street or arterial adjacent to the development site comprises parking lot, the landscape strip between the right-of-way and parking lot shall be increased to 15 feet in width and shall include terrain variations (e.g., one-foot-high berm) plus landscaping. This extra requirement only applies to one street frontage.

f.    A parking, loading, or service area which abuts a property line shall be separated from the property line by a landscaped area at least five feet in width and which shall act as a screen and noise buffer, and the adequacy of the screen and buffer shall be determined by the criteria set forth in CDC 55.100(C) and (D), except where shared parking is approved under CDC 46.050.

g.    All areas in a parking lot not used for parking, maneuvering, or circulation shall be landscaped.

h.    The landscaping in parking areas shall not obstruct lines of sight for safe traffic operation.

i.    Outdoor storage areas, service areas (loading docks, refuse deposits, and delivery areas), and above-ground utility facilities shall be buffered and screened to obscure their view from adjoining properties and to reduce noise levels to acceptable levels at the property line. The adequacy of the buffer and screening shall be determined by the criteria set forth in CDC 55.100(C)(1).

j.    Crime prevention shall be considered and plant materials shall not be located in a manner which prohibits surveillance of public and semi-public areas (shared or common areas).

k.    Irrigation facilities shall be located so that landscaped areas can be properly maintained and so that the facilities do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation.

l.    For commercial, office, multi-family, and other sites, the developer shall select trees that possess the following characteristics:

1)    Provide generous “spreading” canopy for shade.

2)    Roots do not break up adjacent paving.

3)    Tree canopy spread starts at least six feet up from grade in, or adjacent to, parking lots, roads, or sidewalks unless the tree is columnar in nature.

4)    No sticky leaves or sap-dripping trees (no honey-dew excretion).

5)    No seed pods or fruit-bearing trees (flowering trees are acceptable).

6)    Disease-resistant.

7)    Compatible with planter size.

8)    Drought-tolerant unless irrigation is provided.

9)    Attractive foliage or form all seasons.

m.    Plant materials (shrubs, ground cover, etc.) shall be selected for their appropriateness to the site, drought tolerance, year-round greenery and coverage, staggered flowering periods, and avoidance of nuisance plants (Scotch broom, etc.).

F.    Landscaping (trees) in new subdivision.

1.    Street trees shall be planted by the City within the planting strips (minimum six-foot width) of any new subdivision in conformity with the street tree plan for the area, and in accordance with the planting specifications of the Parks and Recreation Department. All trees shall be planted during the first planting season after occupancy. In selecting types of trees, the City Arborist may determine the appropriateness of the trees to local conditions and whether that tree has been overplanted, and whether alternate species should be selected. Also see subsection (C) of this section.

2.    The cost of street trees shall be paid by the developer of the subdivision.

3.    The fee per street tree, as established by the City, shall be based upon the following:

a.    The cost of the tree;

b.    Labor and equipment for original placement;

c.    Regular maintenance necessary for tree establishment during the initial two-year period following the City schedule of maintenance; and

d.    A two-year replacement warranty based on the City’s established failure rate. 

G.    Landscaping requirements in water resource areas (WRAs). Pursuant to CDC 32.110(E)(3) the requirements of this chapter relating to total site landscaping, landscaping buffers, landscaping around parking lots, and landscaping the parking lot interior may be waived or reduced in a WRA application without a variance being required. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1623 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 36, 2014)


54.030 PLANTING STRIPS FOR MODIFIED AND NEW STREETS

All proposed changes in width in a public street right-of-way or any proposed street improvement shall, where feasible, include allowances for planting strips. Plans and specifications for planting such areas shall be integrated into the general plan of street improvements. This chapter requires any multi-family, commercial, or public facility which causes change in public right-of-way or street improvement to comply with the street tree planting plan and standards.


54.040 INSTALLATION

A.    All landscaping shall be installed according to accepted planting procedures.

B.    The soil and plant materials shall be of good quality.

C.    Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

D.    Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the landscaping requirements have been met or other arrangements have been made and approved by the City such as the posting of a bond.


54.050 PROTECTION OF STREET TREES

Street trees may not be topped or trimmed unless approval is granted by the Parks Supervisor or, in emergency cases, when a tree imminently threatens power lines.


54.060 MAINTENANCE

A.    The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris.

B.    All plant growth in interior landscaped areas shall be controlled by pruning, trimming, or otherwise so that:

1.    It will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public utility;

2.    It will not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access; and

3.    It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced visibility.


54.070 SPECIFICATION SUMMARY

 

	Area/Location	Landscaping Req’d.

	1.	Between parking lot and R-O-W. CDC 54.020(E)(3)(d).	10 ft.

	2.	Between parking lot and other lot. CDC 54.020(E)(3)(b).	5 ft.

	3.	Between parking lot and R-O-W if parking lot comprises more than 50 percent of main R-O-W frontage. CDC 54.020(E)(3)(e).	15 ft.

	4.	Percentage of residential/multi-family site to be landscaped. CDC 54.020(E)(1).	25%

	5.	Percentage of non-residential (commercial/industrial/office) site to be landscaped. CDC 54.020(E)(2).	20%

	6.	Percentage of 10 – 20 car parking lot to be landscaped (excluding perimeter). CDC 54.020(E)(3)(a).	5%

	7.	Percentage of 1 – 9 car parking lot to be landscaped (excluding perimeter). CDC 54.020(E)(3)(a).	0%

	8.	Percentage of 20+ car parking lot to be landscaped (excluding perimeter). CDC 54.020(E)(3)(a).	10%

(Ord. 1675 § 42, 2018)


Chapter 55 DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

55.010    PURPOSE AND INTENT – GENERAL

55.020    CLASSES OF DESIGN REVIEW

55.025    EXEMPTIONS

55.030    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

55.040    EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

55.050    DESIGN REVIEW AMENDMENT TRIGGER

55.060    STAGED OR PHASED DEVELOPMENT

55.070    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

55.085    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED AND WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS

55.090    APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS I DESIGN REVIEW

55.100    APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS II DESIGN REVIEW

55.110    SITE ANALYSIS

55.120    SITE PLAN

55.125    TRANSPORTATION ANALYSIS

55.130    GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLANS

55.140    ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS

55.150    LANDSCAPE PLAN

55.170    EXCEPTIONS TO UNDERLYING ZONE, YARD, PARKING, SIGN PROVISIONS, AND LANDSCAPING PROVISIONS

55.180    MAINTENANCE

55.190    SHARED OPEN SPACE

55.195    ANNEXATION AND STREET LIGHTS


55.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT – GENERAL

The purpose of the design review provisions is to establish a process and standards for the review of development proposals in order to conserve and enhance the appearance of the City and to promote functional, safe, and innovative site development. Attention will be paid to the proposal’s scale, layout and design, its compatibility with the surrounding natural environment, and the character of the surrounding neighborhood or area. The intent is to ensure that there is general compatibility between adjoining uses, that private and common outdoor space is provided, that vehicular access and circulation are safe, and that areas of public use are made aesthetically attractive and safe. Also of concern are the needs of persons with disabilities.

Developers of multi-family, industrial, commercial, office, and public building projects are required to take steps to reduce reliance on the automobile by, in part, encouraging other modes of transportation such as transit, bicycles, and foot traffic, and through building orientation or location. (Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


55.020 CLASSES OF DESIGN REVIEW

A.    Class I Design Review. The following are subject to Class I Design Review:

1.    Modification of an office, commercial, industrial, public or multi-family structure for purposes of enhancing the aesthetics of the building and not increasing the interior usable space (e.g., covered walkways or entryways, addition of unoccupied features such as cupolas, clock towers, etc.).

2.    Significant road realignment (when not part of a subdivision or partition plat process). “Significant” shall be defined by the length of the realignment and/or extent of redesign, and/or the natural features or manmade structures that will be impacted or removed.

3.    Addition or reduction of less than five percent of total square footage of a commercial, office, public, multi-family, or industrial building.

4.    Modification of a landscape plan (including water features, ponds, pergolas, arbors, artwork, sculptings, etc.).

5.    Minor modifications and/or upgrades of pump stations, reservoirs, and storm detention facilities.

6.    Americans with Disability Act compliance that significantly alters the exterior of the building (ramps are exempt).

7.    Freestanding art and statuary over five feet tall.

8.    Other land uses and activities may be added if the Planning Director makes written findings that the activity/use will not increase off-site impacts and is consistent with the type and/or scale of activities/uses listed above.

9.    No design review is required if the applicant proposes to repair or replace one of the listed items. The Planning Director shall make the determination of whether an applicant is proposing a repair or replacement. However, Class I design review applies when one of the following improvements is part of a minor redesign or remodel.

a.    Sidewalks on private property.

b.    Loading docks.

c.    Addition or reduction of parking stalls.

d.    Revised parking alignment.

e.    Revised circulation.

f.    Revised points of ingress/egress to a site.

g.    Heating, ventilation, and air conditioners (HVAC) that are visible from the public right-of-way.

B.    Class II Design Review. Class II design review applies to all uses/activities except those uses/activities listed under Class I design review, and the exemptions of CDC 55.025. Class II design review applies to the proposed improvements listed in this section when the proposed improvement (e.g., new sidewalk) is part of a major commercial, office, industrial, public, or multi-family construction project (e.g., a new shopping center). (Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1604 § 50, 2011; Ord. 1622 § 20, 2014)


55.025 EXEMPTIONS

The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Detached single-family residential construction, except as indicated otherwise in the base zone or this chapter;

B.    Accessory structures;

C.    One to two duplexes or single-family attached structures except as indicated otherwise in the base zone or this chapter;

D.    Architectural replacements in kind, or replacement of building materials that are equal or superior to existing materials (in terms of performance or quality) but that do not alter the architectural style of the structure. Retrofitted awnings, changes in color schemes, wall art, and freestanding statuary or art under five feet tall are exempt from design review, but shall be subject to Planning Director review under the provisions of CDC 99.060(A)(2), prescribed conditions, and the approval criteria of CDC 55.100(B)(6)(a) and (b). (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1604 § 51, 2011; Ord. 1675 § 43, 2018)


55.030 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A pre-application conference is required before submitting a development plan application for design review as provided by CDC 99.030(B).

B.    The application shall be submitted by the record owner(s) of the property, authorized agent, or condemnor.

C.    Action on the development plan application shall be as provided by Chapter 99 CDC, Procedures for Decision-Making: Quasi-Judicial, and the following: 

1.    The Planning Director for Class I design review applications, or Planning Commission for Class II design review applications, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on findings related to the applicable criteria set forth in CDC 99.110 and this chapter. 

2.    A decision by the Planning Director may be reviewed by the City Council.

D.    Substantial modifications made to the approved development plan will require reapplication (e.g., more or fewer lots, different architectural design, etc.). (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1597 § 14, 2010)


55.040 EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

If substantial construction has not occurred within three years from the date of approval of the development plan, the approved proposal will be void, unless an extension is granted under CDC 99.325. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


55.050 DESIGN REVIEW AMENDMENT TRIGGER

Amendments to design review shall be required when 10 percent or more of the housing type changes (e.g., from single-family units to multi-family units) from the tentatively approved design review plan, or when there is more than a 10 percent change in the number of units, or when the layout of streets and lots significantly changes, or adjusting more than 20 percent of the building footprint or site plan, or significant changes to the architecture that modify the style, mass, or result in elimination of significant design features. Changes in color or materials would not require an amendment unless the colors were non-earth tones and the materials were of poorer quality (for example, going from tile roof to composition roofing) than originally approved. Changes to the project/site plan to meet conditions of approval or legislative changes shall not trigger an amendment. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


55.060 STAGED OR PHASED DEVELOPMENT

The applicant may elect to develop the site in stages. Staged development shall be subject to the provisions of CDC 99.125.


55.070 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

A.    The design review application shall be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s agent, or condemnor.

B.    A pre-application conference, per CDC 99.030(B), shall be a prerequisite to the filing of an application.

C.    Documentation of any required meeting with the respective City-recognized neighborhood association per CDC 99.038. 

D.    The applicant shall submit a completed application form and:

1.    The development plan for a Class I design review shall contain the following elements:

a.    A site analysis (CDC 55.110) only if the site is undeveloped;

b.    A site plan (CDC 55.120);

c.    Architectural drawings, including building envelopes and all elevations (CDC 55.140) only if architectural work is proposed; and

d.    Pursuant to CDC 55.085, additional submittal material may be required.

One original application form must be submitted. One copy at the original scale and one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. One copy of all other items must be submitted. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the City. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Community Development Department.

2.    The development plan for a Class II design review shall contain the following elements:

a.    A site analysis (CDC 55.110);

b.    A site plan (CDC 55.120);

c.    A grading plan (CDC 55.130);

d.    Architectural drawings, indicating floor plan and elevation (CDC 55.140);

e.    A landscape plan (CDC 55.150);

f.    A utility plan appropriate to respond to the approval criteria of CDC 55.100(I)(1) through (5) relating to streets, drainage, municipal water, sanitary sewers, solid waste, and recycling storage;

g.    A light coverage plan with photometric data, including the location and type of outdoor lighting, with specific consideration given to compliance with CDC 55.100(J) pertaining to crime prevention and, if applicable, CDC 46.150(A)(13) pertaining to parking lot lighting;

h.    If staff determines before or during the pre-application conference that the land use is expected to generate noise that may exceed DEQ standards, the application shall include a noise study conducted by a licensed acoustical engineer that demonstrates that the application and associated noise sources will meet DEQ standards. Typical noise sources of concern include, but are not limited to, vehicle drive-throughs, parking lots, HVAC units, and public address systems; and 

i.    Documents as required per the Tree Technical Manual. 

3.    A narrative, based on the standards contained in this code, which supports any requested exceptions as provided under CDC 55.170.

4.    Submit full written responses to approval criteria of CDC 55.100 for Class II design review, or CDC 55.090 for Class I design review, plus all applicable referenced approval criteria.

E.    The applicant shall submit samples of all exterior building materials and colors in the case of new buildings or building remodeling.

F.    The applicant shall pay the required deposit and fee. (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1613 § 11, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 § 14, 2014)


55.085 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED AND WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS

A.    The Planning Director may require additional information as part of the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(A).

B.    The Planning Director may waive any requirements for the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(B) and (C).


55.090 APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS I DESIGN REVIEW

The Planning Director shall make a finding with respect to the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying a Class I design review application:

A.    The provisions of the following sections shall be met:

1.    CDC 55.100(B)(1) through (4), Relationship to the natural and physical environment, shall apply except in those cases where the proposed development site is substantially developed and built out with no remaining natural physical features that would be impacted.

2.    CDC 55.100(B)(5) and (6), architecture, et al., shall only apply in those cases that involve exterior architectural construction, remodeling, or changes.

3.    Pursuant to CDC 55.085, the Director may require additional information and responses to additional sections of the approval criteria of this section depending upon the type of application.

4.    The design standards or requirements identified in the base zone shall apply.

B.    An application may be approved only if adequate public facilities will be available to provide service to the property at the time of occupancy.

C.    The Planning Director shall determine the applicability of the approval criteria in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1675 § 44, 2018)


55.100 APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS II DESIGN REVIEW

The approval authority shall make findings with respect to the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying a Class II design review application:

A.    The provisions of the following chapters shall be met:

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

3.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

4.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

5.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

6.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

7.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

8.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

9.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

B.    Relationship to the natural and physical environment.

1.    The buildings and other site elements shall be designed and located so that all heritage trees, as defined in the municipal code, shall be saved. Diseased heritage trees, as determined by the City Arborist, may be removed at his/her direction.

2.    All heritage trees, as defined in the municipal code, all trees and clusters of trees (“cluster” is defined as three or more trees with overlapping driplines; however, native oaks need not have an overlapping dripline) that are considered significant by the City Arborist, either individually or in consultation with certified arborists or similarly qualified professionals, based on accepted arboricultural standards including consideration of their size, type, location, health, long term survivability, and/or numbers, shall be protected pursuant to the criteria of subsections (B)(2)(a) through (f) of this section. In cases where there is a difference of opinion on the significance of a tree or tree cluster, the City Arborist’s findings shall prevail. It is important to acknowledge that all trees are not significant and, further, that this code section will not necessarily protect all trees deemed significant.

a.    Non-residential and residential projects on Type I and II lands shall protect all heritage trees and all significant trees and tree clusters by limiting development in the protected area. The protected area includes the protected tree, its dripline, and an additional 10 feet beyond the dripline, as depicted in the figure below. Development of Type I and II lands shall require the careful layout of streets, driveways, building pads, lots, and utilities to avoid heritage trees and significant trees and tree clusters, and other natural resources pursuant to this code. The method for delineating the protected trees or tree clusters (“dripline plus 10 feet”) is explained in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section. Exemptions of subsections (B)(2)(c), (e), and (f) of this section shall apply.


[IMAGE]


PROTECTED AREA = DRIPLINE + 10 FEET

b.    Non-residential and residential projects on non-Type I and II lands shall set aside up to 20 percent of the protected areas for significant trees and tree clusters, plus any heritage trees. Therefore, in the event that the City Arborist determines that a significant tree cluster exists at a development site, then up to 20 percent of the non-Type I and II lands shall be devoted to the protection of those trees by limiting development in the protected areas. The exact percentage is determined by establishing the driplines of the trees or tree clusters that are to be protected. In order to protect the roots which typically extend further, an additional 10-foot measurement beyond the dripline shall be added. The square footage of the area inside this “dripline plus 10 feet” measurement shall be the basis for calculating the percentage (see figure below). The City Arborist will identify which tree(s) are to be protected. Development of non-Type I and II lands shall also require the careful layout of streets, driveways, building pads, lots, and utilities to avoid significant trees, tree clusters, heritage trees, and other natural resources pursuant to this code. Exemptions of subsections (B)(2)(c), (e), and (f) of this section shall apply. Please note that in the event that more than 20 percent of the non-Type I and II lands comprise significant trees or tree clusters, the developer shall not be required to save the excess trees, but is encouraged to do so.


[IMAGE]


E.G., DRIPLINE + 10 FT. AREA = 2,500 SQ. FT. OR 18% OF TOTAL NON-TYPE I AND II LAND DENSITY CALCULATIONS FOR THIS PARCEL WILL BE BASED ON REMAINING NET SQ. FOOTAGE OF SITE (EXCLUDING THE 2,500 SQ. FT.)

c.    Where stubouts of streets occur on abutting properties, and the extension of those streets will mean the loss of significant trees, tree clusters, or heritage trees, it is understood that tree loss may be inevitable. In these cases, the objective shall be to minimize tree loss. These provisions shall also apply in those cases where access, per construction code standards, to a lot or parcel is blocked by a row or screen of significant trees or tree clusters.

d.    For both non-residential and residential development, the layout shall achieve at least 70 percent of maximum density for the developable net area. The developable net area excludes all Type I and II lands and up to 20 percent of the remainder of the site for the purpose of protection of stands or clusters of trees as defined in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

e.    For arterial and collector street projects, including Oregon Department of Transportation street improvements, the roads and graded areas shall avoid tree clusters where possible. Significant trees, tree clusters, and heritage tree loss may occur, however, but shall be minimized.

f.    If the protection of significant tree(s) or tree clusters is to occur in an area of grading that is necessary for the development of street grades, per City construction codes, which will result in an adjustment in the grade of over or under two feet, which will then threaten the health of the tree(s), the applicant will submit evidence to the Planning Director that all reasonable alternative grading plans have been considered and cannot work. The applicant will then submit a mitigation plan to the City Arborist to compensate for the removal of the tree(s) on an “inch by inch” basis (e.g., a 48-inch Douglas fir could be replaced by 12 trees, each four-inch). The mix of tree sizes and types shall be approved by the City Arborist.

3.    The topography and natural drainage shall be preserved to the greatest degree possible.

4.    The structures shall not be located in areas subject to slumping and sliding. The Comprehensive Plan Background Report’s Hazard Map, or updated material as available and as deemed acceptable by the Planning Director, shall be the basis for preliminary determination.

5.    There shall be adequate distance between on-site buildings and on-site and off-site buildings on adjoining properties to provide for adequate light and air circulation and for fire protection.

6.    Architecture.

a.    The proposed structure(s) scale shall be compatible with the existing structure(s) on site and on adjoining sites. Contextual design is required. Contextual design means respecting and incorporating prominent architectural styles, building lines, roof forms, rhythm of windows, building scale and massing of surrounding buildings in the proposed structure. The materials and colors shall be complementary to the surrounding buildings.


[IMAGE]


b.    While there has been discussion in Chapter 24 CDC about transition, it is appropriate that new buildings should architecturally transition in terms of bulk and mass to work with, or fit, adjacent existing buildings. This transition can be accomplished by selecting designs that “step down” or “step up” from small to big structures and vice versa (see figure below). Transitions may also take the form of carrying building patterns and lines (e.g., parapets, windows, etc.) from the existing building to the new one.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


c.    Contrasting architecture shall only be permitted when the design is manifestly superior to adjacent architecture in terms of creativity, design, and workmanship, and/or it is adequately separated from other buildings by distance, screening, grade variations, or is part of a development site that is large enough to set its own style of architecture.

d.    Human scale is a term that seeks to accommodate the users of the building and the notion that buildings should be designed around the human scale (i.e., their size and the average range of their perception). Human scale shall be accommodated in all designs by, for example, multi-light windows that are broken up into numerous panes, intimately scaled entryways, and visual breaks (exaggerated eaves, indentations, ledges, parapets, awnings, engaged columns, etc.) in the facades of buildings, both vertically and horizontally.

The human scale is enhanced by bringing the building and its main entrance up to the edge of the sidewalk. It creates a more dramatic and interesting streetscape and improves the “height and width” ratio referenced in this section.


[IMAGE]


human scale is captured in this example

e.    The main front elevation of commercial and office buildings shall provide at least 60 percent windows or transparency at the pedestrian level to create more interesting streetscape and window shopping opportunities. One side elevation shall provide at least 30 percent transparency. Any additional side or rear elevation, which is visible from a collector road or greater classification, shall also have at least 30 percent transparency. Transparency on other elevations is optional. The transparency is measured in lineal fashion. For example, a 100-foot-long building elevation shall have at least 60 feet (60 percent of 100 feet) in length of windows. The window height shall be, at minimum, three feet tall. The exception to transparency would be cases where demonstrated functional constraints or topography restrict that elevation from being used. When this exemption is applied to the main front elevation, the square footage of transparency that would ordinarily be required by the above formula shall be installed on the remaining elevations at pedestrian level in addition to any transparency required by a side elevation, and vice versa. The rear of the building is not required to include transparency. The transparency must be flush with the building elevation.


[IMAGE]


60 percent of lineal street facing or main elevation is windows. 30 percent of one side elevation is windows. You may transfer windows from the side to front, or vice versa.


[IMAGE]


(Windows not at eye level and/or not flush with building.)

f.    Variations in depth and roof line are encouraged for all elevations.

To vary the otherwise blank wall of most rear elevations, continuous flat elevations of over 100 feet in length should be avoided by indents or variations in the wall. The use of decorative brick, masonry, or stone insets and/or designs is encouraged. Another way to vary or soften this elevation is through terrain variations such as an undulating grass area with trees to provide vertical relief.

g.    Consideration of the micro-climate (e.g., sensitivity to wind, sun angles, shade, etc.) shall be made for building users, pedestrians, and transit users, including features like awnings.

h.    The vision statement identified a strong commitment to developing safe and attractive pedestrian environments with broad sidewalks, canopied with trees and awnings.


[IMAGE]


trees, awnings, and building orientation enhance micro-climate

i.    Sidewalk cafes, kiosks, vendors, and street furniture are encouraged. However, at least a four-foot-wide pedestrian accessway must be maintained per Chapter 53 CDC, Sidewalk Use.

7.    Transportation. The automobile shall be shifted from a dominant role, relative to other modes of transportation, by the following means:

a.    Commercial and office development shall be oriented to the street. At least one public entrance shall be located facing an arterial street; or, if the project does not front on an arterial, facing a collector street; or, if the project does not front on a collector, facing the local street with highest traffic levels. Parking lots shall be placed behind or to the side of commercial and office development. When a large and/or multi-building development is occurring on a large undeveloped tract (three plus acres), it is acceptable to focus internally; however, at least 20 percent of the main adjacent right-of-way shall have buildings contiguous to it unless waived per subsection (B)(7)(c) of this section. These buildings shall be oriented to the adjacent street and include pedestrian-oriented transparencies on those elevations.

For individual buildings on smaller individual lots, at least 30 lineal feet or 50 percent of the building must be adjacent to the right-of-way unless waived per subsection (B)(7)(c) of this section. The elevations oriented to the right-of-way must incorporate pedestrian-oriented transparency.

b.    Multi-family projects shall be required to keep the parking at the side or rear of the buildings or behind the building line of the structure as it would appear from the right-of-way inside the multi-family project. For any garage which is located behind the building line of the structure, but still facing the front of the structure, architectural features such as patios, patio walls, trellis, porch roofs, overhangs, pergolas, etc., shall be used to downplay the visual impact of the garage, and to emphasize the rest of the house and front entry.


[IMAGE]


The parking may be positioned inside small courtyard areas around which the units are built. These courtyard spaces encourage socialization, defensible space, and can provide a central location for landscaping, particularly trees, which can provide an effective canopy and softening effect on the courtyard in only a few years. Vehicular access and driveways through these courtyard areas is permitted.

c.    Commercial, office, and multi-family projects shall be built as close to the adjacent main right-of-way as practical to facilitate safe pedestrian and transit access. Reduced frontages by buildings on public rights-of-way may be allowed due to extreme topographic (e.g., slope, creek, wetlands, etc.) conditions or compelling functional limitations, not just inconveniences or design challenges. 

entrance from right-of-way


[IMAGE]


d.    Accessways, parking lots, and internal driveways shall accommodate pedestrian circulation and access by specially textured, colored, or clearly defined footpaths at least six feet wide. Paths shall be eight feet wide when abutting parking areas or travel lanes. Paths shall be separated from parking or travel lanes by either landscaping, planters, curbs, bollards, or raised surfaces. Sidewalks in front of storefronts on the arterials and main store entrances on the arterials identified in CDC 85.200(A)(3) shall be 12 feet wide to accommodate pedestrians, sidewalk sales, sidewalk cafes, etc. Sidewalks in front of storefronts and main store entrances in commercial/OBC zone development on local streets and collectors shall be eight feet wide.


[IMAGE]


landscaping

e.    Paths shall provide direct routes that pedestrians will use between buildings, adjacent rights-of-way, and adjacent commercial developments. They shall be clearly identified. They shall be laid out to attract use and to discourage people from cutting through parking lots and impacting environmentally sensitive areas.


[IMAGE]


direct pedestrian route required (- -)

f.    At least one entrance to the building shall be on the main street, or as close as possible to the main street. The entrance shall be designed to identify itself as a main point of ingress/egress.

g.    Where transit service exists, or is expected to exist, there shall be a main entrance within a safe and reasonable distance of the transit stop. A pathway shall be provided to facilitate a direct connection.

h.    Projects shall bring at least part of the project adjacent to or near the main street right-of-way in order to enhance the height-to-width ratio along that particular street. (The “height-to-width ratio” is an architectural term that emphasizes height or vertical dimension of buildings adjacent to streets. The higher and closer the building is, and the narrower the width of the street, the more attractive and intimate the streetscape becomes.) For every one foot in street width, the adjacent building ideally should be one to two feet higher. This ratio is considered ideal in framing and defining the streetscape.


[IMAGE]


1:1 height to width ratio is ideal

(example only)

i.    These architectural standards shall apply to public facilities such as reservoirs, water towers, treatment plants, fire stations, pump stations, power transmission facilities, etc. It is recognized that many of these facilities, due to their functional requirements, cannot readily be configured to meet these architectural standards. However, attempts shall be made to make the design sympathetic to surrounding properties by landscaping, setbacks, buffers, and all reasonable architectural means.

j.    Parking spaces at trailheads shall be located so as to preserve the view of, and access to, the trailhead entrance from the roadway. The entrance apron to the trailhead shall be marked: “No Parking,” and include design features to foster trail recognition.

C.    Compatibility between adjoining uses, buffering, and screening.

1.    In addition to the compatibility requirements contained in Chapter 24 CDC, buffering shall be provided between different types of land uses; for example, buffering between single-family homes and apartment blocks. However, no buffering is required between single-family homes and duplexes or single-family attached units. The following factors shall be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the buffer:

a.    The purpose of the buffer, for example to decrease noise levels, absorb air pollution, filter dust, or to provide a visual barrier.

b.    The size of the buffer required to achieve the purpose in terms of width and height.

c.    The direction(s) from which buffering is needed.

d.    The required density of the buffering.

e.    Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.

2.    On-site screening from view from adjoining properties of such things as service areas, storage areas, and parking lots shall be provided and the following factors will be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the screening:

a.    What needs to be screened?

b.    The direction from which it is needed.

c.    How dense the screen needs to be.

d.    Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.

e.    Whether the screening needs to be year-round.

3.    Rooftop air cooling and heating systems and other mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from adjoining properties.

D.    Privacy and noise.

1.    Structures which include residential dwelling units shall provide private outdoor areas for each ground floor unit which is screened from view from adjoining units.

2.    Residential dwelling units shall be placed on the site in areas having minimal noise exposure to the extent possible. Natural-appearing sound barriers shall be used to lessen noise impacts where noise levels exceed the noise standards contained in West Linn Municipal Code Section 5.487.

3.    Structures or on-site activity areas which generate noise, lights, or glare shall be buffered from adjoining residential uses in accordance with the standards in subsection C of this section where applicable. 

4.    Businesses or activities that can reasonably be expected to generate noise in excess of the noise standards contained in West Linn Municipal Code Section 5.487 shall undertake and submit appropriate noise studies and mitigate as necessary to comply with the code. (See CDC 55.110(B)(11) and 55.120(M).)

If the decision-making authority reasonably believes a proposed use may generate noise exceeding the standards specified in the municipal code, then the authority may require the applicant to supply professional noise studies from time to time during the user’s first year of operation to monitor compliance with City standards and permit requirements.

E.    Private outdoor area. This section only applies to multi-family projects.

1.    In addition to the requirements of residential living, unit shall have an outdoor private area (patio, terrace, porch) of not less than 48 square feet in area;

2.    The outdoor space shall be oriented towards the sun where possible; and

3.    The area shall be screened or designed to provide privacy for the users of the space.

4.    Where balconies are added to units, the balconies shall not be less than 48 square feet, if they are intended to be counted as private outdoor areas.

F.    Shared outdoor recreation areas. This section only applies to multi-family projects and projects with 10 or more duplexes or single-family attached dwellings on lots under 4,000 square feet. In those cases, shared outdoor recreation areas are calculated on the duplexes or single-family attached dwellings only. It also applies to qualifying PUDs under the provisions of CDC 24.170.

1.    In addition to the requirements of subsection E of this section, usable outdoor recreation space shall be provided in residential developments for the shared or common use of all the residents in the following amounts:

a.    Studio up to and including two-bedroom units: 200 square feet per unit.

b.    Three or more bedroom units: 300 square feet per unit.

2.    The required recreation space may be provided as follows:

a.    It may be all outdoor space; or

b.    It may be part outdoor space and part indoor space; for example, an outdoor tennis court and indoor recreation room; and

c.    Where some or all of the required recreation area is indoor, such as an indoor recreation room, then these indoor areas must be readily accessible to all residents of the development subject to clearly posted restrictions as to hours of operation and such regulations necessary for the safety of minors.

d.    In considering the requirements of this subsection F, the emphasis shall be on usable recreation space. No single area of outdoor recreational space shall encompass an area of less than 250 square feet. All common outdoor recreational space shall be clearly delineated and readily identifiable as such. Small, marginal, and incidental lots or parcels of land are not usable recreation spaces. The location of outdoor recreation space should be integral to the overall design concept of the site and be free of hazards or constraints that would interfere with active recreation.

3.    The shared space shall be readily observable to facilitate crime prevention and safety.

G.    Demarcation of public, semi-public, and private spaces. The structures and site improvements shall be designed so that public areas such as streets or public gathering places, semi-public areas, and private outdoor areas are clearly defined in order to establish persons having a right to be in the space, to provide for crime prevention, and to establish maintenance responsibility. These areas may be defined by:

1.    A deck, patio, fence, low wall, hedge, or draping vine;

2.    A trellis or arbor;

3.    A change in level;

4.    A change in the texture of the path material;

5.    Sign; or

6.    Landscaping.

Use of gates to demarcate the boundary between a public street and a private access driveway is prohibited.

H.    Public transit.

1.    Provisions for public transit may be required where the site abuts an existing or planned public transit route. The required facilities shall be based on the following:

a.    The location of other transit facilities in the area.

b.    The size and type of the proposed development.

c.    The rough proportionality between the impacts from the development and the required facility.

2.    The required facilities shall be limited to such facilities as the following:

a.    A waiting shelter with a bench surrounded by a three-sided covered structure, with transparency to allow easy surveillance of approaching buses.

b.    A turnout area for loading and unloading designed per regional transit agency standards.

c.    Hard-surface paths connecting the development to the waiting and boarding areas.

d.    Regional transit agency standards shall, however, prevail if they supersede these standards.

3.    The transit stop shall be located as close as possible to the main entrance to the shopping center, public or office building, or multi-family project. The entrance shall not be more than 200 feet from the transit stop with a clearly identified pedestrian link.

4.    All commercial business centers (over three acres) and multi-family projects (over 40 units) may be required to provide for the relocation of transit stops to the front of the site if the existing stop is within 200 to 400 yards of the site and the exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of the development. The commercial or multi-family project may be required to provide new facilities in those cases where the nearest stop is over 400 yards away. The transit stop shall be built per subsection (H)(2) of this section.

I.    Public facilities. An application may only be approved if adequate public facilities will be available to provide service to the property prior to occupancy. 

1.    Streets. Sufficient right-of-way and slope easement shall be dedicated to accommodate all abutting streets to be improved to the City’s Improvement Standards and Specifications. The City Engineer shall determine the appropriate level of street and traffic control improvements to be required, including any off-site street and traffic control improvements, based upon the transportation analysis submitted. The City Engineer’s determination of developer obligation, the extent of road improvement and City’s share, if any, of improvements and the timing of improvements shall be made based upon the City’s systems development charge ordinance and capital improvement program, and the rough proportionality between the impact of the development and the street improvements.

In determining the appropriate sizing of the street in commercial, office, multi-family, and public settings, the street should be the minimum necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic load and needs and should provide substantial accommodations for pedestrians and bicyclists. Road and driveway alignment should consider and mitigate impacts on adjacent properties and in neighborhoods in terms of increased traffic loads, noise, vibrations, and glare.

The realignment or redesign of roads shall consider how the proposal meets accepted engineering standards, enhances public safety, and favorably relates to adjacent lands and land uses. Consideration should also be given to selecting an alignment or design that minimizes or avoids hazard areas and loss of significant natural features (drainageways, wetlands, heavily forested areas, etc.) unless site mitigation can clearly produce a superior landscape in terms of shape, grades, and reforestation, and is fully consistent with applicable code restrictions regarding resource areas.

Streets shall be installed per Chapter 85 CDC standards. The City Engineer has the authority to require that street widths match adjacent street widths. Sidewalks shall be installed per CDC 85.200(A)(3) for commercial and office projects, and CDC 85.200(A)(16) and 92.010(H) for residential projects, and applicable provisions of this chapter. Where streets bisect or traverse water resource areas (WRAs) the street width shall be reduced to the appropriate “constrained” cross-section width indicated in the TSP or alternate configurations which are appropriate to site conditions, minimize WRA disturbance or are consistent with an adopted transportation system plan. The street design shall also be consistent with habitat friendly provisions of CDC 32.060(I).

Based upon the City Manager’s or Manager’s designee’s determination, the applicant shall construct or cause to be constructed, or contribute a proportionate share of the costs, for all necessary off-site improvements identified by the transportation analysis commissioned to address CDC 55.125 that are required to mitigate impacts from the proposed development. Proportionate share of the costs shall be determined by the City Manager or Manager’s designee, who shall assume that the proposed development provides improvements in rough proportion to identified impacts of the development.

2.    Storm detention and treatment and geologic hazards. Per the submittals required by CDC 55.130 and 92.010(E), all proposed storm detention and treatment facilities must comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards, there will be no adverse off-site impacts caused by the development (including impacts from increased intensity of runoff downstream or constrictions causing ponding upstream), and the applicant must provide sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the submitted plan. 

Per the submittals required by CDC 55.130(E), the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed methods of rendering known or potential hazard sites safe for development, including proposed geotechnical remediation, are feasible and adequate to prevent landslides or other damage to property and safety. The review authority may impose conditions, including limits on type or intensity of land use, which it determines are necessary to mitigate known risks of landslides or property damage.

3.    Municipal water. A registered civil engineer shall prepare a plan for the provision of water which demonstrates to the City Engineer’s satisfaction the availability of sufficient volume, capacity, and pressure to serve the proposed development’s domestic, commercial, and industrial fire flows. All plans will then be reviewed by the City Engineer.

4.    Sanitary sewers. A registered civil engineer shall prepare a sewerage collection system plan which demonstrates sufficient on-site capacity to serve the proposed development. The City Engineer shall determine whether the existing City system has sufficient capacity to serve the development.

5.    Solid waste and recycling storage areas. Appropriately sized and located solid waste and recycling storage areas shall be provided. Metro standards shall be used.

J.    Crime prevention and safety/defensible space.

1.    Windows shall be located so that areas vulnerable to crime can be surveyed by the occupants.

2.    Interior laundry and service areas shall be located in a way that they can be observed by others.

3.    Mailboxes, recycling, and solid waste facilities shall be located in lighted areas having vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

4.    The exterior lighting levels shall be selected and the angles shall be oriented towards areas vulnerable to crime.

5.    Light fixtures shall be provided in areas having heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic and in potentially dangerous areas such as parking lots, stairs, ramps, and abrupt grade changes.

6.    Fixtures shall be placed at a height so that light patterns overlap at a height of seven feet which is sufficient to illuminate a person. All commercial, industrial, residential, and public facility projects undergoing design review shall use low or high pressure sodium bulbs and be able to demonstrate effective shielding so that the light is directed downwards rather than omni-directional. Omni-directional lights of an ornamental nature may be used in general commercial districts only.

7.    Lines of sight shall be reasonably established so that the development site is visible to police and residents.

8.    Security fences for utilities (e.g., power transformers, pump stations, pipeline control equipment, etc.) or wireless communication facilities may be up to eight feet tall in order to protect public safety. No variances are required regardless of location. 

K.    Provisions for persons with disabilities.

1.    The needs of a person with a disability shall be provided for. Accessible routes shall be provided between all buildings and accessible site facilities. The accessible route shall be the most practical direct route between accessible building entries, accessible site facilities, and the accessible entry to the site. An accessible route shall connect to the public right-of-way and to at least one on-site or adjacent transit stop (if the area is served by transit). All facilities shall conform to, or exceed, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, including those included in the Uniform Building Code.

L.    Signs.

1.    Based on considerations of crime prevention and the needs of emergency vehicles, a system of signs for identifying the location of each residential unit, store, or industry shall be established.


[IMAGE]


buildings shall be numbered for emergency identification

2.    The signs, graphics, and letter styles shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding development, to contribute to a sense of project identity, or, when appropriate, to reflect a sense of the history of the area and the architectural style.

3.    The sign graphics and letter styles shall announce, inform, and designate particular areas or uses as simply and clearly as possible.

4.    The signs shall not obscure vehicle driver’s sight distance.

5.    Signs indicating future use shall be installed on land dedicated for public facilities (e.g., parks, water reservoir, fire halls, etc.).

6.    Signs and appropriate traffic control devices and markings shall be installed or painted in the driveway and parking lot areas to identify bicycle and pedestrian routes.

M.    Utilities. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including but not limited to communication, street lighting, and cable television, shall be placed underground, as practical. The design standards of Tables 1 and 2 above, and of subsection 5.487 of the West Linn Municipal Code relative to existing high ambient noise levels shall apply to this section.

N.    Wireless communication facilities (WCFs). (This section only applicable to WCFs.) WCFs as defined in Chapter 57 CDC may be required to go through Class I or Class II design review. The approval criteria for Class I design review is that the visual impact of the WCF shall be minimal to the extent allowed by Chapter 57 CDC. Stealth designs shall be sufficiently camouflaged so that they are not easily seen by passersby in the public right-of-way or from any adjoining residential unit. WCFs that are classified as Class II design review must respond to all of the approval criteria of this chapter.

O.    Refuse and recycling standards.

1.    All commercial, industrial and multi-family developments over five units requiring Class II design review shall comply with the standards set forth in these provisions. Modifications to these provisions may be permitted if the Planning Commission determines that the changes are consistent with the purpose of these provisions and the City receives written evidence from the local franchised solid waste and recycling firm that they are in agreement with the proposed modifications.

2.    Compactors, containers, and drop boxes shall be located on a level Portland cement concrete pad, a minimum of four inches thick, at ground elevation or other location compatible with the local franchise collection firm’s equipment at the time of construction. The pad shall be designed to discharge surface water runoff to avoid ponding.

3.    Recycling and solid waste service areas.

a.    Recycling receptacles shall be designed and located to serve the collection requirements for the specific type of material.

b.    The recycling area shall be located in close proximity to the garbage container areas and be accessible to the local franchised collection firm’s equipment.

c.    Recycling receptacles or shelters located outside a structure shall have lids and be covered by a roof constructed of water and insect-resistive material. The maintenance of enclosures, receptacles and shelters is the responsibility of the property owner.

d.    The location of the recycling area and method of storage shall be approved by the local fire marshal.

e.    Recycling and solid waste service areas shall be at ground level and/or otherwise accessible to the franchised solid waste and recycling collection firm.

f.    Recycling and solid waste service areas shall be used only for purposes of storing solid waste and recyclable materials and shall not be a general storage area to store personal belongings of tenants, lessees, property management or owners of the development or premises.

g.    Recyclable material service areas shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition.

4.    Special wastes or recyclable materials.

a.    Environmentally hazardous wastes defined in ORS 466.005 shall be located, prepared, stored, maintained, collected, transported, and disposed in a manner acceptable to the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

b.    Containers used to store cooking oils, grease or animal renderings for recycling or disposal shall not be located in the principal recyclable materials or solid waste storage areas. These materials shall be stored in a separate storage area designed for such purpose.

5.    Screening and buffering.

a.    Enclosures shall include a curbed landscape area at least three feet in width on the sides and rear. Landscaping shall include, at a minimum, a continuous hedge maintained at a height of 36 inches.

b.    Placement of enclosures adjacent to residentially zoned property and along street frontages is strongly discouraged. They shall be located so as to conceal them from public view to the maximum extent possible.

c.    All dumpsters and other trash containers shall be completely screened on all four sides with an enclosure that is comprised of a durable material such as masonry with a finish that is architecturally compatible with the project. Chain link fencing, with or without slats, will not be allowed.

6.    Litter receptacles.

a.    Location. Litter receptacles may not encroach upon the minimum required walkway widths.

b.    Litter receptacles may not be located within public rights-of-way except as permitted through an agreement with the City in a manner acceptable to the City Attorney or his/her designee.

c.    Number. The number and location of proposed litter receptacles shall be based on the type and size of the proposed uses. However, at a minimum, for non-residential uses, at least one external litter receptacle shall be provided for every 25 parking spaces for first 100 spaces, plus one receptacle for every additional 100 spaces. (Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1604 § 52, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 12, 2013; amended during July 2014 supplement; Ord. 1623 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 26, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 37, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 6, 2016; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 1662 § 8, 2017; Ord. 1675 § 45, 2018)


55.110 SITE ANALYSIS

The site analysis shall include:

A.    A vicinity map showing the location of the property in relation to adjacent properties, roads, pedestrian and bike ways, transit stops and utility access.

B.    A site analysis on a drawing at a suitable scale (in order of preference, one inch equals 10 feet to one inch equals 30 feet) which shows:

1.    The property boundaries, dimensions, and gross area.

2.    Contour lines at the following minimum intervals:

a.    Two-foot intervals for slopes from zero to 25 percent; and

b.    Five- or 10-foot intervals for slopes in excess of 25 percent.

3.    Tables and maps identifying acreage, location and type of development constraints due to site characteristics such as slope, drainage and geologic hazards, including a slope analysis which identifies portions of the site according to the land types (I, II, III and IV) defined in Chapter 02 CDC.

4.    The location and width of adjoining streets.

5.    The drainage patterns and drainage courses on the site and on adjacent lands.

6.    Potential natural hazard areas including:

a.    Floodplain areas pursuant to the site’s applicable FEMA Flood Map panel;

b.    Water resource areas as defined by Chapter 32 CDC;

c.    Landslide areas designated by the Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan, Map 16; and

d.    Landslide vulnerable analysis areas, designated by the Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan, Map 17.

7.    Resource areas including:

a.    Wetlands;

b.    Riparian corridors;

c.     Streams, including intermittent and ephemeral streams; 

d.     Habitat conservation areas; and

e.     Large rock outcroppings.

8.    Potential historic landmarks and registered archaeological sites. The existence of such sites on the property shall be verified from records maintained by the Community Development Department and other recognized sources.

9.    Identification information including the name and address of the owner, developer, project designer, lineal scale and north arrow.

10.    Identify Type I and II lands in map form. Provide a table which identifies square footage of Type I and II lands also as percentage of total site square footage. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1526, 2005; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1613 § 13, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 27, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 38, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 9, 2017)


55.120 SITE PLAN

The site plan shall be at the same scale as the site analysis (CDC 55.110) and shall show:

A.    The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant’s property and proposed development and adjacent property and development.

B.    Boundary lines and dimensions for the perimeter of the property and the dimensions for all proposed lot or parcel lines.

C.    Streams and stream corridors.

D.    Identification information, including the name and address of the owner, developer, project designer, lineal scale and north arrow.

E.    The location, dimensions, and names of all existing and proposed streets, public pathways, easements on adjacent properties and on the site, and all associated rights-of-way.

F.    The location, dimensions and setback distances of all:

1.    Existing and proposed structures, improvements, and utility facilities on site; and

2.    Existing structures and driveways on adjoining properties.

G.    The location and dimensions of:

1.    The entrances and exits to the site;

2.    The parking and circulation areas;

3.    Areas for waste disposal, recycling, loading, and delivery;

4.    Pedestrian and bicycle routes, including designated routes, through parking lots and to adjacent rights-of-way;

5.    On-site outdoor recreation spaces and common areas;

6.    All utilities, including stormwater detention and treatment; and

7.    Sign locations.

H.    The location of areas to be landscaped. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1613 § 14, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 28, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 39, 2014)


55.125 TRANSPORTATION ANALYSIS

Certain development proposals required that a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) be provided which may result in modifications to the site plan or conditions of approval to address or minimize any adverse impacts created by the proposal. The purpose, applicability and standards of this analysis are found in CDC 85.170(B)(2). (Ord. 1584, 2008)


55.130 GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLANS

For Type I, II and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), a registered civil engineer must prepare a grading plan and a storm detention and treatment plan pursuant to CDC 92.010(E), at a scale sufficient to evaluate all aspects of the proposal, and a statement that demonstrates:

A.    The location and extent to which grading will take place indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed.

B.    All proposed storm detention and treatment facilities comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards. 

C.    There is sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the plan.

D.    Per CDC 99.035, the Planning Director may require the information in subsections A, B and C of this section for Type IV lands if the information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed site plan.

E.    For Type I, II and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), the applicant must provide a geologic report, with text, figures and attachments as needed to meet the industry standard of practice, prepared by a certified engineering geologist and/or a geotechnical professional engineer, that includes:

1.    Site characteristics, geologic descriptions and a summary of the site investigation conducted;

2.    Assessment of engineering geological conditions and factors;

3.    Review of the City of West Linn’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan and applicability to the site; and

4.    Conclusions and recommendations focused on geologic constraints for the proposed land use or development activity, limitations and potential risks of development, recommendations for mitigation approaches and additional work needed at future development stages including further testing and monitoring.

F.    Identification information, including the name and address of the owner, developer, project designer, and the project engineer. (Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1613 § 15, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 28, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 10, 2017)


55.140 ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS

This section does not apply to single-family residential subdivisions or partitions, or up to two duplexes or single-family attached dwellings.

Architectural drawings shall be submitted showing:

A.    Building elevations and sections tied to curb elevation;

B.    Building materials: color and type; and

C.    The name of the architect or designer. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1613 § 16, 2013)


55.150 LANDSCAPE PLAN

This section does not apply to detached single-family residential subdivisions or partitions, or up to two duplexes or single-family attached dwellings.

A.    The landscape plan shall be prepared and shall show the following:

1.    Preliminary underground irrigation system, if proposed;

2.    The location and height of fences and other buffering of screening materials, if proposed;

3.    The location of terraces, decks, patios, shelters, and play areas, if proposed;

4.    The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials, if proposed; and

5.    Building and pavement outlines.

B.    The landscape plan shall be accompanied by:

1.    The erosion controls that will be used, if necessary;

2.    Planting list; and 

3.    Supplemental information as required by the Planning Director or City Arborist. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1613 § 17, 2013)


55.170 EXCEPTIONS TO UNDERLYING ZONE, YARD, PARKING, SIGN PROVISIONS, AND LANDSCAPING PROVISIONS

A.    The Planning Director may grant an exception to the dimensional building setback or yard requirements in the applicable zone based on findings that the approval will satisfy the following criteria:

1.    A minor exception that is not greater than 20 percent of the required setback.

2.    A more efficient use of the site.

3.    The preservation of natural features that have been incorporated into the overall design of the project.

4.    No adverse affect to adjoining properties in terms of light, air circulation, noise levels, privacy, and fire hazard.

5.    Safe vehicular and pedestrian access to the site and safe on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

B.    The Planning Director may grant an exception to the off-street parking dimensional and minimum number of space requirements in the applicable zone so long as the following criteria are met:

1.    The minor exception is not greater than 10 percent of the required parking;

2.    The application is for a use designed for a specific purpose which is intended to be permanent in nature (for example, a nursing home) and which has a low demand for off-street parking; or

3.    There is an opportunity for sharing parking and there is written evidence that the property owners are willing to enter into a legal agreement; or

4.    Public transportation is available to the site reducing the standards and will not adversely affect adjoining uses, and there is a community interest in the preservation of particular natural feature(s) of the site which make it in the public interest to grant an exception to parking standards.

C.    The Planning Director may grant an exception to the sign dimensional requirements in the applicable zone when the following criteria are met:

1.    The minor exception is not greater than 10 percent of the required applicable dimensional standard for signs;

2.    The exception is necessary for adequate identification of the use on the property; and

3.    The sign will be compatible with the overall site plan, the structural improvements, and with the structures and uses on adjoining properties.

D.    The Planning Director may grant an exception to the landscaping requirements in the applicable zone based on findings that the following criteria will be met:

1.    A minor exception that is not greater than 10 percent of the required landscaped area.

2.    A more efficient use of the site.

3.    The preservation of natural features that have been incorporated into the overall design of the project.

4.    No adverse effect to adjoining property.


55.180 MAINTENANCE

All on-site improvements shall be the ongoing responsibility of the property owner or occupant.


55.190 SHARED OPEN SPACE

Where the open space is designated on the plan as common open space, the following shall apply:

A.    The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the Planning Director.

B.    The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

1.    By dedication to the City as publicly owned and maintained as open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the City must be acceptable to it with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, and budgetary and maintenance limitations.

2.    By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association, or other legal entity with the City retaining the development rights to the property. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the City Attorney for guaranteeing the following:

a.    The continued use of such land for intended purposes.

b.    Continuity of property maintenance.

c.    When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance.

d.    Adequate insurance protection.

e.    Recovery for loss sustained by casualty and condemnation, or otherwise.

3.    By any method that achieves the objectives set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section.


55.195 ANNEXATION AND STREET LIGHTS

As a condition of approval for design review for any project that is being annexed to the City, the developer and/or homeowners association shall pay for all expenses related to street light energy and maintenance costs until annexed into the City. The approval for any property annexed must state: “This approval is contingent on voter approval of annexation of the subject property.” This means that no permit, final plat, or certificate of occupancy may be issued or approved until annexation is complete. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1604 § 53, 2011)


Chapter 56 PARKS AND NATURAL AREA DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

56.010    PURPOSE AND INTENT – GENERAL

56.015    CATEGORIES OF PARKS AND NATURAL RESOURCE FACILITIES

56.020    APPLICABILITY

56.025    EXEMPTIONS

56.030    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

56.040    EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

56.050    DESIGN REVIEW AMENDMENT TRIGGER

56.060    PHASED DEVELOPMENT

56.070    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

56.075    SUBMITTAL STANDARDS FOR CLASS I PARKS DESIGN REVIEW

56.080    SUBMITTAL STANDARDS FOR CLASS II PARKS DESIGN REVIEW

56.085    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED AND WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS

56.090    APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS I DESIGN REVIEW

56.100    APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS II DESIGN REVIEW

56.110    SITE ANALYSIS

56.120    SITE PLAN

56.130    GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLANS

56.140    ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS

56.150    LANDSCAPE PLAN

56.170    EXCEPTIONS TO UNDERLYING PARKING PROVISIONS


56.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT – GENERAL

The purpose of the parks and natural area design review provisions is to establish a process and standards for the review of park and natural area development proposals to ensure that the intent of the Parks Master Plan is satisfied and the planned program needs of the different classes of parks and natural areas are respected and provided for. Attention will be paid to the proposal’s scale, layout and design, its compatibility with the natural environment and the surrounding neighborhood. Compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) will be encouraged but not to the point of diminution of, or adverse impacts on, the natural resource areas or the functionality of the park.


56.015 CATEGORIES OF PARKS AND NATURAL RESOURCE FACILITIES

There are eight categories of park and natural resource facilities as established in the Parks Master Plan. The categories are:

1.    Active-oriented parks.

2.    Passive-oriented parks.

3.    Special use parks.

4.    Linear parks/open space.

5.    City beautification areas.

6.    Pathways and trails.

7.    Natural resource areas.

8.    Multi-use parks.

Active-oriented parks. Active-oriented parks are developed sites that support recreation opportunities including sports and play with facilities, often featuring restrooms, picnic shelters and tables.

Passive-oriented parks. Passive-oriented parks are more natural sites that provide trail-related recreation opportunities and passive outdoor activities such as wildlife watching, nature interpretation and picnicking. Several sites also provide river views or river access.

Special use parks. Special use parks are single-purpose developed sites that include specialized facilities such as a community center, boat ramp, or fishing dock or other unique use.

Linear parks/Open space. Linear parks are open space areas that often bring together patchworks of City-owned lands, stream corridors, and rights-of-way to create a linear facility whose primary goal is to provide a passive recreation experience.

Limited facilities such as benches and picnic tables may be provided, but these parks are primarily designed as corridors for trails, bike and pedestrian paths. The TPR is often well served by these bike and pedestrian paths. Linear parks also provide important visual relief from the built environment. Given their physical and visual accessibility, and the fact that they can extend long distances through the community and be used by many neighborhoods, linear parks can be one of the best investments that cities can make. Ideally, they will be at least 100 to 200 feet wide; however, critical linkages in the system can be as narrow as 10 to 20 feet if that is what it takes to make the connection. Trailheads at the termini of the park are helpful as are trailheads at regular intervals along the length of the linear park.

City beautification areas and public spaces. City beautification areas are intended to provide for the aesthetic needs of the residents. Rather than a physical experience, these areas provide a visual experience. They can take the form of landscaped entryways to the City, landscaped medians, or street corners. Expanding beyond that definition and the expectations of the Parks Master Plan, this park category shall also include public spaces, such as plazas and squares, where the emphasis is on outdoor concerts, farmers’ markets, street fairs, and socialization.

Pathways and trails. Pathways and trails may be incorporated into park facilities, but may also be stand-alone facilities in open space. Communities provide urban paths and trails for their recreational value as well as their value as part of a community’s commitment to the TPR. Trails and paths should be developed to provide linkages between schools, parks, neighborhoods, and the community and even integrate with regional trail systems. An example would be the trails and paths that crisscross the Tanner Basin neighborhood of West Linn and make it possible for children to access school on foot or bicycle in relative safety. Rudimentary gravel foot trails can be three to six feet wide. Paths in high use areas should be in the four- to 10-foot width range and paved. In neighborhoods that are built up with limited space to accommodate the paths or trails, reduced widths and non-traditional designs are encouraged if the alternative is no trail or path at all. Emphasis on providing routes that follow the cognitive patterns of residents is important. Surveillance potential and defensible space are also important considerations.

Natural resource areas. The primary focus is on the long-term protection of natural areas. These natural areas can come in the form of natural drainageways, creeks, wetlands, river greenway areas, habitat protection areas, steep hillsides, significant tree clusters or plant materials, or where the preservation of an open space area provides a visual relief from the images of the built and urbanized environment.

Since the emphasis is upon the protection of the resource, the facilities should be limited. Typically, these facilities include interpretive centers, restrooms, trails, vehicular access, and parking lots. Active recreation facilities, such as organized playing fields, are discouraged. They should only be accommodated if the park is large enough and there is adequate separation between the activity area and the natural resource. At all times, the central philosophy is deference to the natural resource over human needs. 

Multi-use parks. Multi-use parks mix developed and natural areas and offer both active and passive recreation opportunities, ranging from active sports to quiet nature strolls. Several of these parks also have amenities and facilities to support large group gatherings and events. (Ord. 1604 § 54, 2011; Ord. 1694 § 2, 2019)


56.020 APPLICABILITY

A.    This chapter applies to the development of all new parks and natural resource areas. It also applies to changes including the introduction of new facilities and major repairs at existing parks and natural resource areas. No work, except as exempted in CDC 56.025, may take place in these parks and natural resource areas without first obtaining a permit through this chapter and through the appropriate decision-making body. Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, shall not apply to park development or structures or facilities in parks. Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, all relevant CDC chapters shall apply.

B.    There are two classes of Park Design Review – Class I and Class II. Class I park design review applies to minor changes to park facilities. It is reasonable and appropriate that a simpler but more focused set of standards shall apply. Class II park design review applies to the development of any new park or significant changes to an existing park or natural area. The specific submittal standards and approval criteria are explained in CDC 56.070 through 56.100.

C.    Class I design review. The following is a non-exclusive list of Class I design review activities or facilities.

1.    New sidewalks, if over 200 feet long (see CDC 56.025).

2.    New trails, if over 200 feet long (see CDC 56.025).

3.    New paths, if over 200 feet long (see CDC 56.025).

4.    Additional recreation amenities or facilities including playground equipment, picnic shelters, and playing fields so long as those facilities are consistent with the program established for the park and the impacts are expected to be minor. (An example of program consistency would be Class I design review of a proposal to add two more swing sets at an active-oriented park; conversely, it would be a Class II if the proposal would add swing sets in a natural resource area.)

5.    Fences and walls, over 200 feet long (see CDC 56.025).

6.    Addition or reduction of less than 10 percent of total square footage of an existing building so long as there is no encroachment towards a resource area.

7.    Minor road realignment under 200 feet long. Realignment must not come closer to any existing resource area than it currently is.

8.    Ten percent additions or reduction of parking stalls so long as required minimum number of spaces is still met.

9.    Major modification of a landscape plan (including water features, ponds, pergolas, arbors, artwork, sculptings, etc.). Replacement of one type of flowers with another or tree planting would not have to go through review.

10.    Minor modifications and/or minor upgrades or repairs of public or private utilities in the park or resource area. Any proposed excavation or grading within a drainageway will require Class I review and will be covered with a natural drainageway permit. Emergency repairs, authorized by the City Manager, would be exempt from this chapter per CDC 56.025. Post-emergency site restoration or mitigation would, however, be required.

11.    Americans with Disability Act (ADA) compliance (e.g., ramps and paths) is exempt when the improvement is outside of a natural resource area per CDC 56.025. Construction of ADA-accessible interpretive paths and related facilities in natural resource areas shall go through Class I design review.

12.    Freestanding art and statuary under five feet tall.

13.    The addition or removal of a park or natural open space facility or site feature. This could involve, for example, the elimination of a softball diamond.

14.    Other land uses and activities may be added if the Planning Director makes written findings that the activity/use will not increase impacts to any nearby resource area or abutting residential property, does not conflict with the program established for the specific park or natural resource area/open space, and is consistent with the type and/or scale of activities/uses listed above.

D.    Class II design review. The following is a non-exclusive list of Class II parks design review activities or facilities:

1.    Site preparation for and/or development of a new park or natural area.

2.    Outward expansion of an existing park or natural area.

3.    Addition or reduction of more than 10 percent of total square footage of an existing building, including any dimensional change if it would result in encroachment towards a natural resource area.

4.    Any program change that results in a change in the function and classification of the park or resource area (e.g., from active park with playing fields to passive park with no playing fields. Any change that puts park program at odds with, or in violation of, Parks Master Plan).

5.    Any change or proposed development which, by its scale or scope of work, requires that a full and comprehensive review be undertaken in the public forum. See CDC 56.025, Exemptions, for buildings over 10,000 square feet.


56.025 EXEMPTIONS

The provisions of this chapter exempt the following activities from review:

A.    Architectural or other replacement in kind. An example would be replacing a composition roof on a picnic shelter with a new composition roof. Replacing the grass turf of a playing field with synthetic turf would be an example of other replacement in kind. Also exempt is replacement in kind of building materials that are equal or superior to existing materials (for example, replacing T-111 wood siding with cedar lap siding or brick or replacing a gravel path with an asphalt path). For buildings, the replacement in kind cannot constitute more than 50 percent of the valuation of the structure; if it does, then Class I or II design review is required, depending on the size of the building (e.g., a 10-foot by seven-foot tool shed would be Class I). The Planning Director shall make the initial code interpretation. This interpretation is reviewable and amendable by the Planning Commission.

B.    Changes in color schemes, wall art, and freestanding statuary or art under five feet tall are exempt from design review, but shall be subject to Planning Director review under the provisions of CDC 99.060(A)(2), prescribed conditions, with consideration of CDC 55.090. No published findings or notice are required.

C.    Revision to parking alignment or circulation so long as it only involves restriping or painting new directional arrows. These changes will be subject to CDC 99.060(A)(2).

D.    ADA facilities, such as access ramps and modifications to accessways to improve accessibility, outside of resource areas are exempt.

E.    Removal of ivy and other invasive vegetation, such as from trees and elsewhere, including in natural resource areas.

F.    Construction of new sidewalks, paths, and trails that are less than 200 feet long and do not intrude into natural resource areas (NRAs). If they intrude in NRAs, then Class I parks design review is required.

G.    Emergency repairs or maintenance. The City Manager, or designee, shall make the determination that emergency conditions exist. All necessary restoration, mitigation or permitting, as required by this chapter, shall be undertaken by responsible parties once the emergency period has ended.

H.    Installation of directional or interpretive signs shall be exempt from this chapter, but must address the provisions of Chapter 52 CDC as required.

I.    Transit shelters.

J.    Fences and walls up to 200 feet long. If a fence is in an NRA, then Class I parks design review is required.

K.    Changing sports programs from one sport to another at an existing sports field or facility.

L.    Minor changes to park landscaping such as replacement of one type of flowers or groundcover with another or planting trees.

M.    Buildings or structures over 10,000 square feet shall be exempt from review under this chapter. Buildings or structures over 10,000 square feet shall go through review of Chapter 55 CDC. (Parkland on which the building is sited will still go through review of this chapter.)

 

	Exemptions (CDC 56.025)	Class I (CDC 56.020(C))	Class II (CDC 56.020(D))

	Sidewalks, paths, sidewalks, walls and fences up to 200 feet long outside of the natural resource area (NRA).	Sidewalks, paths, sidewalks, walls and fences over 200 feet long and all those within NRA.	Development of a park or park facility and all other major construction projects.

	Architectural or other “replacement in kind.” Substituting one sports program for another.	Addition or elimination of a park facility (e.g., baseball diamond).	Program changes to park that result in it being reclassified as a different type of park.

	Color changes.	Additional playground equipment.	 

	Minor road realignment under 200 feet long outside of NRA.	Minor road realignment of over 200 feet and all work in NRA.	 

	Revisions to circulation and parking layout.	Ten percent increase or decrease in building size.	Over 10 percent increase in building size.

	Up to 10 percent change in parking lot.	 	 

	Directional and interpretive signs.	Over 10 percent increase or decrease in parking lot.	 

	ADA compliance outside of NRA.	ADA compliance in resource area.	 

	Emergency repairs.	Art under five feet tall.	Art over five feet tall.

	Minor landscape plan modification. Ivy removal.	Major landscape plan modification.	 

	Transit shelters.	 	 

	Buildings over 10,000 square feet (Chapter 55 CDC applies).	 	 


56.030 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A pre-application conference is required before submitting a development plan application for design review as provided by CDC 99.030(B).

B.    The application shall be submitted by the record owner(s) of the property, or authorized agent. For City applications, the City Manager shall submit the application.

C.    Action on the development plan application shall be as provided by Chapter 99 CDC, Procedures for Decision-Making: Quasi-Judicial, and the following:

1.    The Planning Director for Class I parks design review applications, or the Planning Commission for Class II parks design review applications, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on findings related to the applicable criteria set forth in CDC 99.110 and this chapter.

2.    A decision by the Planning Director shall be reviewed by the City Council if the case is appealed.

D.    Significant changes to the approved development plan will require reapplication per CDC 56.050. “Significant changes” are defined as more than a 10 percent modification in the design or footprint of a structure or any design that brings the use (e.g., playing field, sidewalk, etc.) closer to a natural resource area or a neighboring home. Minor changes to the design or proposal that are mandated by new State, federal or local laws, engineering standards or building codes are not deemed significant.


56.040 EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

If substantial construction, as defined in Chapter 02 CDC, has not occurred within three years from the date of approval of the development plan, the approved proposal will be void unless an extension is granted under CDC 99.325. Phased improvements to a park or natural area, with clearly stated timeline, are permitted under the provisions of CDC 56.060. However, substantial construction of the final phased improvement must be begun within five years of the original approval date. (Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


56.050 DESIGN REVIEW AMENDMENT TRIGGER

A.    When significant changes are made to the approved development plan, then a reapplication to the appropriate decision-making authority shall be required. A non-exclusive list of examples of significant changes are as follows:

1.    Major realignment of the roads, especially if the road moves closer to the NRA or nearby homes.

2.    Relocation of the parking lot.

3.    A shift in the high activity area, such as a soccer field, from one part of the park to an area that was not planned to have such a high intensity use. Substituting equal-level intensity uses is not significant (e.g., replacing a soccer area with a softball area).

4.    A revised lighting scheme that would illuminate an area that was not expected to be illuminated shall be deemed a significant change.

5.    Any existing or planned activity or structure that is moved closer to a natural resource area.

6.    More than 10 percent increase in the building footprint.

7.    Significant changes to the architecture that modify the style, mass, or result in elimination of significant design features.

8.    Changes in color or materials using non-approved or non-earth tones and/or the use of materials of poorer quality (for example, going from tile roof to composition roofing).

B.    Changes to the project/site plan to meet conditions of approval, federal, State, or metro legislative changes, or new building code requirements shall not trigger an amendment.


56.060 PHASED DEVELOPMENT

The applicant may elect to develop the site in phases, also known as stages. The applicant shall delineate the boundaries of the phases on a map and provide a narrative that explains what improvements or facilities can be expected with each phase and when development for each phase is to be initiated. The decision-making authority must approve phased development with a clearly stated timeline for each phase, per the provisions of CDC 99.125. Once work on a phase is initiated by the approved timeline, it is not necessary that all the work of that phase be completed by the timeline date so long as reasonable progress is being made.


56.070 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

A.    The design review application shall be initiated by the Parks Director.

B.    A pre-application conference shall be a prerequisite to the filing of an application.

1.    The Planning Director shall explain the applicable policies, ordinance provisions, opportunities and constraints which may be applicable to the site and type of proposed development. The Planning Director shall determine which class of park design review is required.

2.    The following subjects shall be reviewed at the pre-application conference:

a.    Identification of the proposed park classification (e.g., active- or passive-oriented park).

b.    The appropriate facilities and programs that should be provided according to the park classification.

c.    The physical and visual accessibility of the site.

d.    The property’s location and size, the Comprehensive Plan, zoning, and other possible and applicable ordinance provisions.

e.    Consideration of buffers, screening, or direction of lighting.

f.    The natural features on the site: topography, drainage courses, microclimate vegetation, and soil conditions and stability.

g.    The availability of utilities (on site and off site).

h.    Vehicular access, trip generation, and potential traffic problems.

i.    The availability of transit, capacity of the road system, and existence of plans for bicycle and pedestrian ways.

j.    Conditions placed on previous applications.

k.    Review submittal requirements.

l.    Preferred architectural design and building orientation.

m.    Location of planned activity areas to satisfy functional needs of the park.

3.    A prerequisite to the filing of an application for a new park or resource area/open space under Class II parks design review is that the Parks Director must demonstrate that the adopted community planning process for parks has been followed. Alternately, the Parks Director will hold a meeting with the respective City-recognized neighborhood association, per CDC 99.038, at which time the Parks Director will present the proposal and receive comments. No neighborhood meeting is required for a Class I design review.

4.    The applicant shall submit a completed application form.

5.    The applicant shall provide the submittal for either a Class I or II park design review as explained in CDC 56.075 or 56.080. (Ord. 1636 § 40, 2014)


56.075 SUBMITTAL STANDARDS FOR CLASS I PARKS DESIGN REVIEW

A.    The application for a Class I parks design review shall contain the following elements:

1.    A site analysis (per CDC 56.110) only if the site is undeveloped.

2.    A site plan (per CDC 56.120) is required.

3.    Architectural drawings, including building envelopes and all elevations (per CDC 56.140), but only if architectural work is proposed.

4.    Pursuant to CDC 56.085, additional submittal material may be required.

5.    One copy at the original scale and one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. One copy of all other items must be submitted. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the City. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Community Development Department. (Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 § 15, 2014)


56.080 SUBMITTAL STANDARDS FOR CLASS II PARKS DESIGN REVIEW

A.    The application for a Class II parks design review shall contain the following elements:

1.    A site analysis (per CDC 56.110);

2.    A site plan (per CDC 56.120);

3.    A grading plan (per CDC 56.130);

4.    Architectural drawings, indicating floor plan and elevation (per CDC 56.140);

5.    A landscape plan (per CDC 56.150);

6.    A sign plan (per CDC 56.160); and

7.    A pedestrian and automobile circulation plan.

8.    The utility plan. The application shall include a submittal appropriate to respond to the approval criteria of CDC 55.100(I)(1) through (5) relating to streets, drainage, municipal water, sanitary sewers, solid waste, and recycling storage.

9.    A narrative, based on the standards contained in this code, which supports any requested exceptions as provided under CDC 56.170.

10.    Submit full written responses to approval criteria of CDC 56.100 for Class II design review, or CDC 56.090 for Class I design review, plus all applicable referenced approval criteria.

11.    Class II design review applications, that require Planning Commission review, shall submit 10 full-sized copies of the required plans. Class I design review shall require three copies at the original scale, and three copies reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. Three copies of all other items must be submitted.


56.085 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED AND WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS

A.    The Planning Director may require additional information as part of the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(A).

B.    The Planning Director may waive any requirements for the application at the applicant’s request, subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(B) and (C).


56.090 APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS I DESIGN REVIEW

The Planning Director shall make a finding with respect to the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying a Class I design review application:

A.    The provisions of the following sections shall be met:

1.    CDC 56.100(C)(1) through (5), Relationship to the natural physical environment, shall apply except in those cases where the proposed development site is substantially developed and built out with no natural physical features that would be impacted.

2.    CDC 56.100(D), Facility design and relationship to the human environment, shall only apply in those cases that involve exterior architectural construction, remodeling, or changes.

3.    Pursuant to CDC 56.085, the Director may require additional information and responses to additional sections of the approval criteria of this section depending upon the type of application.

B.    The Planning Director shall determine the applicability of the approval criteria in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1547, 2007)


56.100 APPROVAL STANDARDS – CLASS II DESIGN REVIEW

The approval authority shall make findings with respect to the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying a Class II parks design review application.

A.    Park classification. The proposed park and park programs shall conform to, and agree with, the Parks Master Plan and the parks definitions of CDC 56.015. Reclassifying the purpose of a park and the programs shall require an amendment to the Parks Master Plan.

Park facilities that are not discussed in the Parks Master Plan shall be classified using the criteria of CDC 56.015 and the Parks Master Plan. Once the classification is made, the approval criteria shall take into consideration those program needs and the standards for the specific park type and evaluate the application accordingly.

B.    Visual and physical accessibility. Many of the City’s parks suffer from inadequate visibility, such as Sunburst Park and North Willamette Park, surrounded as they are by housing. Increased frontage on streets allows greater use of on-street parking and less park space being used for parking. The surrounding streets also provide transitions between on- and off-site activities as discussed in subsection (D)(1) of this section. Physical access is also facilitated by having good cognitive locations that can be safely accessed by bike paths and sidewalks. Improved visual access amplifies the investment and positive benefits of parks in that many people who do not stop the car and actually use the park derive emotional benefits by exposure to scenes of open space, trees, and grass fields in a world increasingly dominated by built environments.

C.    Relationship to the natural environment.

1.    The buildings and other site elements shall be designed and located so that all heritage trees, as defined in the municipal code, shall be saved. Diseased heritage trees, as determined by the City Arborist, may be removed at the direction of the City Manager.

2.    All heritage trees, as defined in the municipal code, and all trees and clusters of trees (“cluster” is defined as three or more trees with overlapping driplines; however, native oaks need not have an overlapping dripline) that are considered significant by the City Arborist, either individually or in consultation with certified arborists or similarly qualified professionals, based on accepted arboricultural standards including consideration of their size, type, location, health, long term survivability, and/or numbers, shall be protected pursuant to the criteria of CDC 55.100(B)(2). It is important to acknowledge that all trees are not significant.

a.    Areas of the park that include non-Type I and II lands shall protect all heritage trees and all significant trees through the careful layout of streets, building pads, playing fields, and utilities. The method for delineating the protected trees or tree clusters (“dripline + 10 feet”) is explained in CDC 55.100(B)(2)(a) and in subsection (C)(2)(b) of this section. 


[IMAGE]


PROTECTED AREA = DRIPLINE + 10 FEET

b.    Areas of the park that include Type I and II lands shall protect all heritage, significant and non-significant trees. Groundcover, bushes, etc., shall be protected and may only be disturbed to allow the construction of trails or accessing and repairing utilities. Exemptions permitted under CDC 55.100(B)(2)(c) through (f) shall apply.

3.    In the case of natural resource areas, the topography shall be preserved to the greatest degree possible. Conversely, in non-natural resource areas, it is recognized that in order to accommodate level playing fields in an active-oriented park, extensive grading may be required and the topography may be modified.

4.    The structures shall not be located in areas subject to slumping and sliding. The Comprehensive Plan Background Report’s Hazard Map, or updated material as available and as deemed acceptable by the Planning Director, shall be the basis for preliminary determination.

5.    The park shall be designed in such a way as to take advantage of scenic views and vistas from the park site, as long as such views can be obtained without eliminating significant trees or other natural vegetated areas.

D.    Facility design and relationship to the human environment.

1.    Architecture. Whereas most park buildings are small in size and compatible with existing structure(s) on site and on adjoining sites, the possibility of larger facilities exists. Larger buildings are defined as those over 1,000 square feet and under 10,000 square feet in size. In those cases, contextual design is required. “Contextual design” means respecting and incorporating prominent architectural styles, building lines, roof forms, rhythm of windows, building scale and massing, materials and colors of surrounding buildings in the proposed structure. Also important is breaking the larger building into smaller visual components so that the mass of the building is not so apparent. This is especially relevant when the building is near the perimeter of the park. However, certain uses, by virtue of their functional and spatial requirements, are large and can never be made visually equal or even compatible with nearby homes. Such uses shall not be prohibited from locating at active-oriented park facilities on architectural grounds so long as the applicant’s architect has broken down the building’s horizontal plane into smaller visual components and stepped down the building at the end closest to the off-site structure(s). “Smaller visual components” shall be defined as changes in the horizontal plane every 100 feet created by indentations or pop-outs at least three feet in depth. “Stepping down” shall be defined as bringing the park building’s end section that is closest to off-site dwellings to half the distance between the highest ridgeline of the park structure and the highest ridgeline of the nearest off-site structure. In those cases where visual component breakdown or stepping down is not feasible, the applicant may rely on transitions in terms of distance as reasonable mitigation between on- and off-site buildings. An appropriate minimum distance to achieve mitigation shall be either 150 feet or an existing public right-of-way.

2.    Material. Park structures shall emphasize natural materials such as exposed timbers, wood with brick and stone detail. Colors are subdued earth tones: grays, brown, off-whites, black, slate, and greens.

3.    Human scale is a term that seeks to accommodate the users of the building and the notion that buildings should be designed around the human scale (e.g., average range of human perception). For large buildings, defined as over 1,000 square feet and less than 10,000 square feet in size, human scale shall be accommodated by, for example, multi-light windows that are broken up into numerous panes, intimately scaled entryways, visual breaks (exaggerated eaves, indentations, belly boards, ledges, cornices, awnings, engaged columns, etc.) in the facades of buildings, both vertically and horizontally, but particularly within the first 10 to 15 feet as measured vertically.

4.    Transparency. For all enclosed buildings in the park, with the exception of public restrooms, storage and utility buildings, the main/front building elevation shall provide at least 60 percent windows or transparency at the pedestrian level to create a more interesting building elevation, allow natural/ambient interior lighting and enhance defensible space. One side elevation shall provide at least 30 percent transparency. Transparency on other elevations is optional. The transparency is measured in lineal fashion. For example, a 100-foot long building elevation shall have at least 60 feet (60 percent of 100 feet) in length of windows. The window height shall be, at minimum, three feet tall. The exception to transparency would be cases where demonstrated functional constraints or topography restrict that elevation from being used. When this exemption is applied to a building elevation(s), the square footage of transparency that would ordinarily be required by the above formula shall be installed on the remaining elevations in addition to any transparency required by a side elevation, and vice versa. The transferred transparency is not required to be at pedestrian level and may be incorporated into clerestories or dormers. The rear of the building is not required to include transparency. The transparency must be flush with the building elevation.

E.    Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) compliance. The TPR is a State requirement to reduce dependence upon the private automobile, reduce the total number of vehicle miles traveled and reduce carbon monoxide emissions. One way this can be achieved is by providing greater connectivity within the City from one neighborhood to the next so that circuitous, fuel-consuming trips are reduced. Where park space is bisected by a planned arterial connector as identified in the City’s Transportation Master Plan, then that arterial shall be constructed as part of the park project. Where proposed collector or local streets are shown on the Transportation Master Plan or where existing roads stub out adjacent to the parks property, the road shall also go through, except in those cases where one of the following criteria is met:

1.    The road will eliminate or adversely affect the functional value of the park (e.g., it would go through the only reasonable location for a planned soccer field).

2.    The road will adversely affect the quality or quantity of a natural resource area/open space (e.g., construction of the road will require grading or fill in the resource area; the increased traffic associated with the road will diminish the restorative, contemplative, and natural interpretative opportunities associated with the resource; the impact of the traffic, such as noise, pollutants, and glare, will make the area less attractive as a wildlife habitat or corridor, and/or have adverse environmental impacts on the resource, etc.).

3.    The road will be in conflict with the City Charter languages.

F.    Compatibility between adjoining uses.

1.    On-site screening from view from adjoining properties of such things as service and storage areas shall be provided and the following factors will be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the screening:

a.    What needs to be screened?

b.    The direction from which it is needed.

c.    How dense the screen needs to be.

d.    Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile.

e.    Whether the screening needs to be year-round.

f.    Consideration shall be given to the proper screening of lights so that no off-site glare is produced.

2.    Rooftop air cooling and heating systems and other mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from adjoining properties.

G.    Crime prevention and safety/defensible space.

1.    Windows shall be located so that areas vulnerable to crime can be surveyed by the occupants.

2.    The exterior lighting levels shall be selected and the angles shall be oriented towards areas vulnerable to crime, to enhance public safety, and away from natural resource areas to minimize disturbance of wildlife.

3.    Light fixtures shall be provided in areas having heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic and in potentially dangerous areas such as large parking lots, stairs, ramps, and abrupt grade changes during hours of intended use or operation.

4.    Fixtures shall be placed at a height so that light patterns overlap at a height of seven feet, which is sufficient to illuminate a person. All projects undergoing design review shall use low- or high-pressure sodium bulbs and be able to demonstrate effective shielding so that the light is directed downwards rather than omni-directional.

5.    Playing fields and court areas shall not be illuminated unless they are separated from nearby homes by adequate distance and/or screening. Adequate distance shall be at least 150 feet. Adequate screening shall be on- or off-site fences, walls, terrain variation or vegetation (trees, etc.).

6.    Lines of sight shall be reasonably established so that the park and its facilities are visible to police and nearby residents.

7.    Large or visually inaccessible parks should ensure that at least some emergency vehicle access is provided to the park’s interior.

8.    Closure times may be posted and/or gates may be installed at City parks to discourage their use at night if necessary for crime prevention and/or public safety.

9.    Park landscaping shall accommodate safety concerns with appropriate use of plant types and ease of maintenance.

H.    Public facilities.

1.    Streets. Sufficient right-of-way and slope easement shall be dedicated to accommodate all abutting streets to be improved to the City’s Improvement Standards and Specifications. In determining the appropriate sizing of the street, the street should be the minimum necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic load and needs and should provide substantial accommodations for pedestrians and bicyclists and in keeping with the character of the neighborhood. Road and driveway alignment should consider and mitigate impacts on adjacent properties and in neighborhoods in terms of increased traffic loads, noise, vibrations, and glare.

Streets shall be installed per Chapter 85 CDC standards. Sidewalks shall be installed per CDC 85.200(A)(16) and 92.010(H). Both chapters allow reduced sidewalk widths to accommodate topographic limitations or to preserve trees.

2.    Parking lots. CDC 46.090 explains the parking requirements for the various categories of parks and open space areas. City squares, malls or plazas are exempt from the parking requirements of Chapter 46 CDC. Reduced parking requirements are explained in CDC 56.170. Except for areas accommodating ADA disabled parking and ADA access, parking lots may be constructed with grasscrete.

3.    Storm detention and treatment and geologic hazards. Per the submittals required by CDC 56.130 and 92.010(E), all proposed storm detention and treatment facilities must comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards, there will be no adverse off-site impacts caused by the development (including impacts from increased intensity of runoff downstream or constrictions causing ponding upstream), and the applicant must provide sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the submitted plan.

Per the submittals required by CDC 56.130(E), the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed methods of rendering known or potential hazard sites safe for development, including proposed geotechnical remediation, are feasible and adequate to prevent landslides or other damage to property and safety. The review authority may impose conditions, including limits on type or intensity of land use, which it determines are necessary to mitigate known risks of landslides or property damage.

I.    Paths and trails. Paths and trails connect the various activity areas within the park. They can also serve as part of a greater system of connective trails from one neighborhood or destination to another. Just like streets, there is a hierarchy of paths and trails.

1.    Paths that connect the right-of-way and/or parking lot with the main activity area(s) of the park need to accommodate pedestrians, bicyclists, and persons with disabilities (as grades allow). The path shall be paved and five to eight feet wide. Lesser dimensions are allowed where topography and trees limit width. The grade shall be kept to fewer than five percent where the terrain allows. The path may be illuminated if the facility is programmed for night use.

2.    Paths that provide a link through the park to neighborhoods on either side must be recognized for their value in addressing the TPR, particularly in those cases where connecting roads through the park or natural area are not provided per CDC 56.100(C)(6). These trails or paths may be paved, five to eight feet wide and may be illuminated. Narrower path sections are permitted in response to topography and to preserve trees. Illumination is especially important for this group if these paths are used by early morning and early evening bicycle and pedestrian commuters. Directional signs are needed for this type of trail and user group.

3.    Smaller or reduced width paths, within park boundaries, can be built to link lesser activity areas or areas of attraction. Walkers, cyclists, or runners who do multiple loops for exercise often use these paths. These paths may be crushed gravel or paved and at least six feet wide.

4.    Nature trails are typically three to six feet wide, gravel, hog fuel, or packed earth. These trails are especially attractive to persons seeking quieter parts of the park for natural interpretation or solitude. Other user groups often use them for exercise loops. Trails and footbridges in natural areas should be designed to minimize disturbance of significant resources. Limiting access to creek beds, potentially erosive slopes, or wetlands by humans and dogs is an important measure if habitat or resource protection is to be addressed. At least initially, the use of these trails by all user groups should be encouraged. Changes or restrictions to some user groups shall be based on empirical observations at that specific site.

5.    Disabled access paths allow disabled persons to access specific activity areas in the park at grades that meet ADA standards. Many parks have special disabled access paths with interpretive areas and viewpoints to allow visual, if not physical, access to natural resource areas. Usually, these paths are 50 to 200 meters long, eight feet wide, and clearly identified.

6.    Paths or trails that link parks, schools, neighborhoods, and the community and even integrate with adjacent cities or regional trails may be paved, five to 10 feet wide. The paths or trails should follow easily identified cognitive routes with good surveillance and defensible space.

7.    All paths and trails shall be clearly identified with signs. They shall be laid out to attract use and to discourage people from cutting across landscaped areas or impacting environmentally sensitive areas.

J.    Provisions for persons with disabilities. The needs of a person with a disability shall be provided for. Accessible routes shall be provided between parking lot(s) and principal buildings and site facilities. The accessible route shall be the most practical direct route between accessible building entries, accessible site facilities, and the accessible entry to the site. All facilities shall conform to, or exceed, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, including those included in the Uniform Building Code.

K.    Miscellaneous criteria. Selected elements of the following chapters shall be met. It is not necessary to respond to all the submittal standards or approval criteria contained in these chapters, only those elements that are found to be applicable by the Planning Director at the pre-application conference pursuant to CDC 99.030(B) and (C):

1.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

2.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

3.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

4.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

5.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

6.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas.

7.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

8.    Chapter 52 CDC, Signs.

9.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping. In addition, landscape plans shall incorporate plants which minimize irrigation needs without compromising recreational facilities or an attractive park environment. (Ord. 1604 §§ 55, 56, 2011; amended during July 2014 supplement; Ord. 1662 § 11, 2017; Ord. 1675 § 46, 2018)


56.110 SITE ANALYSIS

The site analysis shall include:

A.    A vicinity map showing the location of the property in relation to adjacent properties, roads, pedestrian and bike ways, transit stops and utility access.

B.    A site analysis on a drawing at a suitable scale (in order of preference, one inch equals 10 feet to one inch equals 30 feet) which shows:

1.    The lot or parcel boundaries, dimensions, and gross area.

2.    Contour lines at the following minimum intervals:

a.    Two-foot intervals for slopes from zero to 25 percent; and

b.    Five- or 10-foot intervals for slopes in excess of 25 percent.

3.    The location and width of adjoining streets.

4.    The drainage patterns and drainage courses on the site and on adjacent lands.

5.    Potential natural hazard areas including:

a.    Floodplain areas;

b.    Areas subject to a high water table;

c.    Landslide areas; and

d.    Areas having a high erosion potential.

6.    Resource areas including marsh and wetland areas.

7.    The site features including:

a.    Large rock outcroppings;

b.    Areas having unique views; and

c.    Streams and stream corridors.

8.    Potential historic landmarks and registered archaeological sites. The existence of such sites on the property shall be verified from records maintained by the Community Development Department and other recognized sources.

9.    The location of trees having a six-inch caliper at five feet and where the site is heavily wooded, an aerial photograph at the same scale as the site analysis may be submitted and only those trees that will be affected by the proposed development need be sited accurately (e.g., construction activity within the dripline of the trees). All significant trees and tree clusters identified by the City Arborist using the criteria of CDC 56.100(C)(2) and all heritage trees shall be delineated.

10.    Identification information including the name and address of the owner, developer, and project designer and a lineal scale and north arrow. (Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 41, 2014)


56.120 THE SITE PLAN

The site plan shall be at the same scale as the site analysis (CDC 56.110) and shall show:

A.    The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant’s property and proposed development and adjacent property and development.

B.    Boundary lines and dimensions for the perimeter of the property and the dimensions for all proposed lot lines, section lines, corners, and monuments.

C.    Streams and stream corridors.

D.    Identification information, including the name and address of the owner/applicant and project designer and a lineal scale and north arrow.

E.    The location, dimensions, and names of all:

1.    Existing and platted streets and other public ways and easements on adjacent property and on the site;

2.    Proposed streets or other public ways, easements, on the site.

F.    The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

1.    Existing structures, improvements, and utility facilities on adjoining properties;

2.    Existing structures, improvements, and utility facilities to remain on the site;

3.    Proposed structures, improvements, and utility facilities on the site.

G.    The location and dimensions of:

1.    The entrances and exits to the site;

2.    The parking and circulation areas;

3.    Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading, and delivery;

4.    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas;

5.    All utilities; and

6.    Sign locations.

H.    The location of areas to be landscaped.

I.    The location and type of outdoor light with specific consideration given to crime prevention.

J.    Submit an engineering noise control plan by a licensed acoustical engineer to satisfy the noise standards as identified in CDC 55.100(D), in cases where proposed land use can reasonably be expected to generate noise. A reasonable alternative to commissioning a noise study to determine the noise levels of, for example, a children’s soccer league, would be to either locate the potential noise source away from residential properties, to limit activity hours and/or not to provide illuminated playing fields or ball courts.


56.130 GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLANS

For Type I, II and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), a registered civil engineer must prepare a grading plan and a storm detention and treatment plan pursuant to CDC 92.010(E), at the same scale as the site analysis (CDC 56.110), and a statement that demonstrates:

A.    The location and extent to which grading will take place indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed.

B.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

C.    All proposed storm detention and treatment facilities comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards, there will be no adverse off-site impacts caused by the development (including impacts from increased intensity of runoff downstream or constrictions causing ponding upstream), and there is sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the plan.

D.    Per CDC 99.035, the Planning Director may require the information in subsections A, B and C of this section for Type IV lands if the information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed site plan.

E.    Tables and maps identifying acreage, location and type of development constraints due to site characteristics such as slope, drainage and geologic hazards. For Type I, II and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), the applicant must provide a geologic report, with text, figures and attachments as needed to meet the industry standard of practice, prepared by a certified engineering geologist and/or a geotechnical professional engineer, that includes:

1.    Site characteristics, geologic descriptions and a summary of the site investigation conducted;

2.    Assessment of engineering geological conditions and factors;

3.    Review of the City of West Linn’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan and applicability to the site; and

4.    Conclusions and recommendations focused on geologic constraints for the proposed land use or development activity, limitations and potential risks of development, recommendations for mitigation approaches and additional work needed at future development stages including further testing and monitoring.

F.    Identification information, including the name and address of the owner, developer, project designer, and the project engineer. (Ord. 1622 § 28, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 12, 2017)


56.140 ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS

Architectural drawings shall be submitted showing:

A.    Building elevations and sections;

B.    Building materials: color and type;

C.    The name of the architect or designer.


56.150 LANDSCAPE PLAN

A.    The landscape plan shall include the following:

1.    Existing trees, shrubs, plants and groundcover that will be retained as well as an indication of those trees and landscaping that will be removed.

2.    Generalized landscape plan showing areas to be landscaped in the new park plan. Showing that an area will be planted with shrubs or evergreen groundcover is sufficient. (It is not necessary to provide plant detail; for example, five-gallon ferns at four feet on center, etc.)

3.    Statement that the landscaping will be irrigated.

4.    The location of buffering or screening materials (e.g., fences).

5.    The location of playing fields (identify type of activity, if known), picnic shelters, play areas, etc.

6.    Building and pavement outlines.

B.    The landscape plan shall be accompanied by:

1.    Planting schedule.

2.    Supplemental information as required by the Planning Director or City Arborist.


56.170 EXCEPTIONS TO UNDERLYING PARKING PROVISIONS

The Planning Director may grant up to a 50 percent exception to the off-street parking dimensional and minimum number of space requirements in the applicable zone so long as one of the following criteria is met:

A.    There is an opportunity for shared parking and there is written evidence that the property owners are willing to enter into a legal agreement; or

B.    Public transportation is available to the site reducing the standards and will not adversely affect adjoining uses, and there is a community interest in the preservation of particular natural feature(s) of the site which make it in the public interest to grant an exception to parking standards.


Chapter 57 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES (WCF)

Sections:

57.010    PURPOSE

57.020    REPEALED

57.030    APPLICABILITY

57.040    TABLE EXPLAINING APPLICABILITY OF WCF TYPE BY ZONE

57.050    EXCLUSIONS

57.060    APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

57.070    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

57.080    APPROVAL CRITERIA

57.090    CO-LOCATION PROTOCOL

57.100    ABANDONED FACILITIES


57.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate locations, site development standards, and permit requirements for wireless communication facilities and services within the City, in a manner which will facilitate location of various types of wireless communication facilities in permitted locations so they are consistent with the residential character of the City. The requirements of this chapter:

A.    Ensure compatibility of proposed WCF with surrounding areas by establishing standards for location, height, structural integrity, design review, landscaping, and visual screening;

B.    Reduce the apparent quantity of WCF by providing incentives and other inducements to utilize co-location and stealth technologies, thereby lessening adverse visual impacts of these facilities on the City’s developed residential areas and natural surroundings; and

C.    Allow WCF which are sufficient to allow adequate service to citizens, the traveling public, and others within the City; and to accommodate the need for connection of such services to wireless facilities in adjacent and surrounding communities. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.020 DEFINITIONS

Repealed by Ord. 1604. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.030 APPLICABILITY

These provisions shall apply to all applications for the installation or construction of wireless communication facilities (WCF) including support structures and attached and/or co-located WCFs and antennas and shall include stealth designs as defined in CDC 57.020. This chapter encourages co-location and the placement of antennas and WCF on existing structures and buildings by permitting those uses, either outright or by design review. The construction of new WCF structures is discouraged by requiring more extensive review including conditional use permits and design review. The following table explains what review process is required for each WCF type by zoning district. Non-commercial ham radio towers, citizen band transmitters, and antennas over 50 feet tall must be reviewed under this chapter like any other WCF using the appropriate category. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.040 TABLE EXPLAINING APPLICABILITY OF WCF TYPE BY ZONE

 

Wireless Communication Facilities Type

CO-LOCATION

	Zone	New Tower 120' Max. Incl. Array	New Tower 40' Max. Incl. Array	30' Max Above Bldg. or Existing WCF1	10' Max. Above Bldg. or Existing WCF1	No Ext. Above Bldg. or Existing WCF	On Utility/Light Poles in R.O.W. or Easemts All Zones – No Extension4	Stealth Designs Inside Bldgs.2	Install Accessory Bldgs., Equip., Landscaping

	GC, OBC, CI, R-2.1, R-3	No	CUP/DR Class II	No	DR Class I	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3

	GI	CUP/DR Class II	DR Class II	DR Class I	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3

	Public Bldgs. in All Zones	No	No	No	DR Class I	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3	Outright3

	All Other Zones	No	No	No	No	No	DR Class I	DR Class I	DR Class I

	Historic W.F. Dr. Comm’l Overlay Zone	No	No	No	No	No	No	Outright3	Outright-inside existing bldg. only3

1 Maximum five antenna arrays/users on same tower, or in case of building, there is a maximum of five antenna arrays/users. Additional antenna arrays/users on same building must be at least 50 feet from existing cluster or outside of line of sight of existing cluster as seen from adjacent right-of-way. Maximum height is to top of highest antenna. The reference in the third vertical column to “30' Max. Above Bldg. or Existing WCF” means that any WCF tower built under the provisions of this chapter can be increased in height by a maximum of 30 feet. For example, a 120-foot tower in the General Industrial zone could be increased to 150 feet to accommodate co-location. No additional height increases would be permitted unless by Class II variance. WCF providers cannot stack one 30-foot increase on top of another 30-foot increase.

2 Stealth designs represent the placement of antennas and all support equipment inside buildings or enclosures so they are not readily seen from adjacent rights-of-way or properties for the purpose of lessening or eliminating visual impacts. Additions to buildings such as cupolas, clock towers, and dormers are permitted to accommodate stealth WCF. No new freestanding buildings may be built exclusively or primarily for the purpose of concealing stealth WCF and support equipment.

3 Fencing, security, landscaping, screening, and noise standards of CDC 57.080(L) through (N) shall apply.

4 “No Extension” means that antennas or other WCF equipment may not extend above the top of the utility or light pole.

(Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.050 EXCLUSIONS

The following uses and activities shall be exempt from these regulations:

A.    Existing non-commercial or commercial towers and antennas and any repair, reconstruction, repainting, or maintenance of these facilities which does not create a significant change in visual impact.

B.    Non-commercial ham radio towers, citizen band transmitters, and antennas under 50 feet tall.

C.    Antennas and equipment and other apparatus completely located within an existing structure, the purpose of which is to enhance or facilitate communication function of other structures on the site. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.060 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

An application shall be pursuant to CDC 99.030. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.070 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

To be considered a complete application, the following information is required:

1.    A plot plan showing: the lease area; antenna structure; height above grade and setback from property lines; equipment shelters and setback from property lines; access; connection point with landline system; and all landscape areas intended to screen the WCF.

2.    An engineer’s statement that the RF emissions at grade, or at nearest habitable space when attached to an existing structure, comply with FCC rules for such emissions; the cumulative RF emissions if co-located.

3.    A description of the type of service offered (voice, data, video, etc.) and the consumer receiving equipment.

4.    Provide facilities maintenance schedule.

5.    Provide zoning and Comprehensive Plan designation of proposed site.

6.    Photo or computer simulations of the proposed WCF from the four cardinal compass points and/or abutting right-of-way, whichever provides the most accurate representation of the proposed facility from a variety of vantage points.

7.    The distance from the nearest WCF and nearest co-location site.

8.    An engineer’s statement demonstrating:

a.    The reasons why the WCF must be located at the proposed site (service demands, topography, dropped coverage, etc.);

b.    The reason why the WCF must be constructed at the proposed height; and

c.    Verification of good faith efforts made to locate or design the proposed WCF to qualify for a less rigorous approval process (building permit or site plan approval).

9.    A copy of that portion of the lease agreement (or lease memo) with the property owner that includes co-location provisions (where applicable), facility removal within 90 days of abandonment, and a bond to guarantee removal shall be submitted to the City for review purposes only. The bond may be effective only in the event that the application is approved.

10.    A signed statement from the applicant agreeing to allow co-location on the applicant’s structure (where applicable).

11.    A map of the City showing the approximate geographic limits of the cell to be created by the facility. This map shall include the same information for all other facilities owned or operated by the applicant within the City, or extending within the City from a distant location, and any existing detached WCF of another provider within 1,000 feet of the proposed site.

12.    An engineer’s analysis/report of the recommended site location area for the proposed facility. If an existing structure approved for co-location is within the area recommended by the engineer’s report, reasons for not co-locating shall be provided and must demonstrate at least one of the following deficiencies:

a.    The structure is not of sufficient height to meet engineering requirements;

b.    The structure is not of sufficient structural strength to accommodate the WCF;

c.    Electromagnetic interference for one or both WCF will result from co-location; or

d.    The radio frequency coverage objective cannot be adequately met.

13.    Full response to CDC 57.080 approval criteria as applicable.

14.    Fulfillment of co-location protocol requirements of CDC 57.090. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.080 APPROVAL CRITERIA

A.    For WCF allowed outright, a building permit is required. WCF, accessory buildings, and equipment shall satisfy subsections L through N of this section.

B.    For WCF allowed by Design Review Class I, the applicable approval criteria of Chapter 55 CDC and applicable criteria of subsections E through N of this section shall apply.

C.    For WCF allowed by Design Review Class II, the applicable approval criteria of Chapter 55 CDC and applicable criteria of subsections E through N of this section shall apply.

D.    For WCF allowed by conditional use permit, the approval criteria of CDC 60.070 and applicable criteria of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review, and subsections E through N of this section shall apply.

E.    Aesthetics.

1.    New towers shall maintain a galvanized steely grey finish or other accepted contextual or compatible color or, if required by the FAA, be painted pursuant to the FAA’s requirements.

2.    If co-location on an existing tower is requested, the design of any antenna, accessory structure, or equipment shall, to the greatest extent possible, use materials, colors, and textures that will match the existing tower, building, or other existing structures.

3.    If co-location on an existing non-tower structure is requested, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be a neutral color that is the same as the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.

F.    Setbacks.

1.    Towers designed to collapse within themselves shall be set back in accordance with the setbacks contained in the zone.

2.    Towers not designed to collapse within themselves shall be set back from the property line by a distance equal to one-half the height of the tower.

G.    Tower location. Co-location or placement on existing structures or buildings is the preferred siting choice. If co-location cannot be accommodated, new WCFs shall be placed as close as possible to existing WCFs so that the impacts are concentrated rather than spread out or dispersed.

H.    Height. New towers shall not exceed 120 feet in height in the GI zone, and 40 feet in height in the GC, OBC, CI, R-2.1, and R-3 zones except by Class II variance. Antennas, etc., may not extend above these heights.

I.    Lighting. None allowed except as required by the FAA.

J.    Points of visual interest shall be protected. Long-range views from the I-205 rest area towards Mt. Hood shall be protected pursuant to subsection K of this section. Views from residential structures located within 250 feet of the proposed wireless communication facility to the following points of visual interest shall be protected to the greatest practical extent:

1.    Mountains.

2.    Significant public open spaces.

3.    Historic structures.

K.    Methods for protecting points of visual interest. The following standards, and only the following standards, shall be used to protect the above-identified points of visual interest to the greatest practical extent if views from a residential structure located within 250 feet from a proposed wireless communication facility to a point of visual interest specifically identified above are significantly impacted. The standards shall also apply to preserving long-range views of Mt. Hood from the northbound I-205 rest area. The applicant shall:

1.    Investigate other locations within the same lot where such visual impacts can be minimized overall.

2.    Investigate alternative tower designs that can be used to minimize the interruption of views from the residents/public to the points of visual interest.

3.    Minimize visual impacts to the point of visual interest referred to above, by demonstrating that co-location or the use of other structures within the service area is not feasible at this time.

4.    Minimize visual impacts by varying the setbacks or landscape standards that would otherwise be applicable, so long as the overall impact of the proposed development is as good as or better than that which would otherwise be required without said variations.

L.    Fencing and security. For security, tower(s) and ancillary facilities shall be enclosed by a fence up to eight feet high. No fence height variances shall be required.

M.    Landscaping and screening. Landscaping shall be placed outside the fence and shall consist of a fast-growing vegetation with a minimum planted height of six feet placed densely so as to form a solid hedge. Landscaping shall be properly maintained.

N.    Noise. Noise-generating equipment shall be sound-buffered by means of baffling, barriers, or other suitable means to reduce sound levels consistent with West Linn Municipal Code Chapter 5. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1604 § 58, 2011)


57.090 CO-LOCATION PROTOCOL

A.    The purpose of this requirement is to create a process that will allow providers to equitably share publicly available, nonproprietary information among themselves, with interested persons and agencies, and with the approval authority, at the time the provider schedules a pre-application conference with the approval authority. This co-location protocol is designed to increase the likelihood that all reasonable opportunities for co-location have been investigated and that the appropriate information has been shared among the providers.

The approval authority recognizes that co-location is preferable, where technologically feasible and visually desirable, as a matter of public policy, but that co-location of antennas by providers is not always feasible for technical or business reasons. However, if all licensed providers are made aware of any pending tower or antenna permit requests, such disclosure will allow providers to have the maximum amount of time to consider possible co-location opportunities, and will also assure the approval authority that all reasonable accommodations for co-location have been investigated. The code creates strong incentives for co-location because proposals for co-location qualify for a less rigorous approval process (building permit or design review approval rather than a discretionary land use permit).

B.    A pre-application conference is required for all proposed freestanding support structures.

C.    At the time a pre-application conference is scheduled, the applicant shall demonstrate that the following notice was mailed to all other wireless providers licensed to provide service within the City:

Pursuant to the requirements of Community Development Code Chapter 57, (name of wireless provider) is hereby providing you with notice of our intent to meet with the City of West Linn in a pre-application conference to discuss the location of a freestanding wireless communication facility that would be located at _____(location)______. In general, we plan to construct a support structure of ______ feet in height for the purpose of providing (cellular, PCS, etc.) service.

Please inform us whether you have any existing or pending wireless facilities locating within (distance) of the proposed facility, that may be available for possible co-location opportunities. Please provide us with this information within 10 business days after the date of this letter. Your cooperation is appreciated.

Sincerely, (pre-application applicant, wireless provider).

D.    If a response to a co-location request letter is received by an applicant indicating an opportunity for co-location, the applicant shall make a good faith effort to analyze the feasibility of co-location. This analysis shall be submitted with an application for any freestanding support structure.

A good faith effort to investigate the feasibility of co-location shall be deemed to have occurred if the applicant submits all of the following information:

1.    A statement from a qualified engineer indicating whether the necessary service can or cannot be provided by co-location at the possible co-location site.

2.    Evidence that the lessor of the possible co-location site either agrees or disagrees to co-location on his/her property.

3.    Evidence that adequate site area exists or does not exist at the possible co-location site to accommodate needed equipment and meet all of the site development standards.

4.    Evidence that adequate access does or does not exist at the possible co-location site.

E.    If the applicant has provided information addressing each of the criteria in subsection D of this section, the co-location protocol shall be deemed complete. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


57.100 ABANDONED FACILITIES

A wireless communication facility which has been discontinued for a period of six consecutive months or longer is hereby declared abandoned. Abandoned facilities shall be removed by the property owner within 90 days from date of abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned facility is declared a public nuisance and is subject to penalties and enforcement under Chapter 106 CDC.

Upon written application, prior to the expiration of the six-month period, the Planning Director shall, in writing, grant a six-month extension for reuse of the facility. Additional extensions beyond the first six-month extension may be granted by the Planning Director subject to any conditions required to bring the project or facility into compliance with current law(s) and make compatible with surrounding development. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


Chapter 58 WILLAMETTE FALLS DRIVE COMMERCIAL DESIGN DISTRICT

Sections:

58.010    PURPOSE

58.020    IMPLEMENTATION

58.030    APPLICABILITY

58.040    EXEMPTIONS

58.050    PERMITTED USES

58.060    REPEALED

58.065    REPEALED

58.070    APPLICATION AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

58.080    FEES

58.090    STANDARDS

58.100    VARIANCE PROCEDURES

58.110    EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL


58.010 PURPOSE

A.    Implement the goals and policies of the economic element of the Comprehensive Plan relating to the rehabilitation and revitalization of the Willamette Commercial District.

B.    Enhance the historic and aesthetic quality of the Commercial District.

C.    Increase the attractiveness of the commercial areas to tourists, customers, tenants, business owners, and City residents.

D.    Reinforce the commitment to existing commercial buildings of the 1880 – 1915 period and complement the adjacent residential historic district.

E.    Encourage a sense of historic identity for the Willamette area and West Linn as a whole.


58.020 IMPLEMENTATION

The intent and purpose of this chapter shall be carried out by establishing architectural standards of the 1880 – 1915 period which shall be used in new commercial construction and remodels.


58.030 APPLICABILITY

A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new commercial construction, restorations, and remodels on Willamette Falls Drive between 10th and 15th Streets. Properties that are historic resources shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25 CDC, as applicable. “Restorations” shall be defined as all exterior repairs, replacement of materials, alterations or changes, including reroofing, painting, window and sign replacement, etc. Failure to obtain a permit shall constitute a Class A violation pursuant to CDC 106.050.

B.    Commercial structures that are also within the historic district as defined in CDC 25.030(A) are required to meet the provisions of Chapter 25 CDC in addition to the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Boundary limits. The affected area shall be as delineated in Figure 1, below. Generally, the area is along Willamette Falls Drive between 10th Street and 15th Street.

Figure 1


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1350, 1993; Ord. 1614 § 10, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


58.040 EXEMPTIONS

Remodels to exclusive single-family residential homes are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Single-family homes that are used for businesses or home occupations are not exempt. Repainting any structure requires review and is not exempt. All exemptions must be approved by the Planning Director.


58.050 PERMITTED USES

All uses permitted by the underlying General Commercial zone shall be allowed pursuant to CDC 19.030, 19.040, 19.050, and 19.060 and shall require the application of the standards of this chapter. Residential use of the second floor and the rear portion only of the ground floor, with no access onto Willamette Falls Drive, is permitted by application through this chapter. Residential use may only comprise 50 percent or less of the total square footage of the building combined. Commercial uses shall dominate the first floor. (Ord. 1401, 1997)


58.060 REVIEW BODY

Repealed by Ord. 1597. 


58.065 APPEALS OF HISTORIC REVIEW BOARD

Repealed by Ord. 1597. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


58.070 APPLICATION AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

A.    Applicants shall attend a pre-application conference if required by CDC 99.030(B).

B.    The Director shall determine the appropriateness of the proposal and the completeness of the materials to be submitted. The Director may consult with members of the Historic Review Board in this process.

C.    The application is made with appropriate fees. A written narrative may be required explaining how the proposal meets the approval criteria.

D.    All applications for remodels and new construction shall require scaled elevation plans, site plans, and material and color board. (Ord. 1599 § 5, 2011)


58.080 FEES

A.    New construction and major restoration projects shall be charged fees consistent with the adopted fee schedule for design review.

B.    Minor restoration projects under $50,000 valuation shall pay fees as directed by the adopted fee schedule.

C.    Repainting and replacement of windows (Class B restoration) shall pay a fee as directed by the adopted fee schedule.


58.090 STANDARDS

A.    Standards are needed to provide a clear and objective list of design elements that are needed to bring new construction and remodels into conformance with 1880 – 1915 architecture. Buildings of the period saw relatively few deviations in design. Consequently, the Historic Review Board will require conformance with the standards. Deviations or deletions from the standards are addressed in the variance procedure of this chapter.

B.    The use of neo-designs or simply contextual designs which only attempt to capture the basic or generalized elements such as building line, massing and form, etc., is not acceptable.


[IMAGE]


C.    The following standards shall apply to new construction and remodels.

1.    Dimensional standards.

a.    Front: zero-foot setback. Building may not be set back from the property line unless it is consistent with predominant building line.

b.    Side and side street: zero-foot setback. Building may not be set back from the side property line except for side passageway, accessway, or stairway unless fire codes dictate otherwise. The setback shall not exceed six feet. 

c.    Rear: 20-foot setback. Setbacks between zero and 20 feet are permitted only if the applicant can demonstrate that he or she can successfully mitigate any impacts associated with the building in current and future uses as they would relate to abutting residential and other properties.

d.    Lot coverage: up to 100 percent of lot may be developed depending upon ability to mitigate impacts upon abutting residential and other uses.

2.    Minimum landscaping required. Sites in this district are exempt from landscaping requirements as identified in Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping, with the exception of parking areas.

3.    Building height limitations. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet (as measured by this code), and two stories. False fronts shall be considered as the peak of the building if it exceeds the gable roof ridgeline.


[IMAGE]


4.    External ground level or first story minimum height. Ten feet to allow transoms.

5.    Roof form. Flat or pitched roofs. Pitched roof ridgeline shall run from the front of the building to the back.


[IMAGE]


6.    Building form, scale and depth. Building shall emphasize the vertical through narrow, tall windows (especially on second floor), vertical awning supports, engaged columns, and exaggerated facades creating a height-to-width ratio of 1.5:1.


[IMAGE]


Building depth shall be flat, only relieved by awning and cornice projections and the indented doorway.

7.    Spacing and rhythm. Buildings shall follow a regular rhythm. Strong vertical breaks or lines should be regularly spaced every 25 to 50 feet.

8.    Facades. No gables, hipped, or pitched roofs shall be exposed to the street at the front. The “Western false front” shall be the preferred style although variations shall be allowed.


[IMAGE]


9.    Cornice. Cornices shall be broad and may include regularly spaced supporting brackets. A cornice is not required, but preferred.


[IMAGE]


10.    Building materials and orientation. Wood shall be the principal building material. Horizontal wood siding in one-inch by eight-inch dimensions shall be used for siding. Brick and certain concrete configurations are permitted only by a variance under CDC 58.090.

11.    Awnings. All buildings shall have awnings extending out from building face. Awnings are preferred for micro-climate benefits. Ideally, the building will have both transom and awnings, although transoms are not required.

Awnings shall be either canvas or vinyl, or similar approved material, supported by an internal metal framework or metal or wood supported by a curved metal support, either attached to the building or a simple four-inch by four-inch wood post extending down to the outside of the sidewalk.


[IMAGE]


Awnings shall, therefore, extend beyond the front property line to the outside edge of the sidewalk, and shall possess a seven-foot clearance to the valance or any other part. The pitch of the awning shall be 10 to 40 degrees. No “bubble-type” awnings are permitted. No backlit awnings are permitted. Canvas or matte-finish vinyl, or similar approved material awnings, may be one-color or striped and shall have a free-hanging plain or crenelated valance. Canvas or matte-finish vinyl, or similar approved material awnings, should not be shared between two structures. Each structure should have its own awning.

12.    Extruded roofs. As a substitute for an awning, extruded roofs have a 10- to 40-degree pitch and extend one to two feet from the building face just above the transom windows where the first and second stories meet. The roof runs along the entire building frontage.

Standard roofing materials are used. Transoms are required with extruded roofs.


[IMAGE]


13.    Doors and entryways. The entryway shall be centered in the middle of the building at grade. The buildings on street corners may position their doors on the corner at an angle as depicted in the illustration. The doors may be single or double doors. The doors shall be recessed three to five feet back from the building line. Doors shall have glazing in the upper two-thirds to half of the door. Panels should decorate the lower portions. The entryway shall have windows all the way around at the same level as the other display windows. Wood doors are preferable although alternatives with a dark matte finish may be acceptable.


[IMAGE]


14.    Glazing. Clear glass only. No mirrored or tinted glass. No films applied to glass. Lettering on glass is permitted (see subsection (C)(25)(b) of this section).

15.    Display or pedestrian level windows. Shall extend across at least 80 percent of building front. The windows shall start one and one-half to two and one-half feet above grade to a height of seven to eight feet, and shall be level with the top of the height of the adjacent entryway area, excluding transom. A single sheet of glass is not permitted. The window shall be broken up into numerous sections, also known as lights. From 1880 onwards, the number of lights was generally no more than six in a pedestrian-level window. The frames may be wood or vinyl-clad wood, or other materials so long as a matte finish is possible.


[IMAGE]


16.    Second floor and other windows. Double- and single-hung windows proportionately spaced and centered should be used. Smaller square shaped windows may be permitted (one and one-half feet to two feet per side). A typical window should have a 3:1 height to width ratio for the glass area. There should be a minimum of two lights: “one over one” of equal size. “Two over one” or “four over one” is appropriate.


[IMAGE]


17.    Wainscotting. Wainscotting shall be consistent with primary material of the building, typically wood.

18.    Shutters. Shutters are not allowed.

19.    Balconies. No balconies are permitted except on rear of building.

20.    Exterior stairs. Simple stairs are permitted on the rear or side of the building only.

21.    Roof mounted mechanical equipment. Equipment shall be screened from view on all sides by normal and consistent architectural features of the building. CDC 55.100(D), Privacy and noise, shall apply.

22.    Air conditioning. No window types on avenue or street side are permitted. Window-mounted air conditioners are not allowed at rear where abutting residential.

23.    Exterior lighting fixtures. Any lighting fixtures that can be traced to 1880 – 1915 period are permitted. Simple modern fixtures that are screened and/or do not attract attention are acceptable. Overly ornate fixtures of the Victorian era are to be discouraged.

24.    Transoms. Transom windows are required with extruded roofs and optional with awnings. Transom windows shall cover the front of the building above, but not beyond, the main display windows and the entryway area. Transoms should be broken up into sections every six inches to three feet in a consistent and equal pattern. Height should not exceed three feet. Transoms may or may not open. False ceilings are allowed behind the transoms.


[IMAGE]


 

 

25.    Planters. No planters are allowed.

26.    Paint colors. Body color typically included white, cream, or a light, warm color of low intensity. Accents, trims, windows, etc., should be dark-colored. Contrasting colors should be compatible. Existing colors shall not enjoy protected status when repainting is proposed. A palette or color wheel of acceptable 1880 – 1915 period colors shall be the basis for color selection. No other colors are allowed. The palette is available at the Community Development Department.

27.    Ornamental or advertising flags, pennants, or banners. Not permitted on buildings.

28.    New materials. Permitted where it is demonstrated that new material visually replicates originally required material, except siding, which must be wood. (Ord. 1391, 1996; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1604 § 59, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 18, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 47, 2018)


58.100 VARIANCE PROCEDURES

In those circumstances where a design proposal cannot meet the standards, or proposes an alternative to the standard, the Historic Review Board may grant a variance in those cases where one of the following criteria is met:

A.    The applicant can demonstrate by review of historical records or photographs that the alternative is correct and appropriate to architecture in the region, and especially West Linn, in 1880 – 1915.

B.    The applicant is incorporating exceptional 1880 – 1915 architecture into the building which overcompensates for an omission. The emphasis is upon superior design, detail, or workmanship.


[IMAGE]



58.110 EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

If substantial construction has not occurred within three years from the date of approval of the development plan, the approved proposal will be void, unless an extension is granted per CDC 99.325. (Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


Chapter 59 WILLAMETTE NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE TRANSITIONAL ZONE

Sections:

59.010    PURPOSE

59.020    PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

59.030    PERMITTED USES

59.040    ACCESSORY USES

59.050    USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

59.060    CONDITIONAL USES

59.070    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

59.080    ADDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS

59.090    DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

59.100    OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS


59.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of the mixed use/transitional zone is to provide for a transitional area between commercial and residential zones with a desirable mix of residential land uses with limited commercial land uses. The limited commercial uses allowed in this district are selected for their compatibility with residential uses and their ability to meet the needs of the neighborhood. Uses in this district are intended to be compatible with the design and aesthetic qualities of the adjacent neighborhood. This zone is intended to implement the Willamette neighborhood plan as authorized by the policies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007)


59.020 PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A use permitted outright, CDC 59.030, is a use that requires no approval under the provisions of this code. If a use is not listed as a use permitted outright, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

B.    A use permitted under prescribed conditions, CDC 59.050, is a use for which approval will be granted provided all conditions are satisfied, and:

1.    The Planning Director shall make the decision in the manner provided by CDC 99.060(A)(2), Administrative Procedures, except that no notice shall be required; and

2.    The decision may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

C.    The approval of a conditional use (CDC 59.060) is discretionary with the Planning Commission. The approval process and criteria for approval are set forth in Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses. If a use is not listed as a conditional use, it may be held to be a similar unlisted use under the provisions of Chapter 80 CDC.

D.    The following code provisions may be applicable in certain situations:

1.    Chapter 65 CDC, Non-conforming Uses Involving a Structure.

2.    Chapter 66 CDC, Non-conforming Structures.

3.    Chapter 67 CDC, Non-conforming Uses of Land.

4.    Chapter 68 CDC, Non-conforming Lots, Lots of Record.

5.    Chapter 75 CDC, Variance. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007)


59.030 PERMITTED USES

The following are uses permitted outright in this zone:

1.    Single-family detached dwelling;

2.    Multi-family dwelling;

3.    Common-wall single-family dwellings above a permitted use;

4.    Residential use of the second floor or a portion of the ground floor of a permitted use;

5.    Residential home;

6.    Family day care;

7.    Bed and breakfast lodging;

8.    Animal sales and services, grooming;

9.    Business support services;

10.    Cultural exhibits and library services;

11.    General retail services;

12.    Medical and dental services;

13.    Personal service facilities;

14.    Professional and administrative services;

15.    Transportation facilities (Type I);

16.    Utility, minor. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1604 § 60, 2011; Ord. 1686 § 3, 2018)


59.040 ACCESSORY USES

1.    Accessory uses are allowed in this zone as provided by Chapter 34 CDC. 

2.    Manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1686 § 4, 2018)


59.050 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

The following uses are allowed in this zone under prescribed conditions:

1.    Signs, subject to the following provisions:

a.    Wall signs. Shall not exceed 10 percent of the square footage of the front elevation. The calculation of allowable signage is explained in CDC 52.300. The sign(s) shall be proportionate to buildings and signs on adjacent buildings. The 10 percent shall be broken up into multiple signs. The sign(s) shall be mounted or painted on the second floor, on the valance of the awning, on the windows at pedestrian level, or on four-by-four awning posts.

b.    Ground-mounted signs. One ground-mounted sign is permitted in the front yard with a maximum size of 16 square feet, a maximum height of four feet, and a minimum setback of five feet from the right-of-way.

c.    No signs shall be the internally lit “can” type. No backlit signs are permitted. Illumination by spotlight is permitted for either sign type. Neon signs are permitted only inside the windows. No flashing signs are allowed. By temporary sign permit only, neon colored lettering or designs painted on windows or on paper or banners in the windows are allowed, but discouraged. Small signs or plaques that describe the building in a historical sense are exempt from the allowable square footage restrictions. Signs cannot project from the building face.

d.    Temporary signs. Temporary sandwich board signs are permitted without the temporal restrictions of Chapter 52 CDC.

e.    All other provisions of Chapter 52 CDC. Signs are applicable unless they conflict with the provisions of this chapter.

2.    Temporary use, subject to the provisions of Chapter 35 CDC.

3.    Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 37 CDC. 

4.    Consumer repair services, as prescribed with no exterior storage.

5.    Animal sales and services: veterinary (small animals), as prescribed with no exterior runs or storage.

6.    Financial and insurance, as prescribed with no drive-through service.

7.    Building maintenance services, as prescribed with no exterior storage.

8.    Wireless communication facilities, subject to the provisions of Chapter 57 CDC. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1686 § 5, 2018)


59.060 CONDITIONAL USES

Only the following conditional uses are allowed in this zone subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses:

1.    Certified child care center.

2.    Community building.

3.    Religious institution.

4.    Senior center.

5.    Public support and public safety facilities, including public parking lots.

6.    Nursery.

7.    Parks and open space.

8.    Eating and drinking establishments.

9.    Food and beverage retail sales.

10.    Hotel/motel. 

11.    Construction sales and services.

12.    Parking facilities. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1655 § 6, 2016; Ord. 1675 § 48, 2018; Ord. 1686 § 6, 2018)


59.070 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT AND USES PERMITTED UNDER PRESCRIBED CONDITIONS

A.    Except as may be otherwise provided by the provisions of this code, the following are the requirements for uses within this zone:

1.    The minimum front lot line length or the minimum lot width at the front lot line shall be 35 feet.

2.    The average minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

3.    The average minimum lot depth shall not be less than 90 feet.

4.    The minimum yard dimensions or minimum building setback area from the lot line shall be:

a.    For a front yard, 12 feet minimum and 20 feet maximum to the structure, except that a porch, patio, or pedestrian amenity may be six feet from the front property line.

b.    For an interior side yard, seven and one-half feet.

c.    For a side yard abutting a street, 12 feet.

d.    For a rear yard, 20 feet. However, where the use abuts a residential district, the setback distance required in the residential district shall apply, and within the setback area a buffer of at least 10 feet of landscaping in addition to a fence is required.

5.    The maximum building height shall be two stories above grade, or 35 feet, whichever is less.

6.    Maximum building size for all floors shall not exceed 6,000 square feet above grade excluding porches.

7.    The maximum building floor area ratio shall be 0.4, except that the ground floor of the building shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. Type I and II lands shall not be counted toward lot area when determining allowable floor area ratio, except that a minimum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall be allowed regardless of the classification of lands within the property. That 30 percent shall be based upon the entire property including Type I and II lands. Existing residences in excess of this standard may be replaced to their prior dimensions when damaged without the requirement that the homeowner obtain a non-conforming structures permit under Chapter 66 CDC.

8.    The minimum lot size shall be 4,500 square feet and the maximum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet, unless defined as an existing lot of record.

B.    Design standards. All uses in the mixed-use zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, except for CDC 55.100(B)(7)(a), (b), (c), (h), (i), and (j). Further, single-family and duplex residential uses shall also comply with the Class I design review standards. In addition, the design standards described below apply to all uses.

1.    Residential-style building with single story porch on the front, and on the side where it abuts a street.

2.    New sidewalk construction shall be allowed to match the historical sidewalk standards in this zone.

3.    Off-street parking shall be behind, under, or on the side of building.

4.    Garages shall not extend any closer to the street than the street-facing facade of the house.

5.    There shall be no illuminated outdoor advertising on accessory buildings, equipment, or vending machines

6.    These design standards, subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section, shall not apply to public facilities such as reservoirs, water towers, treatment plants, fire stations, pump stations, power transmission facilities, etc. It is recognized that many of these facilities, due to their functional requirements, cannot readily be configured to meet these design standards. However, attempts shall be made to make the design sympathetic to surrounding properties through compatible architecture, enhanced landscaping, setbacks, buffers, and other reasonable means. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1675 § 50, 2018)


59.080 ADDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS

In addition to all other provisions of this section, the following additional requirements may apply:

A.    Permitted uses may only be open from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and are subject to the noise provisions of Chapter 55 CDC.

B.    Exterior business activity shall not take place beyond the rear wall of the building when the subject property abuts a residential district, except for parking and refuse storage. Refuse storage must be buffered or enclosed and may not abut a property line that adjoins a residential zone. (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1614 § 11, 2013)


59.090 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES

Except as may otherwise be established by this code, the appropriate lot or parcel size for a conditional use shall be determined by the approval authority at the time of consideration of the application based upon the criteria set forth in CDC 60.070(A) and (B). (Ord. 1515, 2005; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1636 § 42, 2014)


59.100 OTHER APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

The following standards apply to all development including permitted uses:

1.    Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection.

2.    Chapter 36 CDC, Manufactured Homes.

3.    Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection.

4.    Chapter 34 CDC, Accessory Structures, Accessory Dwelling Units, and Accessory Uses.

5.    Chapter 35 CDC, Temporary Structures and Uses.

6.    Chapter 37 CDC, Home Occupations.

7.    Chapter 38 CDC, Additional Yard Area Required; Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Storage in Yards; Projections into Yards.

8.    Chapter 41 CDC, Building Height, Structures on Steep Lots, Exceptions.

9.    Chapter 42 CDC, Clear Vision Areas.

10.    Chapter 44 CDC, Fences.

11.    Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

12.    Chapter 46 CDC, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Reservoir Areas, except for the provisions of CDC 46.140, apply to all uses.

13.    Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.

14.    Chapter 54 CDC, Landscaping.

15.    Chapter 53 CDC, Sidewalk Use. (Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1614 § 12, 2013; Ord. 1675 § 49, 2018)


Chapter 60 CONDITIONAL USES

Sections:

60.010    PURPOSE

60.030    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

60.040    TIME LIMIT ON A CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL

60.050    BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE

60.060    APPLICATION

60.070    APPROVAL STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS

60.080    SITE PLAN AND MAP

60.090    ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES (TYPE II)

60.100    ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR SCHOOLS AND OTHER GOVERNMENT FACILITIES


60.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures under which conditional uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered if the site is appropriate and if other conditions can be met. (Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


60.030 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    Conditional use applications shall be decided by the Planning Commission in the manner set forth in CDC 99.060(B). A petition for review by the Council may be filed as provided by CDC 99.240(B).

B.    All approved conditional use applications in new buildings, or buildings with a major modification, shall be subject to design review under the provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, and in the manner set forth in CDC 99.060(B). 

C.    All approved conditional use applications within existing buildings shall not be subject to design review. (Ord. 1635 § 28, 2014)


60.040 TIME LIMIT ON A CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL

Approval of a conditional use that required a design review shall be subject to the time limitations set forth in CDC 55.040. Approval of a conditional use that did not require design review shall be void unless either the use is commenced or an extension is granted per CDC 99.325 within three years of the approval. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1604 § 61, 2011)


60.050 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE

Building permits for all or any portion of a conditional use shall be issued only on the basis of the conditional use plan and conditions as approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1622 § 21, 2014)


60.060 APPLICATION

A.    A conditional use application shall be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

B.    A prerequisite to the filing of an application is a pre-application conference at which time the Director shall explain the requirements and provide the appropriate forms as specified in CDC 99.030(B) and (C).

C.    A prerequisite to the filing of an application is a meeting with the respective City-recognized neighborhood association, per CDC 99.038, at which time the applicant will present his/her proposal and receive comments.

D.    An application for a conditional use shall include the completed application form and:

1.    A narrative which addresses the approval criteria set forth in CDC 60.070 and which sustains the applicant’s burden of proof;

2.    A site plan as provided by CDC 60.080; and

3.    If site modification or construction is proposed, a storm detention and treatment plan and narrative pursuant to CDC 92.010(E).

One original application form must be submitted. One copy at the original scale and one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. One copy of all other items must be submitted. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the City. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Community Development Department. 

E.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee. (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 § 16, 2014; Ord. 1662 § 13, 2017)


60.070 APPROVAL STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS

A.    The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use, except for a manufactured home subdivision in which case the approval standards and conditions shall be those specified in CDC 36.030, or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact with respect to each of the following criteria:

1.    The site size and dimensions provide:

a.    Adequate area for the needs of the proposed use; and

b.    Adequate area for aesthetic design treatment to mitigate any possible adverse effect from the use on surrounding properties and uses. 

2.    The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use considering size, shape, location, topography, and natural features.

3.    The granting of the proposal will produce a facility that provides an overall benefit to the City.

4.    Adequate public facilities will be available to provide service to the property at the time of occupancy. 

5.    The applicable requirements of the zone are met, except as modified by this chapter.

6.    The supplementary requirements set forth in Chapters 52 to 55 CDC and CDC 92.010(E) are met, if applicable.

7.    The use will comply with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

B.    An approved conditional use or enlargement or alteration of an existing conditional use shall be subject to the development review provisions set forth in Chapter 55 CDC.

C.    The Planning Commission may impose conditions on its approval of a conditional use which it finds are necessary to assure the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.    Limiting the hours, days, place, and manner of operation.

2.    Requiring design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor, and dust.

3.    Requiring additional setback areas, lot area, or lot depth, or width.

4.    Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, or location on the site.

5.    Designating the size, number, location and design of vehicle access points.

6.    Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and the street to be improved including all steps necessary to address future street improvements identified in the adopted Transportation System Plan.

7.    Requiring participation in making the intersection improvement or improvements identified in the Transportation System Plan when a traffic analysis (compiled as an element of a conditional use application for the property) indicates the application should contribute toward.

8.    Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, and surfacing of parking and loading areas.

9.    Limiting the number, size, location, height, and lighting of signs.

10.    Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting.

11.    Requiring berming, screening, or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance.

12.    Requiring and designating the size, height, location, and materials for fences.

13.    Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, and drainage areas.

D.    Aggregate extraction uses shall also be subject to the provisions of ORS 541.605. 

E.     The Historic Review Board shall review an application for a conditional use, or to enlarge a conditional use on a property designated as a historic resource, based on findings of fact that the use will: 

1.    Preserve or improve a historic resource which would probably not be preserved or improved otherwise; and 

2.     Utilize existing structures rather than new structures. (Ord. 1291, 1987; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1614 § 13, 2013; Ord. 1655 § 7, 2016; Ord. 1662 § 14, 2017)


60.080 SITE PLAN AND MAP

A.    All site plans and maps shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the scale of the site plan, north arrow, and a vicinity map.

B.    The applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to an appropriate scale (in order of preference, one inch equals 10 feet to one inch equals 30 feet) which contains the following information:

1.    The subdivision name, block, and lot number or the section, township, range, and tax lot number.

2.    The lot or parcel boundaries, dimensions, and gross area.

3.    The applicant’s property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant’s property and proposed development to the adjacent property and development.

4.    The location, dimensions, and names of all existing and platted streets and other public ways and easements on adjacent property and on the site.

5.    The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

a.    Existing structures, improvements, utilities, and drainage facilities on adjoining properties;

b.    Existing structures, improvements, utilities, and drainage facilities to remain on the site; and

c.    Proposed structures or changes to existing structures, improvements, utilities, and drainage facilities.

6.    The existing and proposed dimensions of:

a.    The entrances and exits to the site;

b.    The parking and circulation areas;

c.    Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading and delivery;

d.    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation area;

e.    On-site outdoor recreation spaces and common areas; and

f.    Above-ground utilities.

7.    The location of areas to be landscaped and the proposed landscape plan.

8.    The location of all trees having a six-inch caliper at a height of five feet.

C.    The applicant shall submit the site plan on a map showing two-foot contours up to 20 percent grade and 10-foot contours on grades above 20 percent. (Ord. 1636 § 43, 2014)


60.090 ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES (TYPE II)

A.    Construction, reconstruction, or widening of highways, roads, bridges or other transportation facilities that are (1) not designated in the adopted West Linn Transportation System Plan (“TSP”) or (2) not designed and constructed as part of an approved, active, development order are allowed in all zoning districts subject to the conditional use and all other applicable provisions of the CDC and satisfaction of all of the following criteria:

1.    The project and its design are consistent with West Linn’s adopted TSP, with the State Transportation Planning Rule (OAR 660-012), and with the adopted Regional Transportation Plan (RTP).

2.    The project design is compatible with abutting land uses in regard to noise generation and public safety and is consistent with the applicable zoning and development standards and criteria for the abutting properties.

3.    The project design minimizes environmental impacts to identified wetlands, wildlife habitat, air and water quality, cultural resources, and scenic qualities, and a site with fewer environmental impacts is not reasonably available.

4.    The project preserves or improves the safety and function of the facility through access management, traffic calming, or other design features.

5.    The project includes provisions for bicycle and pedestrian access and circulation consistent with the comprehensive plan, the requirements of this chapter, and the TSP.

B.    State transportation system facility or improvement projects. The State Department of Transportation (“ODOT”) shall provide a narrative statement with the application demonstrating compliance with all of the criteria and standards in subsections (A)(1) through (5) of this section. Where applicable, an environmental impact statement or environmental assessment may be used to address one or more of these criteria.

C.    Proposal inconsistent with TSP/TPR. If the City determines that the proposed use or activity or its design is inconsistent with the TSP or TPR, then the applicant shall apply for and obtain a plan and/or zoning amendment prior to or in conjunction with conditional use permit approval. (Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


60.100 ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR SCHOOLS AND OTHER GOVERNMENT FACILITIES

Schools and other government facilities that attract a regular and significant volume of users shall, to the greatest extent possible, be centrally located relative to the majority of the population that they will serve and be serviceable by sidewalks and bike routes/lanes. Police and fire stations shall meet these standards to the greatest extent possible but it is acknowledged that access to arterials remains a key locational determinant for those uses. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


Chapter 65 NON-CONFORMING USES INVOLVING A STRUCTURE

Sections:

65.010    PURPOSE

65.030    EXCEPTIONS TO NON-CONFORMING USE PROVISIONS

65.040    STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO EXCEPTIONS TO THE NON-CONFORMING USE PROVISIONS

65.050    DETERMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING USE STATUS

65.060    STATUS OF NON-CONFORMING USES

65.070    DISCONTINUATION OF NON-CONFORMING USE

65.080    ALTERATIONS REQUIRED BY LAW

65.090    MAINTENANCE

65.100    EXPANSION OF USE WITHIN SAME STRUCTURE OR ALTERATION TO STRUCTURE

65.110    BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED NON-CONFORMING USE

65.120    APPLICATION

65.130    APPROVAL STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS

65.140    SITE PLAN(S) AND MAPS


65.010 PURPOSE

The zones applied within the City after the effective date of this code may cause some existing uses in structures to become prohibited uses in the particular zones in which they are located. The purpose of this chapter is to permit these non-conforming uses to be continued until they are removed or discontinued. Non-conforming uses are incompatible with the permitted uses in the zone; therefore, standards are required to assure that changes in the scope of the use are, or can be, made compatible with the permitted uses in the zone.


65.030 EXCEPTIONS TO NON-CONFORMING USE PROVISIONS

A.    Prior listed permitted uses. This subsection provides for an exception to the non-conforming use provisions for uses which were prior listed permitted uses in the following zones (Neighborhood Commercial, General Commercial, Office Business Center, Campus Industrial and General Industrial), which were superseded by the code and which were legally established prior to the effective date of this code. The following shall apply:

1.    A use which was permitted outright and is not listed in the applicable zone as a use permitted outright shall be deemed to be a conforming conditional use and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses, and Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.

2.    A use which was permitted outright, but which is a conditional use in the applicable zone, shall be deemed to be a conforming conditional use and change shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses, and Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.

B.    Prior listed conditional uses. This subsection provides for an exception to the non-conforming use provisions for uses which were prior listed conditional uses in the following zones: Neighborhood Commercial, General Commercial, Office Business Center, Campus Industrial and General Industrial, which were superseded by this code and which were legally established prior to the effective date of this code, and which are not a listed conditional use in the applicable zone, shall be deemed to be a conforming conditional use and any changes shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 60 CDC, Conditional Uses, and Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review.

C.    Uncompleted construction.

1.    In order to avoid undue hardship, this code does not require any change in the location, plans, construction, size, or use of a lot or structure, or part thereof, for which a final development approval or building permit was received prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter if construction of the structure or the use is established within one year of the effective date or in accordance with an approved development schedule; however:

a.    If a building permit is revoked or for any reason becomes void, all rights granted by this section are extinguished and thereafter all requirements of the code shall be met; and

b.    The structure and uses shall be controlled by the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 66 and 67 CDC.


65.040 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO EXCEPTIONS TO THE NON-CONFORMING USE PROVISIONS

A.    Uses made exceptions to the non-conforming use provisions by CDC 65.030(A) and (B) shall be governed by the following:

1.    Upon discontinuance of the use as provided by CDC 65.070, any new use shall conform to the provisions of the applicable zone in this code. (Ord. 1211, 1987)


65.050 DETERMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING USE STATUS

A.    The Planning Director shall make a determination regarding non-conforming use status.

B.    Upon application and payment of fees, the determination by the Planning Director of the non-conforming status may be appealed to the Planning Commission sitting as a fact-finding body pursuant to CDC 103.040.

C.    A petition for review by the Council sitting as a fact-finding body may be taken pursuant to CDC 103.090.


65.060 STATUS OF NON-CONFORMING USES

A non-conforming use may be continued, although it does not conform to the provisions of the applicable zone in which it is located, subject to the provisions of CDC 65.070 through 65.100.


65.070 DISCONTINUATION OF NON-CONFORMING USE

If a non-conforming use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year, any use of the property from that time forward shall be in full conformity with the provisions of the applicable zone. For the purpose of computing the time period, a use is deemed discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

A.    On the date when the structure and/or premises are vacated.

B.    On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services.

C.    On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the non-conforming use has occupied the premises.

D.    On the date a request for final reading of water meter is made to the City Utilities Department.

E.    The structure is damaged, removed or moved as provided by CDC 66.070. (Ord. 1211, 1987)


65.080 ALTERATIONS REQUIRED BY LAW

The Planning Director shall permit the alteration of any non-conforming use when it is required by law, rule, ordinance, or regulation.


65.090 MAINTENANCE

A structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use may be maintained in terms of normal repairs or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing performed in a manner not in conflict with the other provisions of the City code. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.


65.100 EXPANSION OF USE WITHIN SAME STRUCTURE OR ALTERATION TO STRUCTURE

An expansion of the use within the same structure or an alteration to the structure may be permitted subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission under the provisions of CDC 65.110 to 65.140.


65.110 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED NON-CONFORMING USE

A.    Building permits for all or any portion of a non-conforming use shall be issued only on the basis of the site plan and conditions as approved by the Planning Commission.

B.    Any change in the site plan or conditions of approval shall require a new application and hearing pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter and CDC 99.120(B).


65.120 APPLICATION

A.    An application to enlarge a non-conforming use or to alter a structure containing a non-conforming use shall be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

B.    A prerequisite to the filing of an application is a pre-application conference at which time the Planning Director shall explain the requirements and provide the appropriate forms.

C.    An application shall include the completed application form and:

1.    A narrative which addresses the approval standards set forth in CDC 65.130 and which sustains the applicant’s burden of proof.

2.    A site plan as provided by CDC 65.140.

One original application form must be submitted. One copy at the original scale and one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. One copy of all other items must be submitted. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the City. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Community Development Department.

D.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 § 17, 2014)


65.130 APPROVAL STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS

A.    The Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application to enlarge a non-conforming use or alter a structure containing a non-conforming use based on the provisions set forth in CDC 99.060(B) and findings of fact on each of the following:

1.    The granting of the enlargement or alteration will provide for a facility that is consistent with the overall needs of the community;

2.    The characteristics of the site can accommodate the change considering size, shape, location, topography, and natural features;

3.    The site size and dimensions provide adequate area for aesthetic design treatment to eliminate any possible adverse effects from the use on surrounding properties and uses;

4.    All required public facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposal;

5.    The alteration to the structure or expansion of the use will have no greater impact on the surrounding properties, community, or public facilities than existed at the time this application was made;

6.    The applicable dimensional requirements of the zone are met;

7.    The applicable supplementary requirements set forth in Chapters 34 to 55 CDC are met; and

8.    The use will comply with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

B.    All approved enlargements or alterations to an existing non-conforming use shall be subject to the design review provisions set forth in Chapter 55 CDC.

C.    The Planning Commission, as provided by CDC 99.120, may impose conditions on its approval which it finds are necessary to assure the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity. These conditions may include but are not limited to the following:

1.    Limiting the house, days, place, and manner of operation;

2.    Requiring design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor, and dust;

3.    Requiring additional setback areas, lot area, or lot depth or width;

4.    Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, or location on the site;

5.    Designating the size, number, location, and design of vehicle access points;

6.    Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and the street to be improved;

7.    Designating the location and size of the vehicle access points;

8.    Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, and surfacing of parking and loading areas;

9.    Limiting the number, size, location, height, and lighting of signs;

10.    Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;

11.    Requiring berming, screening, or landscaping and the establishment of standards for the installation and maintenance;

12.    Requiring and designating the size, height, location, and materials for fences; and

13.    Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, and drainage areas. (Amended during July 2014 supplement)


65.140 SITE PLAN(S) AND MAPS

A.    All site plans and maps shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the scale of the site plan, north arrow and vicinity map.

B.    The applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to an appropriate scale (in order of preference: one foot equals 10 feet to one foot equals 30 feet) which contains the following:

1.    The subdivision name, block, and lot number or the section, township, range, and tax lot number.

2.    The lot or parcel boundaries, dimensions, and gross area.

3.    The applicant’s property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant’s property and proposed development to the adjacent property and development.

4.    The location, dimensions, and names of all existing and platted streets and other public ways and easements on adjacent property and on the site.

5.    The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

a.    Existing structures, improvements, utility, and drainage facilities on adjoining properties;

b.    Existing structures, improvements, utility, and drainage facilities to remain on the site; and

c.    Proposed structures or changes to existing structures, improvements, utility, and drainage facilities on the site.

6.    The existing and proposed location and dimensions of:

a.    The entrances and exits to the site;

b.    The parking and circulation areas;

c.    Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading, and delivery;

d.    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas;

e.    On-site outdoor recreation spaces and common areas; and

f.    Above-ground utilities.

7.    The location of areas landscaped and proposed to be landscaped.

8.    The location and type of outdoor lighting with specific consideration given to crime prevention.

C.    The applicant shall submit the site plan on a map showing two-foot contours up to a 20 percent grade and 10-foot contours on grades above 20 percent. (Ord. 1636 § 44, 2014)


Chapter 66 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES

Sections:

66.010    PURPOSE

66.030    EXCEPTIONS

66.040    DETERMINATION OF STATUS

66.050    STATUS OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES

66.060    DISCONTINUANCE OR CHANGE OF CONFORMING USE IN A NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE

66.070    DESTRUCTION, MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES

66.080    ENLARGEMENT OF OR ALTERATION TO A NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE: PROCESS AND APPROVAL STANDARDS

66.090    NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE UNSUITED FOR A CONFORMING USE

66.100    BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE


66.010 PURPOSE

The zones applied within the City after the effective date of this code may cause some existing structures to become non-conforming in terms of meeting the zone lot coverage, setback, parking, building height, or landscaping requirements. The purpose of this chapter is to permit these non-conforming structures to be used until they are destroyed or made conforming.


66.030 EXCEPTIONS

A.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to lawful pre-existing single-family dwellings except that the enlargement of or alterations to a single-family dwelling shall be as provided by CDC 66.080.

B.    A structure for which a variance was granted under the zoning provisions in effect prior to the effective date of this code is not considered non-conforming solely due to the fact that the structure for which the variance was granted fails to comply with the requirements of this code. The existence of such a variance does not prevent the structure from being classified as non-conforming if some other characteristics of the use or structure fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


66.040 DETERMINATION OF STATUS

A.    The Planning Director shall make a determination regarding non-conforming status without giving notice.

B.    However, upon application and payment of fees, the determination by the Planning Director of the non-conforming status may be appealed to the Planning Commission sitting as a fact-finding body pursuant to CDC 103.040.

C.    A petition for review by the Council sitting as a fact-finding body may be taken pursuant to CDC 103.090.


66.050 STATUS OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES

A non-conforming structure may be maintained although it does not conform to the provisions of the applicable zone in which it is located subject to the provisions of CDC 66.060 through 66.100.


66.060 DISCONTINUANCE OR CHANGE OF CONFORMING USE IN A NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE

Should the owner or occupant discontinue or change the use of a non-conforming structure, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this code to begin or maintain such altered use until the off-street parking spaces and loading area requirements of Chapter 46 CDC and the access, egress, and circulation requirements of Chapter 48 CDC are met, or until the appropriate approval authority under Chapter 99 CDC has approved the change.


66.070 DESTRUCTION, MOVEMENT OF STRUCTURES

A.    If a non-conforming structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent that the cost of rebuilding the damaged portions would exceed 50 percent of the then current replacement cost of the entire building, the rebuilding shall conform fully to City codes and standards. Determination of the rebuilding costs shall be made by the Building Official, who may utilize an appraisal to determine current replacement costs. If the damage is 50 percent or less, the rebuilding or reconstruction shall be commenced within one year of the date of damage or destruction, and shall be completed within two years. Under such circumstances, the reconstruction shall comply with the terms of this code.

B.    Should such a structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, excluding elevating the structure to construct or replace the foundation, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is newly located.


66.080 ENLARGEMENT OF OR ALTERATION TO A NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE: PROCESS AND APPROVAL STANDARDS

A.    An enlargement of or alteration to a non-conforming structure containing a non-conforming use may be permitted subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission under the provisions of CDC 99.060(B) and CDC 65.120 through 65.140.

B.    An enlargement or alteration to a non-conforming structure containing a conforming use may be permitted subject to the following:

1.    If the enlargement, in and of itself, meets all provisions of this code, the enlargement will be permitted. This exception does not preclude design review or other applicable provisions of this code.

2.    If the enlargement, in and of itself, does not meet all provisions of the code, review and approval by the Planning Director for single-family structures, and by the Planning Commission for non-single-family structures under the provisions of CDC 99.060(B) is required subject to the following standards.

a.    The enlargement or alteration will not change the non-conformity; and

b.    All other applicable ordinance provisions will be met. (Ord. 1192, 1987)


66.090 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE UNSUITED FOR A CONFORMING USE

When a non-conforming use involving a structure is replaced by another use, the new use shall conform to this code unless the Planning Commission, after a public hearing held pursuant to Chapter 99 CDC, determines that such a structure is suitable only for another non-conforming use, so long as the new use is no more intense than the past use or other uses contemplated in the zone. The determination by the Planning Commission shall be based on findings of fact which support its determination of suitability. (Ord. 1287, 1990; Ord. 1604 § 62, 2011)


66.100 BUILDING PERMITS FOR AN APPROVED NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE

The provisions of CDC 65.110 shall apply.


Chapter 67 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND

Sections:

67.010    PURPOSE

67.030    DETERMINATION OF STATUS

67.040    STATUS

67.050    DISCONTINUANCE


67.010 PURPOSE

The zones applied within the City after the effective date of this code may cause some existing uses of land to become prohibited uses in the particular zone in which they are located. The purpose of this chapter is to permit these non-conforming uses to be continued until they are removed or discontinued. Non-conforming uses are incompatible with the permitted uses in the zone; therefore, standards are required to assure that changes in the scope of the use are, or can be made, compatible with the permitted uses in the zone.


67.030 DETERMINATION OF STATUS

A.    The Planning Director, without giving notice, shall make a determination regarding the non-conforming status; however

B.    Upon application and payment of fees, the determination by the Planning Director of the non-conforming status may be appealed to the Planning Commission sitting as a fact-finding body pursuant to CDC 103.040.

C.    A petition for review by the Council sitting as a fact-finding body may be taken pursuant to CDC 103.080.


67.040 STATUS

A.    A non-conforming use of land shall be allowed to continue; however, it shall not be:

1.    Enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of this code; or

2.    Moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied on the effective date of this code.

B.    No additional structure, building, or sign shall be constructed on the land in conjunction with the non-conforming use of land. (Ord. 1636 § 45, 2014)


67.050 DISCONTINUANCE

A.    If a non-conforming use of land shall be discontinued or abandoned for any reason for a period of 120 days, any subsequent use of the land shall be for a conforming use.

B.    A use is deemed discontinued or abandoned for purpose of computing the time period upon the first time any of the events listed in CDC 65.070 occur.


Chapter 68 NON-CONFORMING LOTS, LOTS OF RECORD

Sections:

68.010    PURPOSE

68.030    DETERMINATION OF STATUS

68.040    STATUS


68.010 PURPOSE

The zones applied within the City after the effective date of this code may cause some existing lots of record to be non-conforming lots in the zone in which they are located. The purpose of this chapter is to permit certain non-conforming lots to be developed provided all use, setback, and other applicable standards can be met.


68.030 DETERMINATION OF STATUS

A.    The Planning Director, without giving notice, shall make a determination regarding the non-conforming lot status.

B.    Upon application and payment of fees, the determination by the Planning Director of the non-conforming lot of record status may be appealed to the Planning Commission sitting as a fact-finding body pursuant to CDC 103.040.

C.    A petition for review by the Council sitting as a fact-finding body may be taken pursuant to CDC 103.080.


68.040 STATUS

A.    A substandard lot of record in any residential zoning district except the Willamette Historic District, as regulated in Chapter 25 CDC, may be developed for a use allowed within the applicable zone provided:

1.    The lot is 5,000 square feet or greater in size; except in the R-5, R-4.5 and R-2.1 zones in which case the minimum lot sizes shall be 4,500, 4,000 and 4,000 square feet, respectively; and

2.    All single-family dwellings shall have a hard-surface paved driveway at least 10 feet wide. 

3.    All applicable code provisions including lot dimensional requirements are met except for single-family detached or attached dwellings in the R-10, R-7, R-5, R-4.5, R-3 and R-2.1 zones where the following lot dimensional requirements shall apply:

a.    The minimum front lot line shall be 30 feet.

b.    The average minimum lot width shall be 35 feet.

c.    The minimum average lot depth shall be 80 feet.

d.    The minimum front yard shall be 18 feet except for steeply sloping lots in which case the provisions of CDC 41.010 shall apply.

e.    The minimum interior side yard for the principal structure including all protrudances shall be three feet.

f.    The minimum side yard abutting street shall be 13 feet.

g.    The minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet. 

4.    Variances have been granted under the provisions of Chapter 75 CDC for Class II variances.

5.    The following improvement standards are satisfied:

a.    Streets. The streets shall have a hard, all-weather surfacing of either asphaltic concrete or Portland cement, laid over a sub-base of not less than six inches of crushed rock. Said street shall be at least 12 feet in width or not less than the width of the existing street improvements onto which the proposed improvements will connect. The improvements shall extend through the driveway.

b.    Water. The City Engineer shall review the proposal and require a system that will deliver adequate domestic use and acceptable protection facilities and flows. The City shall participate in costs when oversizing pipes above six inches in diameter is required.

c.    Power, phone, cable, gas. Each utility shall address its own requirements as needed. The City strongly suggests underground power, phone, and cable where field conditions allow. Street lights shall be the City’s option.

d.    Sanitary sewer. Each developed lot or parcel shall be connected to the sanitary sewer at developer cost. (Ord. 1308, 1991; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1636 § 46, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 51, 2018)


Chapter 75 VARIANCES AND SPECIAL WAIVERS

Sections:

75.010    PURPOSE

75.020    CLASSIFICATION OF VARIANCES

75.030    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

75.040    TIME LIMIT ON A VARIANCE AND SPECIAL WAIVERS

75.050    APPLICATION

75.060    SITE PLANS AND MAP


75.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for granting variances and special waivers from the applicable requirements of this code. However, this chapter may not be used to allow a use that is not a specified use in the zone where the land is located or to modify density provisions. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1622 § 9, 2014)


75.020 CLASSIFICATION OF VARIANCES

A.    Class I Variance. Class I variances provide minor relief from certain code provisions where it can be demonstrated that the modification will not harm adjacent properties, and it conforms with any other code requirements. Class I variances are allowed for the following code provisions:

1.    Required Yard and Minimum Lot Dimensional Requirements. Required yards may be modified up to 20 percent, lot dimensions by up to 10 percent and lot area by up to five percent if the decision-making authority finds that the resulting approval:

a.    Provides for a more efficient use of the site;

b.    Preserves and incorporates natural features into the overall design of the project;

c.    Does not adversely affect adjoining properties in terms of light, air circulation, noise levels, privacy, and fire hazards; and 

d.    Provides for safe vehicular and pedestrian access to the site and safe on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 

2.    Off-street parking dimensional and minimum number of space requirements may be modified up to 10 percent if the decision-making authority finds that the use is designed for a specific purpose, which is intended to be permanent in nature.

3.    Dimensional sign requirements may be modified up to 10 percent if the decision-making authority finds that the proposed larger sign is:

a.    Necessary for adequate identification of the use on the property; and

b.    Compatible with the overall site plan, the structural improvements, and with the structures and uses on adjoining properties.

4.    Landscaping requirements in the applicable zone may be modified up to 10 percent if the decision-making authority finds that the resulting approval:

a.    Provides for a more efficient use of the site;

b.    Preserves and incorporates natural features into the overall design of the project; and

c.    Will have no adverse effect on adjoining property.

B.    Class II Variance. Class II variances may be utilized when strict application of code requirements would be inconsistent with the general purpose of the CDC and would create a burden upon a property owner with no corresponding public benefit. A Class II variance will involve a significant change from the code requirements and may create adverse impacts on adjacent property or occupants. It includes any variance that is not classified as a Class I variance or special waiver.

1.    Class II Variance Approval Criteria. The approval authority may impose appropriate conditions to ensure compliance with the criteria. The appropriate approval authority shall approve a variance request if all the following criteria are met and corresponding findings of fact prepared.

a.    The variance is the minimum variance necessary to make reasonable use of the property. To make this determination, the following factors may be considered, together with any other relevant facts or circumstances:

1)    Whether the development is similar in size, intensity and type to developments on other properties in the City that have the same zoning designation.

2)    Physical characteristics of the property such as lot size or shape, topography, or the existence of natural resources.

3)    The potential for economic development of the subject property.

b.    The variance will not result in violation(s) of any other code standard, and the variance will meet the purposes of the regulation being modified.

c.    The need for the variance was not created by the applicant and/or owner requesting the variance.

d.    If more than one variance is requested, the cumulative effect of the variances results in a project that is consistent with the overall purpose of the zone. 

C.    Special Waivers. Special waivers are only applicable in mixed use and non-residential zoning districts. Special waivers may be granted by the approval authority when it can be shown that the proposed site design provides a superior means of furthering the intent and purpose of the regulation to be waived. A special waiver involves a waiver of a standard to permit a specific proposed development. It does not require demonstration of a hardship. It is a request to modify specific requirements in order to provide a superior site design that would not otherwise be possible under the standard requirements of the code. 

1.     The Planning Commission may approve a special waiver due to the unique nature of the proposed development if it finds that there is sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the proposed development:

a.    Demonstrates that the proposed development can comply with the regulation to be waived, but the waiver provides an alternative means of furthering the purpose of the regulation to be waived;

b.    Will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area when compared with the impacts of development otherwise permitted; 

c.    Provides adequate area for aesthetic design treatment to mitigate potential visual impacts from the use on surrounding properties and uses; and

d.    The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use considering size, shape, location, topography, and natural features. (Ord. 1622 § 9, 2014)


75.030 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    Class I variances shall be decided by the Planning Director in the manner set forth in CDC 99.060(A). An appeal may be taken as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

B.    Class II variances and special waivers shall be decided by the Planning Commission in the manner set forth in CDC 99.060(B). A petition for review by the Council may be filed as provided by CDC 99.240(B). (Ord. 1622 § 9, 2014)


75.040 TIME LIMIT ON A VARIANCE AND SPECIAL WAIVERS

Approval of a variance or special waiver shall be void after three years unless substantial construction has taken place or an extension is granted per Chapter 99 CDC. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1622 § 9, 2014)


75.050 APPLICATION

A.    A variance request shall be initiated by the property owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

B.    A prerequisite to the filing of an application for a Class II variance or special waiver is a pre-application conference at which time the Planning Director shall explain the requirements and provide the appropriate form(s).

C.    An application for a variance shall include the completed application form and:

1.    A narrative which addresses the approval criteria set forth in CDC 75.020, and which sustains the applicant’s burden of proof.

2.    A site plan as provided by CDC 75.060.

One original application form must be submitted. One copy at the original scale and one copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller of all drawings and plans must be submitted. One copy of all other items must be submitted. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the City. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Community Development Department.

D.    Requests for more than one Class II variance for the same lot or parcel shall be consolidated in one application and reviewed concurrently by the City.

E.    Not more than two Class II variances may be approved for any one lot or parcel in a continuous 12-month period.

F.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 §§ 9, 18, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 47, 2014)


75.060 SITE PLANS AND MAP

A.    All plot plans and maps shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; the scale; north arrow; and a vicinity map.

B.    The applicant shall submit a plot plan drawn to an appropriate scale (in order of preference: one inch equals 10 feet to one inch equals 30 feet) which shows the following:

1.    The subdivision name, block, and lot number or the section, township, range, and tax lot number.

2.    In the case of a request for a variance to a lot or parcel dimensional or building setback requirement:

a.    The lot or parcel configuration and dimensions, and the location of all existing structures; the setback distances and the location of all structures on abutting units of land, and the setback distances; and

b.    The proposed variances.

3.    In the case of a request for a variance to the building height provisions:

a.    An elevation drawing of the structure and the proposed variances; and

b.    A drawing(s) to scale showing the impact on adjoining properties; for example, will the height variance, if granted, block a viewpoint from an adjoining property of a significant land feature. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1604 § 63, 2011; Ord. 1622 § 9, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 48, 2014. Formerly 75.070.)


Chapter 80 UNLISTED USES; AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES

Sections:

80.010    PURPOSE

80.030    DETERMINATION PROCESS

80.040    LIMITATION

80.050    APPROVAL STANDARDS


80.010 PURPOSE

It is not possible to contemplate all of the various uses which will be compatible within a particular zone. Therefore, unintentional omissions occur. The purpose of these provisions is to establish a procedure for determining whether certain specific uses would have been permitted in a zone had they been contemplated, and whether such unlisted uses are compatible with the listed uses. (Ord. 1339, 1993)


80.030 DETERMINATION PROCESS

A.    Upon application and payment of fees, the determination regarding an unlisted use shall be made by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of CDC 80.050 subject to the limitation set forth in CDC 80.040.

B.    The Planning Director shall maintain a list by zone of approved unlisted uses, and the list shall have the same effect as an amendment to the use provisions of the applicable zone. (Ord. 1339, 1993)


80.040 LIMITATION

The Commission shall not authorize an unlisted use in a zone if the use is specifically listed in another zone as either a permitted use or a conditional use. (Ord. 1339, 1993)


80.050 APPROVAL STANDARDS

Approval or denial of an unlisted use application by the Commission shall be based on findings that:

A.    The use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;

B.    The use is consistent with the intent and purpose of the applicable zone;

C.    The use is similar to and of the same general type as the uses listed in the zone;

D.    The use has similar intensity, density, and off-site impacts as the uses listed in the zone; and

E.    The use has similar impacts on the community facilities as the listed use. (Ord. 1339, 1993)


Chapter 81 BOUNDARY CHANGES

Sections:

81.010    PURPOSE

81.030    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

81.040    PETITION

81.050    APPROVAL CRITERIA

81.055    ZONING DESIGNATION

81.060    EXPEDITED PROCESS

81.070    REPEALED


81.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the provisions of ORS 268.354 and Metro Code Chapter 3.09. This chapter provides standards and procedures for all boundary change proposals and step one review of annexation proposals. The step one review process is a land use decision which shall determine whether the proposed annexation is consistent with the intent of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan and Community Development Code. Step two review for annexation proposals shall follow the procedures outlined in Municipal Code Chapter 2. The step two process is a legislative decision by the City Council that the proposed annexation is appropriate to be placed before the voters for a final decision. For the purpose of this chapter, the term “boundary change” includes the formation, merger, consolidation, or dissolution of a city or district; annexation or withdrawal of territory to or from a city or district, or from a city-county to a city; or an extra-territorial extension of water or sewer service by a city or district. (Ord. 1442, 1999)


81.030 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    Boundary change proposals shall be considered by the City Council. The Council decision on the proposal shall be considered the final decision for purposes of compliance with Metro Code Chapter 3.09.

B.    Notice of the Council hearing to consider the boundary change proposal shall follow the procedures of CDC 99.080(D) (quasi-judicial amendments), as well as the uniform notice requirements provided in Metro Code Section 3.09.030.

C.    A staff report shall be issued prior to the hearing pursuant to the requirements of CDC 99.040 and Metro Code 3.09.050(b).

D.    The final decision shall be made by the Council after a public hearing. The decision shall be reduced to writing and shall follow the requirements of CDC 99.110 and uniform hearing requirements of Metro Code Section 3.09.050.

E.    Should a proposal for annexation of property to the City obtain final approval through this step one process, the proposal will be set on the agenda of a Council meeting for consideration under the step two process as set forth in Section 2.950(2)(b) through (d) of the Municipal Code. A proposal for any other boundary change shall be considered pursuant to the provisions of State law. (Ord. 1442, 1999)


81.040 PETITION

A.    A petition to annex to the City of West Linn may be initiated by a property owner(s) of the area to be annexed, or the City, as set forth in Section 2.950(1) of the City Code.

B.    A prerequisite to the filing of an annexation petition is a pre-application conference at which time the Director shall explain the requirements and provide the appropriate forms as specified in CDC 99.030(B) and (C).

C.    A petition to annex shall include the completed petition form and three copies of each of the following, except for each drawing submitted, there shall be three copies at the original scale and three copies reduced to a paper size not greater than 11 inches by 17 inches.

1.    The minimum petition requirements of Metro Code Section 3.09.040.

2.    A narrative which addresses the approval criteria set forth in Municipal Code Section 2.920 and Metro Code Sections 3.09.050(d) and, if applicable, (e).

3.    Vicinity, legal, and other descriptive maps necessary to show compliance with Municipal Code Section 2.920 and Metro Code 3.09.040.

D.    A petition of any type of boundary change, other than annexation, shall be processed as provided by State law and Metro Code Chapter 3.09.

E.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee. The fee for a boundary change shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1442, 1999)


81.050 APPROVAL CRITERIA

The City Council shall approve a boundary change proposal based on findings and conclusions that the proposal complies with the criteria of Metro Code Section 3.09.050(D) and:

A.    West Linn Municipal Code Section 2.920, Step 1: Land Use Decision.

1.    The application of the zoning designation shall follow the criteria in CDC 81.055. 

B.    West Linn Municipal Code Section 2.930, Step 2: Policy Decision. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1635 § 29, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 52, 2018)


81.055 ZONING DESIGNATION

A decision on annexation shall also incorporate a decision on a zoning designation. The applicant may concurrently apply for a comprehensive plan amendment if desired. Any approval of an annexation shall designate the City zone to be applied if the annexation is approved by the voters. The City zone shall be designated based upon the existing West Linn comprehensive plan/land use designation, pursuant to the following table:

 

	COMPREHENSIVE PLAN/LAND USE DESIGNATION	ASSIGNED ZONING DISTRICT

	Low Density Residential	R-40, R-20, R-15, R-10 or R-7

	Medium Density Residential	R-5 or R-4.5

	Medium High Density Residential	R-3 or R-2.1

	Mixed Use	MU

	Commercial	NC, GC, or OBC

	Industrial	GI or CI

	Other	FU-10

Where the City Council has discretion to apply zoning, the Council shall consider the following factors in making its decision:

A.    Specific site characteristics such as topography, drainage, and existing vegetation.

B.    The existing zoning and development patterns of surrounding properties.

C.    The capacity of the City to provide road, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water service to the site. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1528, 2005; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1635 § 30, 2014)


81.060 EXPEDITED PROCESS

A.    A petition for any type of minor boundary change may be processed through an expedited process as provided by Metro Code Chapter 3.09.

B.    An expedited boundary change proposal may be considered by the City Council without a public hearing. The Council decision on the proposal shall be considered the final decision for purposes of compliance with Metro Code Chapter 3.09.

C.    Petition requirements for expedited applications shall be listed in CDC 81.040, except that the initiation of an expedited boundary change petition must follow the requirements of Metro Code 3.09.045(a).

D.    Notice of petition for an expedited process must be provided a minimum of 20 days prior to the final decision and shall follow the expedited notice requirements provided in Metro Code Section 3.09.045(b).

E.    A brief report shall be issued at least seven days prior to the decision date pursuant to the requirements of Metro Code 3.09.045(c).

F.    The City Council shall approve or deny an expedited boundary change proposal based on the criteria listed in CDC 81.050.

G.    An expedited process cannot be used if a necessary party gives written notice to contest the decision pursuant to Metro Code 3.09.045(b). (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1635 § 31, 2014)


81.070 APPEALS

Repealed by Ord. 1635. (Ord. 1442, 1999)


Chapter 85 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

85.010    PURPOSE

85.020    SCOPE – CONFORMITY REQUIRED

85.030    SALE OR NEGOTIATION TO SELL LOT OR PARCEL PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF TENTATIVE PLAN

85.040    REPEALED

85.050    APPROVAL REQUIRED BEFORE CREATING STREET OR ROAD TO PARTITION LAND

85.060    INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS – DECISION-MAKING PERIOD

85.070    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

85.080    SUBSTANTIAL DEVIATION FROM APPROVED PLAN PROHIBITED

85.085    SUBDIVISION/PARTITION AMENDMENT TRIGGER

85.090    EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

85.100    NON-COMPLIANCE – BOND

85.110    STAGED DEVELOPMENT

85.120    PARTIAL DEVELOPMENT

85.130    LAND DIVISION APPLICATION IN CONJUNCTION WITH OTHER LAND USE APPLICATIONS

85.140    PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE REQUIRED

85.150    APPLICATION – TENTATIVE PLAN

85.160    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TENTATIVE PLAN

85.170    SUPPLEMENTAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION PLAN

85.180    REDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENT

85.190    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED AND WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS

85.200    APPROVAL CRITERIA

85.210    PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS – APPROVAL STANDARDS


85.010 PURPOSE

A.    The purpose of the land division provisions of this code is to implement the Comprehensive Plan; to provide rules and standards governing the approval of plats of subdivisions (four lots or more) and partitions (three lots or fewer); to help direct the development pattern; to lessen congestion in the streets; to increase street safety; to efficiently provide water, sewage, and storm drainage service; and to conserve energy resources.

B.    The purpose is further defined as follows:

1.    To improve our sense of neighborhood and community and increase opportunities for socialization.

2.    To comply with the State’s Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), which seeks to encourage alternate forms of transportation and reduce reliance upon the private automobile and vehicle miles traveled by increasing accessibility within and between subdivisions and neighborhoods. This may be accomplished by designing an easily understood, interconnected pattern of streets, bicycle and foot paths, and accommodation of transit facilities. Cul-de-sacs are to be discouraged unless site conditions dictate otherwise.

3.    To reduce pedestrian/vehicle conflicts and create a safe and attractive environment for pedestrians and bicyclists.

4.    To protect natural resource areas such as drainageways, Willamette and Tualatin River greenways, creeks, habitat areas, and wooded areas as required by other provisions of this code or by the layout of streets and graded areas so as to minimize their disturbance.

5.    To protect the natural features and topography by minimizing grading and site disturbance and by requiring proper erosion control techniques.

6.    To arrange the lots and streets so as to minimize nuisance conditions such as glare, noise, and vibration.

7.    To maximize passive solar heating benefits by orienting the streets on an east-to-west axis which increases exposure to the sun.

8.    To arrange for the efficient layout of utilities and infrastructure as well as their extension to adjacent properties in a manner consistent with either adopted utility plans or sound engineering practices.

9.    To arrange lots and roads to create reasonably buildable lots and acceptable driveway grades.

10.    To encourage the arrangement of increased densities and smaller lots in proximity to needed services and schools as well as transportation corridors so as to reduce vehicle miles traveled and to encourage alternate modes of travel.

11.    To encourage design experimentation and creativity.

12.    To arrange for the mitigation of impacts generated by new development. These impacts include increased automobile, foot, and bicycle traffic. These impacts are to be mitigated at the developer’s cost, by the provision of streets, sidewalks, bicycle and foot paths, and traffic control devices within, contiguous to, and nearby the development site. Similarly, increased demand on local infrastructure such as water lines, sanitary sewer lines, and storm drainage and detention facilities, should be offset by improving existing facilities or providing new ones. (Ord. 1636 § 49, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 7, 2016)


85.020 SCOPE – CONFORMITY REQUIRED

A.    This division shall apply to all subdivisions and partitions within the City limits of West Linn.

B.    No person shall subdivide or create a partition except in conformity with the provisions of this code and Chapter 92 ORS. Chapter 92 ORS states that all partitions and subdivisions of land require a final plat to be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor; all corners must be monumented, the partition or subdivision plat must be approved by the City and County surveyor, as appropriate, and recorded with the County recorder.

C.    No building permit shall be issued for any parcel or lot which was created by subdivision or partition if it is not approved and in conformity with the provisions of this code.

D.    No excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvement shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1636 § 50, 2014)


85.030 SALE OR NEGOTIATION TO SELL LOT OR PARCEL PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF TENTATIVE PLAN

A.    No person shall sell any lot in any subdivision to which approval is required until such approval is obtained. No person shall negotiate to sell any lot in a subdivision until the tentative plan has been approved.

B.    A person may negotiate to sell any parcel in a partition for which approval of a tentative plan is required, but shall not sell a parcel prior to approval.

C.    No building permits will be issued for tentatively approved lots or parcels. The final plat must be recorded before permits will be issued. (Ord. 1636 § 51, 2014)


85.040 SALE OF LOTS PROHIBITED UNTIL SUBDIVISION PLAT IS RECORDED

Repealed by Ord. 1636. 


85.050 APPROVAL REQUIRED BEFORE CREATING STREET OR ROAD TO PARTITION LAND

A.    No person shall create a street or road for the purpose of partitioning an area or tract of land without approval by the approval authority under the provisions of CDC 99.060(A) and (B).

B.    No instrument dedicating land to public use shall be accepted for recording unless such instrument bears the approval of the Planning Director or City Engineer, as applicable, under the provisions of CDC 99.060(A) and (B), procedures for decision-making. (Ord. 1382, 1995)


85.060 INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS – DECISION-MAKING PERIOD

A.    The Director shall not accept incomplete applications; however, if an application for approval of a tentative plan for a subdivision or partition is incomplete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the fact within 30 days of the receipt of the application and allow the applicant to provide the additional required information.

B.    The approval authority shall take final action on an application for approval of a tentative plan for a subdivision or partition within 120 days after the application is found to be complete.

C.    If action is not taken within the 120-day period, the applicant may apply to the circuit court for a writ of mandamus to compel the issuance of approval. (Ord. 1382, 1995)


85.070 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    The application shall be filed by the record owner(s) of the property or by an authorized agent who has a letter of authorization from the property owners of record. The burden of proof will be upon the applicant to demonstrate the validity of the ownership, if challenged.

B.    Action on the application for a tentative plan shall be as provided by Chapter 99 CDC.

1.    The Planning Director shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for a partition subject to the provisions of CDC 85.200, 99.060(A), and 99.110. The Director’s decision may be appealed to the City Council as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

2.    The Planning Commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for a tentative plan for a subdivision subject to the provisions of CDC 85.200, 99.060(B), and 99.110. A petition for review of the Planning Commission’s decision may be filed as provided by CDC 99.240.

3.    Action on the final plat shall be ministerial and taken by the Planning Director and City Engineer, and the Planning Director and City Engineer shall approve a final subdivision or partition plat upon the finding that the approval criteria set forth in CDC 89.050 have been satisfied. The Planning Director’s and City Engineer’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission by the applicant, and the Planning Commission shall make its decision based on testimony from the applicant and the Director. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


85.080 SUBSTANTIAL DEVIATION FROM APPROVED PLAN PROHIBITED

A.    Approval of the tentative plan shall require that the final plat be in substantial conformance. Only such changes in the plat or map as are necessary for compliance with the terms of its approval, changes appropriate to meet accepted engineering practices due to grades or site conditions, or changes to satisfy legislative requirements are appropriate; however

B.    Approval of the tentative plan for the proposed subdivision or the partition shall not constitute final acceptance of the plat of the proposed subdivision or partition for recording.


85.085 SUBDIVISION/PARTITION AMENDMENT TRIGGER

Amendments to subdivision/partitions shall be required when 10 percent or more of the housing type changes (e.g., from single-family units to multi-family units) from the tentatively approved plan, or when there is more than a 10 percent change in the number of units, or when the layout of streets and lots significantly changes. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


85.090 EXPIRATION OR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL

The final plat map shall be submitted to the Planning Director and recorded with the County within three years from the date of approval of the tentative plan, or as approved under CDC 99.325. If the final plat is not recorded by that time, the approval expires. (Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


85.100 NON-COMPLIANCE – BOND

A.    Non-compliance with an approved final plat shall be a violation of this code.

B.    The development and associated conditions of approval shall be completed in accordance with the approved final plat before any occupancy permits will be issued except that when the City Engineer or Planning Director determines that immediate execution of any feature of an approved final plat is impractical due to climatic conditions, unavailability of materials, or other temporary condition, the Planning Director or City Engineer shall, as a precondition of the issuance of a required permit, require a cashier’s check, cash, or other surety (generally 125 percent of an engineer’s estimated cost of improvements), to secure execution of the feature at a time certain not to exceed one year.


85.110 STAGED DEVELOPMENT

The applicant may elect to develop the site in stages. Staged development shall be subject to the provisions of CDC 99.125. However, notwithstanding the provisions of CDC 99.125, in no case shall the time period for final platting and recording all stages with the County be greater than five years without refiling the application. (Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


85.120 PARTIAL DEVELOPMENT

Where the tentative subdivision or partition plan is limited to only part of the potential development site, the approval authority may require that an applicant submit a tentative layout for the streets for the unsubdivided portion. A tentative street plan is required for sites where the unsubdivided portion of the property is greater than 300 percent of the minimum lot size allowed in the underlying zoning district. (Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


85.130 LAND DIVISION APPLICATION IN CONJUNCTION WITH OTHER LAND USE APPLICATIONS

As provided by CDC 99.070, a land division application filed under this code may be heard concurrently with another application, upon applicant’s request.


85.140 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE REQUIRED

A.    An applicant shall participate in a pre-application conference with staff prior to the submission of a complete tentative plan.

B.    The Planning staff shall explain the applicable plan policies, ordinance provisions, opportunities, and constraints which may be applicable to the site and type of proposed land division.

C.    The City Engineering staff shall explain the public improvement requirements which may be applicable to the site and type of proposed land division, including potential for the applicant to apply for a waiver of street improvements. (Ord. 1544, 2007)


85.150 APPLICATION – TENTATIVE PLAN

A.    The applicant shall submit a completed application which shall include:

1.    The completed application form(s).

2.    Copies of the tentative plan and supplemental drawings shall include one copy at the original scale plus one copy reduced in paper size not greater than 11 inches by 17 inches. The applicant shall also submit one copy of the complete application in a digital format acceptable to the City. When the application submittal is determined to be complete, additional copies may be required as determined by the Community Development Department. 

3.    A narrative explaining all aspects of land division per CDC 85.200. 

B.    The applicant shall pay the requisite fee. (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1613 § 19, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1622 § 19, 2014)


85.160 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TENTATIVE PLAN

A.    A City-wide map shall identify the site. A vicinity map covering one-quarter-mile radius from the development site shall be provided in the application showing existing subdivisions, streets, and unsubdivided land ownerships adjacent to the proposed subdivision and showing how proposed streets and utilities may be extended to connect to existing streets and utilities.

B.    The tentative subdivision plan shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and/or a licensed land surveyor. A stamp and signature of the engineer or surveyor shall be included on the tentative subdivision plan. A tentative minor partition plan (three lots or less) is only required to be drawn to scale and does not have to be prepared by an engineer or surveyor.

C.    The tentative plan of a subdivision or partition shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, or, for areas over 100 acres, one inch equals 200 feet.

D.    The following general information shall be shown on the tentative plan of subdivision or partition:

1.    Proposed name of the subdivision and streets; these names shall not duplicate nor resemble the name of any other subdivision or street in the City and shall be determined by the City Manager or designee. Street names should be easily spelled, pronounced, and of limited length. All new street names must, to the greatest extent possible, respect and be representative of the surrounding geography and existing street names. Street names should consider any prominent historical City figures or neighborhood themes that exist. Subdivision street names may not reference names of the builder or developer.

2.    Date, north arrow, scale of drawing, and graphic bar scale.

3.    Appropriate identification clearly stating the drawing as a tentative plan.

4.    Location of the proposed division of land, with a tie to the City coordinate system, where established, and a description sufficient to define its location and boundaries, and a legal description of the tract boundaries.

5.    Names and addresses of the owner, developer, and engineer or surveyor.

E.    The following existing conditions shall be shown on the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition:

1.    The location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the tract (within 50 feet), together with easements and other important features such as section lines, donation land claim corners, section corners, City boundary lines, and monuments.

2.    Contour lines related to the U.S. Geological Survey datum or some other established benchmark, or other datum approved by the Planning Director and having the following minimum intervals:

a.    Two-foot contour intervals for ground slopes less than 20 percent.

b.    Five-foot contour intervals for ground slopes exceeding 20 percent.

3.    The location of any control points that are the basis for the applicant’s mapping.

4.    The location, by survey, and direction of all watercourses and areas subject to periodic inundation or storm drainageway overflow or flooding, including boundaries of flood hazard areas as established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the City zoning ordinance.

5.    Natural features such as rock outcroppings, wetlands tied by survey, wooded areas, heritage trees, and isolated trees (six-inch diameter at five feet above grade) identified by size, type, and location. All significant trees and tree clusters identified by the City Arborist using the criteria of CDC 55.100(B)(2), and all heritage trees, shall be delineated. Trees on non-Type I and II lands shall have their “dripline plus 10 feet” protected area calculated per CDC 55.100(B)(2) and expressed in square feet, and also as a percentage of total non-Type I and II area. 

6.    Existing uses of the property, including location of all existing structures. Label all structures to remain on the property after platting.

7.    Identify the size and location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, drain pipes, gas, electric, and other utility lines within the site, and in the adjoining streets and property.

8.    Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.

9.    Existing uses to remain on the adjoining property and their scaled location.

10.    The location of any existing bicycle or pedestrian ways.

11.    The location of adjacent transit stops.

F.    The following proposed improvements shall be shown on the tentative plan or supplemental drawings:

1.    The street – street location, proposed name, right-of-way width, and approximate radius of curves of each proposed street and street grades. Proposed street names shall comply with the street naming method explained in CDC 85.200(A)(12).

2.    The type, method, and location of any erosion prevention and sediment control measures and/or facilities in accordance with the most current version of Clackamas County’s Erosion/Sedimentation Control Plans Technical Guidance Handbook, which are necessary to prevent and control visible or measurable erosion as determined by the following criteria:

a.    Deposition of soil, sand, dirt, dust, mud, rock, gravel, refuse, or any other organic or inorganic material exceeding one cubic foot in volume in a public right-of-way or public property, or into the City surface water management system either by direct deposit, dropping, discharge, or as a result of erosion; or

b.    Flow of water over bare soils, turbid or sediment-laden flows, or evidence of on-site erosion such as rivulets or bare soil slopes, where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on the development site; or

c.    Earth slides, mud flows, land slumping, slope failure, or other earth movement that is likely to leave the property of origin.

Additional on-site measures may later be required if original measures prove to be inadequate in meeting these attainment standards. For the purposes of this code, “one cubic foot in volume” is defined to include the volume of material, wet or dry, at the time of deposition and includes any water of a discolored or turbid nature.

3.    Any proposed infrastructure improvements that address those identified in the City Transportation System Plan. 

4.    Any proposed bicycle or pedestrian paths. The location of proposed transit stops.

5.    Any easement(s) – location, width, and purpose of the easement(s).

6.    The configuration including location and approximate dimensions and area of each lot or parcel, and in the case of a subdivision, the proposed lot and block number.

7.    A street tree planting plan and schedule approved by the Parks Department.

8.    Any land area to be dedicated to the City or put in common ownership.

9.    Phase boundaries shall be shown. (Ord. 1382, 1995; Ord. 1403, 1997; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1636 §§ 53, 54, 2014)


85.170 SUPPLEMENTAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION PLAN

The following information shall be submitted to supplement the tentative subdivision plan:

A.    General.

1.    Narrative stating how the plan meets each of the applicable approval criteria and each subsection below.

2.    Statement or affidavit of ownership of the tract (County Assessor’s map and tax lot number).

3.    A legal description of the tract.

4.    If the project is intended to be phased, then such a proposal shall be submitted at this time with drawing and explanation as to when each phase will occur and which lots will be in each phase.

5.    Where the land to be subdivided or partitioned contains only a part of the contiguous land owned by the developer, the Commission or Planning Director, as applicable, shall require a master plan of the remaining portion illustrating how the remainder of the property may suitably be subdivided.

6.    Where the proposed subdivision site includes hillsides, as defined in CDC 02.030 Type I and II lands, or any lands identified as a hazard site in the West Linn Comprehensive Inventory Plan Report, the requirements for erosion control as described in CDC 85.160(F)(2) shall be addressed in a narrative. 

7.    Table and calculations showing the allowable number of lots under the zone and how many lots are proposed.

8.    Map and table showing square footage of site comprising slopes by various classifications as identified in CDC 55.110(B)(3). 

B.    Transportation.

1.    Centerline profiles with extensions shall be provided beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision to the point where grades meet, showing the finished grade of streets and the nature and extent of street construction. Where street connections are not proposed within or beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision on blocks exceeding 330 feet, or for cul-de-sacs, the tentative plat or partition shall indicate the location of easements that provide connectivity for bicycle and pedestrian use to accessible public rights-of-way.

2.    Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA).

a.    Purpose. The purpose of this section of the code is to implement Section 660-012-0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the City to adopt a process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to minimize adverse impacts to and protect transportation facilities. This section establishes the standards for when a proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a Traffic Impact Analysis must be submitted with a development application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a Traffic Impact Study; and who is qualified to prepare the study.

b.    Typical average daily trips. The latest edition of the Trip Generation manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as the standards by which to gauge average daily vehicle trips.

c.    When required. A Traffic Impact Analysis may be required to be submitted to the City with a land use application, when the following conditions apply:

1)    The development application involves one or more of the following actions:

(A)    A change in zoning or a plan amendment designation; or

(B)    Any proposed development or land use action that ODOT states may have operational or safety concerns along a State highway; and

(C)    The development shall cause one or more of the following effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation manual; and information and studies provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:

(1)    An increase in site traffic volume generation by 250 average daily trips (ADT) or more (or as required by the City Engineer); or

(2)    An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the 20,000-pound gross vehicle weights by 10 vehicles or more per day; or

(3)    The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles queue or hesitate on the State highway, creating a safety hazard; or

(4)    The location of the access driveway does not meet the access spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or

(5)    A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach area.

d.    Traffic impact analysis requirements.

1)    Preparation. A Traffic Impact Analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer qualified under OAR 734-051-0040. The City shall commission the traffic analysis and it will be paid for by the applicant.

2)    Transportation Planning Rule compliance. See CDC 105.050(D), Transportation Planning Rule Compliance.

3)    Pre-application conference. The applicant will meet with West Linn Public Works prior to submitting an application that requires a traffic impact application. This meeting will determine the required elements of the TIA and the level of analysis expected.

e.    Approval criteria.

1)    Criteria. When a Traffic Impact Analysis is required, approval of the development proposal requires satisfaction of the following criteria:

(A)    The Traffic Impact Analysis was prepared by a professional traffic engineer qualified under OAR 734-051-0040; and

(B)    If the proposed development shall cause one or more of the effects in subsection (B)(2) of this section, or other traffic hazard or negative impact to a transportation facility, the Traffic Impact Analysis includes mitigation measures that meet the City’s level of service and are satisfactory to the City Engineer, and ODOT when applicable; and

(C)    The proposed site design and traffic and circulation design and facilities, for all transportation modes, including any mitigation measures, are designed to:

(1)    Have the least negative impact on all applicable transportation facilities; and

(2)    Accommodate and encourage non-motor vehicular modes of transportation to the extent practicable; and

(3)    Make the most efficient use of land and public facilities as practicable; and

(4)    Provide the most direct, safe and convenient routes practicable between on-site destinations, and between on-site and off-site destinations; and

(5)    Otherwise comply with applicable requirements of the City of West Linn Community Development Code.

f.    Conditions of approval. The City may deny, approve, or approve the proposal with appropriate conditions.

1)    Dedication of land for streets, transit facilities, sidewalks, bikeways, paths, or accessways shall be required where the existing transportation system will be impacted by or is inadequate to handle the additional burden caused by the proposed use.

2)    Improvements such as paving, curbing, installation or contribution to traffic signals, or construction of sidewalks, bikeways, accessways, paths, or streets that serve the proposed use where the existing transportation system may be burdened by the proposed use may be required.

C.    Grading.

1.    If areas are to be graded, a plan showing the location of cuts, fill, and retaining walls, and information on the character of soils, shall be provided. The grading plan shall show proposed and existing contours at intervals per CDC 85.160(E)(2).

2.    The grading plan shall demonstrate that the proposed grading to accommodate roadway standards and create appropriate building sites is the minimum amount necessary.

3.    The grading plan must identify proposed building sites and include tables and maps identifying acreage, location and type of development constraints due to site characteristics such as slope, drainage and geologic hazards. For Type I, II, and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), the applicant must provide a geologic report, with text, figures and attachments as needed to meet the industry standard of practice, prepared by a certified engineering geologist and/or a geotechnical professional engineer, that includes:

a.    Site characteristics, geologic descriptions and a summary of the site investigation conducted;

b.    Assessment of engineering geological conditions and factors;

c.    Review of the City of West Linn’s Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan and applicability to the site; and

d.    Conclusions and recommendations focused on geologic constraints for the proposed land use or development activity, limitations and potential risks of development, recommendations for mitigation approaches and additional work needed at future development stages including further testing and monitoring. 

D.    Water.

1.    A plan for domestic potable water supply lines and related water service facilities, such as reservoirs, etc., shall be prepared by a licensed engineer consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Water System Plan and most recently adopted updates and amendments.

2.    Location and sizing of the water lines within the development and off-site extensions. Show on-site water line extensions in street stubouts to the edge of the site, or as needed to complete a loop in the system.

3.    Adequate looping system of water lines to enhance water quality.

4.    For all non-single-family developments, calculate fire flow demand of the site and demonstrate to the Fire Chief. Demonstrate to the City Engineer how the system can meet the demand.

E.    Sewer.

1.    A plan prepared by a licensed engineer shall show how the proposal is consistent with the Sanitary Sewer Master Plan and subsequent updates and amendments. Agreement with that plan must demonstrate how the sanitary sewer proposal will be accomplished and how it is efficient. The sewer system must be in the correct zone.

2.    Sanitary sewer information will include plan view of the sanitary sewer lines, including manhole locations and depths. Show how each lot or parcel would be sewered.

3.    Sanitary sewer lines shall be located in the public right-of-way, particularly the street, unless the applicant can demonstrate why the alternative location is necessary and meets accepted engineering standards.

4.    Sanitary sewer line should be at a depth that can facilitate connection with down-system properties in an efficient manner.

5.    The sanitary sewer line should be designed to minimize the amount of lineal feet in the system.

6.    The sanitary sewer line shall minimize disturbance of natural areas and, in those cases where that is unavoidable, disturbance shall be mitigated pursuant to the appropriate chapters (e.g., Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection).

7.    Sanitary sewer shall be extended or stubbed out to the next developable subdivision or a point in the street that allows for reasonable connection with adjacent or nearby properties.

8.    The sanitary sewer system shall be built pursuant to Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), City, and Tri-City Service District sewer standards. This report should be prepared by a licensed engineer, and the applicant must be able to demonstrate the ability to satisfy these submittal requirements or standards at the pre-construction phase.

F.    Storm. A storm detention and treatment plan and narrative compliant with CDC 92.010(E) must be submitted for storm drainage and flood control including profiles of proposed drainageways with reference to the most recently adopted Storm Drainage Master Plan. (Ord. 1382, 1995; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 65, 2011; Ord. 1635 § 33, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 54, 2014; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 1662 § 15, 2017)


85.180 REDIVISION PLAN REQUIREMENT

A redivision plan shall be required for a partition or subdivision, where the property could be developed at a higher density, under existing/proposed zoning, if all services were available and adequate to serve the use.

A.    The redivision plan is a sketch plan. A land survey and an engineering drawing are not required except where there are unique soil, topographic, or geologic conditions. Under the provisions of CDC 99.035, administrative procedures, the Planning Director may require additional information.

B.    The applicant shall submit a topographic map based on available information and a subdivision layout in accordance with standards set forth in this chapter and the zoning district in which the property is located.

C.    A building permit issued shall be for a specified future lot or parcel and the building shall meet the setback provisions of the zoning district in which the property is located.

D.    The redivision plan is considered a guide. Its purpose is to assure the efficient use of land and orderly growth. At such time as the property owner applies to redivide the land, a different proposal may be submitted for approval provided it meets all of the requirements. The redivision plan is not binding on the applicant or the City at the time a formal application is submitted under this chapter.

E.    The Planning Director shall approve the redivision plan in the manner set forth in CDC 99.060(A)(2), except that no notice shall be given. The applicant may appeal the Planning Director’s decision as provided by CDC 99.240(A).

F.    The Planning Director’s decision shall be based on the following findings:

1.    The redivision plan complies with the applicable requirements of this chapter and zoning district in which the property is located.

2.    There are adequate water and sewage systems available for the proposed use. (Ord. 1636 § 55, 2014)


85.190 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED AND WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS

A.    The Planning Director may require additional information as part of the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(A).

B.    The applicant may request a waiver of any requirements for the application subject to the provisions of CDC 99.035(B) and (C).


85.200 APPROVAL CRITERIA

No tentative subdivision or partition plan shall be approved unless adequate public facilities will be available to provide service to the partition or subdivision area prior to final plat approval and the Planning Commission or Planning Director, as applicable, finds that the following standards have been satisfied, or can be satisfied by condition of approval.

A.    Streets.

1.    General. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to the generalized or reasonable layout of streets on adjacent undeveloped lots or parcels, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, to accommodate various types of transportation (automobile, bus, pedestrian, bicycle), and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The functional class of a street aids in defining the primary function and associated design standards for the facility. The hierarchy of the facilities within the network in regard to the type of traffic served (through or local trips), balance of function (providing access and/or capacity), and the level of use (generally measured in vehicles per day) are generally dictated by the functional class. The street system shall assure an adequate traffic or circulation system with intersection angles, grades, tangents, and curves appropriate for the traffic to be carried. Streets should provide for the continuation, or the appropriate projection, of existing principal streets in surrounding areas and should not impede or adversely affect development of adjoining lands or access thereto.

To accomplish this, the emphasis should be upon a connected continuous pattern of local, collector, and arterial streets rather than discontinuous curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs. Deviation from this pattern of connected streets should only be permitted in cases of extreme topographical challenges including excessive slopes (35 percent-plus), hazard areas, steep drainageways, wetlands, etc. In such cases, deviations may be allowed but the connected continuous pattern must be reestablished once the topographic challenge is passed. Streets should be oriented with consideration of the sun, as site conditions allow, so that over 50 percent of the front building lines of homes are oriented within 30 degrees of an east-west axis. 

Internal streets are the responsibility of the developer. All streets bordering the development site are to be developed by the developer with, typically, half-street improvements or to City standards prescribed by the City Engineer. Additional travel lanes may be required to be consistent with adjacent road widths or to be consistent with the adopted Transportation System Plan (TSP) and any adopted updated plans.

An applicant may submit a written request for a waiver of abutting street improvements if the TSP prohibits the street improvement for which the waiver is requested. Those areas with numerous (particularly contiguous) under-developed or undeveloped tracts will be required to install street improvements. When an applicant requests a waiver of street improvements and the waiver is granted, the applicant shall pay an in-lieu fee equal to the estimated cost, accepted by the City Engineer, of the otherwise required street improvements. As a basis for this determination, the City Engineer shall consider the cost of similar improvements in recent development projects and may require up to three estimates from the applicant. The amount of the fee shall be established prior to the Planning Commission’s decision on the associated application. The in-lieu fee shall be used for in kind or related improvements. 

Streets shall also be laid out to avoid and protect tree clusters and significant trees, but not to the extent that it would compromise connectivity requirements per this subsection (A)(1), or bring the density below 70 percent of the maximum density for the developable net area. The developable net area is calculated by taking the total site acreage and deducting Type I and II lands; then up to 20 percent of the remaining land may be excluded as necessary for the purpose of protecting significant tree clusters or stands as defined in CDC 55.100(B)(2).

2.    Right-of-way widths shall depend upon which classification of street is proposed. The right-of-way widths are established in the adopted TSP. 

3.    Street widths. Street widths shall depend upon which classification of street is proposed. The classifications and required cross sections are established in the adopted TSP.

The following table identifies appropriate street width (curb to curb) in feet for various street classifications. The desirable width shall be required unless the applicant or his or her engineer can demonstrate that site conditions, topography, or site design require the reduced minimum width. For local streets, a 12-foot travel lane may only be used as a shared local street when the available right-of-way is too narrow to accommodate bike lanes and sidewalks.

 

City of West Linn Roadway Cross-Section Standards 

	Street Element	Characteristic	Width/Options

	Vehicle Lane Widths (Typical widths)	Minor Arterial	11 – 12 feet

	Collector	10 – 12 feet

	Neighborhood Route	10 – 12 feet

	Local	10 – 12 feet

	On-Street Parking	Minor Arterial	Limited (in designated commercial zones)

	Collector	Optional (8 feet typical width)

	Neighborhood Route	Optional (8 feet typical width)

	Local	Optional (8 feet typical width)

	Bicycle Lanes (Typical widths)	Arterial	5 feet

	Collector	5 feet

	Neighborhood Route	5 feet

	Cycle Track	Minor Arterial (30 MPH or greater)	7 feet

	Collector (30 MPH or greater)	7 feet

	Sidewalks (Typical widths)	Minor Arterial	6 feet, 10 – 12 feet in commercial zones

	Collector	6 feet, 8 feet in commercial zones

	Along Cycle Track	6 feet, 10 – 12 feet in commercial zones

	Neighborhood Route/Local	6 feet (4 – 5 feet in Willamette Historical District), 8 feet in commercial zones

	Landscape Strips	Can be included on all streets	6 feet typical (5 feet for minor arterials)

	Raised Medians	5-Lane	Optional

	3-Lane	Optional

	2-Lane	Consider if appropriate

	Neighborhood Traffic Management	Arterials	None

	Collectors	None

	Neighborhood Route/Local	At the discretion of the City Engineer

	Transit	Minor Arterial/Collector	Appropriate

	Neighborhood Route	Only in special circumstances

	Local	Not recommended

 

4.    The decision-making body shall consider the City Engineer’s recommendations on the desired right-of-way width, pavement width and street geometry of the various street types within the subdivision after consideration by the City Engineer of the following criteria:

a.    The type of road as set forth in the Transportation Master Plan.

b.    The anticipated traffic generation.

c.    On-street parking requirements.

d.    Sidewalk and bikeway requirements.

e.    Requirements for placement of utilities.

f.    Street lighting.

g.    Drainage and slope impacts.

h.    Street trees.

i.    Planting and landscape areas.

j.    Existing and future driveway grades.

k.    Street geometry.

l.    Street furniture needs, hydrants.

5.    Additionally, when determining appropriate street width, the decision-making body shall consider the following criteria:

a.    When a local street is the only street serving a residential area and is expected to carry more than the normal local street traffic load, the designs with two travel and one parking lane are appropriate.

b.    Streets intended to serve as signed but unstriped bike routes should have the travel lane widened by two feet.

c.    Collectors should have two travel lanes and may accommodate some parking. Bike routes are appropriate.

d.    Arterials should have two travel lanes. On-street parking is not allowed unless part of a Street Master Plan. Bike lanes are required as directed by the Parks Master Plan and Transportation Master Plan.

6.    Reserve strips. Reserve strips or street plugs controlling the access to streets are not permitted unless owned by the City.

7.    Alignment. All streets other than local streets or cul-de-sacs, as far as practical, shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof. The staggering of street alignments resulting in “T” intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the centerlines of streets having approximately the same direction and otherwise shall not be less than 100 feet.

8.    Future extension of streets. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary of the subdivision and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved without turnarounds. (Temporary turnarounds built to Fire Department standards are required when the dead-end street is over 100 feet long.)

9.    Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect angles as near to right angles as practical, except where topography requires lesser angles, but in no case less than 60 degrees unless a special intersection design is approved. Intersections which are not at right angles shall have minimum corner radii of 15 feet along right-of-way lines which form acute angles. Right-of-way lines at intersections with arterial streets shall have minimum curb radii of not less than 35 feet. Other street intersections shall have curb radii of not less than 25 feet. All radii shall maintain a uniform width between the roadway and the right-of-way lines. The intersection of more than two streets at any one point will not be allowed unless no alternative design exists.

10.    Additional right-of-way for existing streets. Wherever existing street rights-of-way adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate widths based upon the standards of this chapter, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision or partition.

11.    Cul-de-sacs.

a.    New cul-de-sacs and other closed-end streets (not including stub streets intended to be connected) on sites containing less than five acres, or sites accommodating uses other than residential or mixed use development, are not allowed unless the applicant demonstrates that there is no feasible alternative due to: 

1)    Physical constraints (e.g., existing development, the size or shape of the site, steep topography, or a fish bearing stream or wetland protected by Chapter 32 CDC), or 

2)    Existing easements or leases.

b.    New cul-de-sacs and other closed-end streets, consistent with subsection (A)(11)(a) of this section, shall not exceed 200 feet in length or serve more than 25 dwelling units unless the design complies with all adopted Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue (TVFR) access standards and adequately provides for anticipated traffic, consistent with the Transportation System Plan (TSP). 

c.    New cul-de-sacs and other closed-end streets (not including stub streets intended to be connected) on sites containing five acres or more that are proposed to accommodate residential or mixed use development are prohibited unless barriers (e.g., existing development, steep topography, or a fish bearing stream or wetland protected by Chapter 32 CDC, or easements, leases or covenants established prior to May 1, 1995) prevent street extensions. In that case, the street shall not exceed 200 feet in length or serve more than 25 dwelling units, and its design shall comply with all adopted TVFR access standards and adequately provide for anticipated traffic, consistent with the TSP. 

d.    Applicants for a proposed subdivision, partition or a multifamily, commercial or industrial development accessed by an existing cul-de-sac/closed-end street shall demonstrate that the proposal is consistent with all applicable traffic standards and TVFR access standards.

e.    All cul-de-sacs and other closed-end streets shall include direct pedestrian and bicycle accessways from the terminus of the street to an adjacent street or pedestrian and bicycle accessways unless the applicant demonstrates that such connections are precluded by physical constraints or that necessary easements cannot be obtained at a reasonable cost. 

f.    All cul-de-sacs/closed-end streets shall terminate with a turnaround built to one of the following specifications (measurements are for the traveled way and do not include planter strips or sidewalks).


[IMAGE]


12.    Street names. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets within the City. Street names that involve difficult or unusual spellings are discouraged. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission or Planning Director, as applicable. Continuations of existing streets shall have the name of the existing street. Streets, drives, avenues, ways, boulevards, and lanes shall describe through streets. Place and court shall describe cul-de-sacs. Crescent, terrace, and circle shall describe loop or arcing roads.


[IMAGE]


13.    Grades and curves. Grades and horizontal/vertical curves shall meet the West Linn Public Works Design Standards. 

14.    Access to local streets. Intersection of a local residential street with an arterial street may be prohibited by the decision-making authority if suitable alternatives exist for providing interconnection of proposed local residential streets with other local streets. Where a subdivision or partition abuts or contains an existing or proposed major arterial street, the decision-making authority may require marginal access streets, reverse-frontage lots with suitable depth, visual barriers, noise barriers, berms, no-access reservations along side and rear property lines, and/or other measures necessary for adequate protection of residential properties from incompatible land uses, and to ensure separation of through traffic and local traffic.

15.    Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are made as approved by the decision-making authority. While alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment should be avoided, the corners of necessary alley intersections shall have radii of not less than 10 feet. Alleys may be provided in residential subdivisions or multi-family projects. The decision to locate alleys shall consider the relationship and impact of the alley to adjacent land uses. In determining whether it is appropriate to require alleys in a subdivision or partition, the following factors and design criteria should be considered:

a.    The alley shall be self-contained within the subdivision. The alley shall not abut undeveloped lots or parcels which are not part of the project proposal. The alley will not stub out to abutting undeveloped parcels which are not part of the project proposal.

b.    The alley will be designed to allow unobstructed and easy surveillance by residents and police.

c.    The alley should be illuminated. Lighting shall meet the West Linn Public Works Design Standards.

d.    The alley should be a semi-private space where strangers are tacitly discouraged.

e.    Speed bumps may be installed in sufficient number to provide a safer environment for children at play and to discourage through or speeding traffic.

f.    Alleys should be a minimum of 14 feet wide, paved with no curbs.

16.    Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed per CDC 92.010(H), Sidewalks. The residential sidewalk width is six feet plus planter strip as specified below. Sidewalks in commercial zones shall be constructed per subsection (A)(3) of this section. See also subsection C of this section. Sidewalk width may be reduced with City Engineer approval to the minimum amount (e.g., four feet wide) necessary to respond to site constraints such as grades, mature trees, rock outcroppings, etc., or to match existing sidewalks or right-of-way limitations.

17.    Planter strip. The planter strip is between the curb and sidewalk providing space for a grassed or landscaped area and street trees. The planter strip shall be at least 6 feet wide to accommodate a fully matured tree without the boughs interfering with pedestrians on the sidewalk or vehicles along the curbline. Planter strip width may be reduced or eliminated, with City Engineer approval, when it cannot be corrected by site plan, to the minimum amount necessary to respond to site constraints such as grades, mature trees, rock outcroppings, etc., or in response to right-of-way limitations.

18.    Streets and roads shall be dedicated without any reservations or restrictions.

19.    All lots in a subdivision shall have access to a public street. Lots created by partition may have access to a public street via an access easement pursuant to the standards and limitations set forth for such accessways in Chapter 48 CDC.

20.    Gated streets. Gated streets are prohibited in all residential areas on both public and private streets. A driveway to an individual home may be gated. 

21.    Entryway treatments and street isle design. When the applicant desires to construct certain walls, planters, and other architectural entryway treatments within a subdivision, the following standards shall apply:

a.    All entryway treatments except islands shall be located on private property and not in the public right-of-way.

b.    Planter islands may be allowed provided there is no structure (i.e., brick, signs, etc.) above the curbline, except for landscaping. Landscaped islands shall be set back a minimum of 24 feet from the curbline of the street to which they are perpendicular.

c.    All islands shall be in public ownership. The minimum aisle width between the curb and center island curbs shall be 14 feet. Additional width may be required as determined by the City Engineer.

d.    Brick or special material treatments are acceptable at intersections with the understanding that the City will not maintain these sections except with asphalt overlay, and that they must meet the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. They shall be laid out to tie into existing sidewalks at intersections.

e.    Maintenance for any common areas and entryway treatments (including islands) shall be guaranteed through homeowners association agreements, CC&Rs, etc.

f.    Under Chapter 52 CDC, subdivision monument signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.

22.    Based upon the determination of the City Manager or the Manager’s designee, the applicant shall construct or cause to be constructed, or contribute a proportionate share of the costs, for all necessary off-site improvements identified by the transportation analysis commissioned to address CDC 85.170(B)(2) that are required to mitigate impacts from the proposed subdivision. The proportionate share of the costs shall be determined by the City Manager or Manager’s designee, who shall assume that the proposed subdivision provides improvements in rough proportion to identified impacts of the subdivision. Off-site transportation improvements will include bicycle and pedestrian improvements as identified in the adopted City of West Linn TSP. 

B.    Blocks and lots.

1.    General. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be designed with due regard for the provision of adequate building sites for the use contemplated; consideration of the need for traffic safety, convenience, access, circulation, and control; and recognition of limitations and opportunities of topography and solar access.

2.    Sizes. The recommended block size is 400 feet in length to encourage greater connectivity within the subdivision. Blocks shall not exceed 800 feet in length between street lines, except for blocks adjacent to arterial streets or unless topographical conditions or the layout of adjacent streets justifies a variation. Designs of proposed intersections shall demonstrate adequate sight distances to the City Engineer’s specifications. Block sizes and proposed accesses must be consistent with the adopted TSP. Subdivisions of five or more acres that involve construction of a new street shall have block lengths of no more than 530 feet. If block lengths are greater than 530 feet, accessways on public easements or right-of-way for pedestrians and cyclists shall be provided not more than 330 feet apart. Exceptions can be granted when prevented by barriers such as topography, rail lines, freeways, pre-existing development, leases, easements or covenants that existed prior to May 1, 1995, or by requirements of Titles 3 and 13 of the UGMFP. If streets must cross water features protected pursuant to Title 3 UGMFP, provide a crossing every 800 to 1,200 feet unless habitat quality or the length of the crossing prevents a full street connection.

3.    Lot size and shape. Lot or parcel size, width, shape, and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision or partition, for the type of use contemplated, for potential utilization of solar access, and for the protection of drainageways, trees, and other natural features. No lot or parcel shall be dimensioned to contain part of an existing or proposed street. All lots or parcels shall be buildable. “Buildable” describes lots that are free of constraints such as wetlands, drainageways, etc., that would make home construction impossible. Lot or parcel sizes shall not be less than the size required by the zoning code unless as allowed by planned unit development (PUD).

Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and service facilities required by the type of use proposed.

4.    Access. Access to subdivisions, partitions, and lots shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 48 CDC, Access, Egress and Circulation.

5.    Double frontage lots and parcels. Double frontage lots and parcels have frontage on a street at the front and rear property lines. Double frontage lots and parcels shall be avoided except where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets or adjacent non-residential activities, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen or impact mitigation easement at least 10 feet wide, and across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of building sites abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use.

6.    Lot and parcel side lines. The lines of lots and parcels, as far as is practicable, should run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets they should be radial to the curve.

7.    Flag lots. Flag lots can be created where it can be shown that no other reasonable street access is possible to achieve the requested land division. A single flag lot shall have a minimum street frontage of 15 feet for its accessway. Where two to four flag lots share a common accessway, the minimum street frontage and accessway shall be eight feet in width per lot. Common accessways shall have mutual maintenance agreements and reciprocal access and utility easements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to flag lots:


[IMAGE]


a.    Setbacks applicable to the underlying zone shall apply to the flag lot.

b.    Front yard setbacks may be based on the rear property line of the lot or parcel which substantially separates the flag lot from the street from which the flag lot gains access. Alternately, the house and its front yard may be oriented in other directions so long as some measure of privacy is ensured, or it is part of a pattern of development, or it better fits the topography of the site.

c.    The lot size shall be calculated exclusive of the accessway; the access strip may not be counted towards the area requirements.

d.    The lot depth requirement contained elsewhere in this code shall be measured from the rear property line of the lot or parcel which substantially separates the flag lot from the street from which the flag lot gains access.

e.    As per CDC 48.030, the accessway shall have a minimum paved width of 12 feet.

f.    If the use of a flag lot stem to access a lot is infeasible because of a lack of adequate existing road frontage, or location of existing structures, the proposed lot(s) may be accessed from the public street by an access easement of a minimum 15-foot width across intervening property.

8.    Large lots or parcels. In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which, at some future time, are likely to be redivided, the approval authority may:

a.    Require that the blocks be of such size and shape, and be so divided into building sites, and contain such easements and site restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller size; or

b.    Alternately, in order to prevent further subdivision or partition of oversized and constrained lots or parcels, restrictions may be imposed on the subdivision or partition plat.

C.    Pedestrian and bicycle trails.

1.    Trails or multi-use pathways shall be installed, consistent and compatible with federal ADA requirements and with the Oregon Transportation Planning Rule, between subdivisions, cul-de-sacs, and streets that would otherwise not be connected by streets due to excessive grades, significant tree(s), and other constraints natural or manmade. Trails shall also accommodate bicycle or pedestrian traffic between neighborhoods and activity areas such as schools, libraries, parks, or commercial districts. Trails shall also be required where designated by the Parks Master Plan.

2.    The all-weather surface (asphalt, etc.) trail should be eight feet wide at minimum for bicycle use and six feet wide at minimum for pedestrian use. Trails within 10 feet of a wetland or natural drainageway shall not have an all-weather surface, but shall have a soft surface as approved by the Parks Director. These trails shall be contained within a corridor dedicated to the City that is wide enough to provide trail users with a sense of defensible space. Corridors that are too narrow, confined, or with vegetative cover may be threatening and discourage use. Consequently, the minimum corridor width shall be 20 feet. Sharp curves, twists, and blind corners on the trail are to be avoided as much as possible to enhance defensible space. Deviations from the corridor and trail width are permitted only where topographic and ownership constraints require it.

3.    Defensible space shall also be enhanced by the provision of a three- to four-foot-high matte black chain link fence or acceptable alternative along the edge of the corridor. The fence shall help delineate the public and private spaces.

4.    The bicycle or pedestrian trails that traverse multi-family and commercial sites should follow the same defensible space standards but do not need to be defined by a fence unless required by the decision-making authority.

5.    Except for trails within 10 feet of a wetland or natural drainageway, soft surface or gravel trails may only be used in place of a paved, all-weather surface where it can be shown to the Planning Director that the principal users of the path will be recreational, non-destination-oriented foot traffic, and that alternate paved routes are nearby and accessible.

6.    The trail grade shall not exceed 12 percent except in areas of unavoidable topography, where the trail may be up to a 15 percent grade for short sections no longer than 50 feet. In any location where topography requires steeper trail grades than permitted by this section, the trail shall incorporate a short stair section to traverse the area of steep grades.

D.    Transit facilities.

1.    The applicant shall consult with Tri-Met and the City Engineer to determine the appropriate location of transit stops, bus pullouts, future bus routes, etc., contiguous to or within the development site. If transit service is planned to be provided within the next two years, then facilities such as pullouts shall be constructed per Tri-Met standards at the time of development. More elaborate facilities, like shelters, need only be built when service is existing or imminent. Additional rights-of-way may be required of developers to accommodate buses.

2.    The applicant shall make all transit-related improvements in the right-of-way or in easements abutting the development site as deemed appropriate by the City Engineer.

3.    Transit stops shall be served by striped and signed pedestrian crossings of the street within 150 feet of the transit stop where feasible. Illumination of the transit stop and crossing is required to enhance defensible space and safety. ODOT approval may be required.

4.    Transit stops should include a shelter structure bench plus eight feet of sidewalk to accommodate transit users, non-transit-related pedestrian use, and wheelchair users. Tri-Met must approve the final configuration.

E.    Grading. Grading of building sites shall conform to the following standards unless physical conditions demonstrate the propriety of other standards:

1.    All cuts and fills shall comply with the excavation and grading provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the following:

a.    Cut slopes shall not exceed one and one-half feet horizontally to one foot vertically (i.e., 67 percent grade).

b.    Fill slopes shall not exceed two feet horizontally to one foot vertically (i.e., 50 percent grade). Please see the following illustration.


[IMAGE]


2.    The character of soil for fill and the characteristics of lot and parcels made usable by fill shall be suitable for the purpose intended.

3.    If areas are to be graded (more than any four-foot cut or fill), compliance with CDC 85.170(C) is required.

4.    The proposed grading shall be the minimum grading necessary to meet roadway standards, and to create appropriate building sites, considering maximum allowed driveway grades.

5.    Type I lands shall require a report submitted by an engineering geologist, and Type I and Type II lands shall require a geologic hazard report.

6.    Per the submittals required by CDC 85.170(C)(3), the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed methods of rendering known or potential hazard sites safe for development, including proposed geotechnical remediation, are feasible and adequate to prevent landslides or other damage to property and safety. The review authority may impose conditions, including limits on type or intensity of land use, which it determines are necessary to mitigate known risks of landslides or property damage.

7.    On land with slopes in excess of 12 percent, cuts and fills shall be regulated as follows:

a.    Toes of cuts and fills shall be set back from the boundaries of separate private ownerships at least three feet, plus one-fifth of the vertical height of the cut or fill. Where an exception is required from that requirement, slope easements shall be provided.

b.    Cuts shall not remove the toe of any slope where a severe landslide or erosion hazard exists.

c.    Any structural fill shall be designed by a registered engineer in a manner consistent with the intent of this code and standard engineering practices, and certified by that engineer that the fill was constructed as designed.

d.    Retaining walls shall be constructed pursuant to Section 2308(b) of the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code.

e.    Roads shall be the minimum width necessary to provide safe vehicle access, minimize cut and fill, and provide positive drainage control.

8.    Land over 50 percent slope shall be developed only where density transfer is not feasible. The development will provide that:

a.    At least 70 percent of the site will remain free of structures or impervious surfaces.

b.    Emergency access can be provided.

c.    Design and construction of the project will not cause erosion or land slippage.

d.    Grading, stripping of vegetation, and changes in terrain are the minimum necessary to construct the development in accordance with subsection J of this section.

F.    Water.

1.    A plan for domestic water supply lines or related water service facilities shall be prepared consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Water System Plan, plan update, March 1987, and subsequent superseding revisions or updates.

2.    Adequate location and sizing of the water lines.

3.    Adequate looping system of water lines to enhance water quality.

4.    For all non-single-family developments, there shall be a demonstration of adequate fire flow to serve the site.

5.    A written statement, signed by the City Engineer, that water service can be made available to the site by the construction of on-site and off-site improvements and that such water service has sufficient volume and pressure to serve the proposed development’s domestic, commercial, industrial, and fire flows.

G.    Sewer.

1.    A plan prepared by a licensed engineer shall show how the proposal is consistent with the current Sanitary Sewer Master Plan and subsequent updates and amendments applicable at the time the proposal is submitted. Agreement with that plan must demonstrate how the sanitary sewer proposal will be accomplished and how it is gravity-efficient. The sewer system must be in the correct basin and should allow for full gravity service.

2.    Sanitary sewer information will include plan view of the sanitary sewer lines, including manhole locations and depth or invert elevations.

3.    Sanitary sewer lines shall be located in the public right-of-way, particularly the street, unless the applicant can demonstrate why the alternative location is necessary and meets accepted engineering standards.

4.    Sanitary sewer line should be at a depth that can facilitate connection with down-system properties in an efficient manner.

5.    The sanitary sewer line should be designed to minimize the amount of lineal feet in the system.

6.    The sanitary sewer line shall avoid disturbance of wetland and drainageways. In those cases where that is unavoidable, disturbance shall be mitigated pursuant to Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection, all trees replaced, and proper permits obtained. Dual sewer lines may be required so the drainageway is not disturbed.

7.    Sanitary sewer shall be extended or stubbed out to the next developable subdivision or a point in the street that allows for reasonable connection with adjacent or nearby properties.

8.    The sanitary sewer system shall be built pursuant to DEQ, City, and Tri-City Service District sewer standards. The design of the sewer system should be prepared by a licensed engineer, and the applicant must be able to demonstrate the ability to satisfy these submittal requirements or standards at the pre-construction phase.

9.    A written statement, signed by the City Engineer, that sanitary sewers with sufficient capacity to serve the proposed development and that adequate sewage treatment plant capacity is available to the City to serve the proposed development.

H.    Storm detention and treatment. All proposed storm detention and treatment facilities comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards, there will be no adverse off-site impacts caused by the development (including impacts from increased intensity of runoff downstream or constrictions causing ponding upstream), and there is sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the submitted plan. 

I.    Utility easements. Subdivisions and partitions shall establish utility easements to accommodate the required service providers as determined by the City Engineer. The developer of the subdivision shall make accommodation for cable television wire in all utility trenches and easements so that cable can fully serve the subdivision. 

J.    Supplemental provisions.

1.    Wetland and natural drainageways. Wetlands and natural drainageways shall be protected as required by Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection. Utilities may be routed through the protected corridor as a last resort, but impact mitigation is required.

2.    Willamette and Tualatin Greenways. The Willamette and Tualatin River Greenways shall be protected as required by Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection.

3.    Street trees. Street trees are required as identified in the appropriate section of the municipal code and Chapter 54 CDC.

4.    Lighting. All subdivision street or alley lights shall meet West Linn Public Works Design Standards.

5.    Dedications and exactions. The City may require an applicant to dedicate land and/or construct a public improvement that provides a benefit to property or persons outside the property that is the subject of the application when the exaction is roughly proportional. No exaction shall be imposed unless supported by a determination that the exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of development.

6.    Underground utilities. All utilities, such as electrical, telephone, and television cable, that may at times be above ground or overhead shall be buried underground in the case of new development. The exception would be in those cases where the area is substantially built out and adjacent properties have above-ground utilities and where the development site’s frontage is under 200 feet and the site is less than one acre. High voltage transmission lines, as classified by Portland General Electric or electric service provider, would also be exempted. Where adjacent future development is expected or imminent, conduits may be required at the direction of the City Engineer. All services shall be underground with the exception of standard above-grade equipment such as some meters, etc.

7.    Density requirement. Density shall occur at 70 percent or more of the maximum density allowed by the underlying zoning. These provisions would not apply when density is transferred from Type I and II lands as defined in CDC 02.030. Development of Type I or II lands are exempt from these provisions. Land divisions of three lots or less would also be exempt.

8.    Mix requirement. The “mix” rule means that developers shall have no more than 15 percent of the R-2.1 and R-3 development as single-family residential. The intent is that the majority of the site shall be developed as medium high density multi-family housing.

9.    Heritage trees/significant tree and tree cluster protection. All heritage trees, as defined in the municipal code, shall be saved. Diseased heritage trees, as determined by the City Arborist, may be removed at his/her direction. All non-heritage trees and clusters of trees (three or more trees with overlapping dripline; however, native oaks need not have an overlapping dripline) that are considered significant by virtue of their size, type, location, health, or numbers shall be saved pursuant to CDC 55.100(B)(2). Trees are defined per the municipal code as having a trunk six inches in diameter or 19 inches in circumference at a point five feet above the mean ground level at the base of the trunk. (Ord. 1377, 1995; Ord. 1382, 1995; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1403, 1997; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1526, 2005; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1584, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1604 § 64, 2011; Ord. 1613 § 20, 2013; amended during July 2014 supplement; Ord. 1635 § 34, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 56, 2014; Ord. 1647 § 8, 2016; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 1662 § 16, 2017; Ord. 1675 § 53, 2018; Ord. 1695 § 4, 2019)


85.210 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS – APPROVAL STANDARDS

A.    The Director shall approve or deny a request for a property line adjustment based on the criteria stated below:

1.    An additional lot or parcel shall not be created by the property line adjustment. 

2.    The existing property shall not be reduced in size by the adjustments below the minimum lot or parcel size established by the approved zoning for that district. The property line adjustment shall not enlarge, increase or extend the non-conformity of a non-conforming lot or non-conforming structure. 

3.    Property line adjustments shall be either:

a.    A straight line (see Figure 1 example);

b.     A line with maximum of two 45- to 90-degree turns (see Figure 2 example); or 

c.    A maximum of three turns less than 45 degrees (see Figure 3 example). 

(The following figures are only intended as examples.)

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	Figure 1.	Figure 2.

	
[IMAGE]


	Figure 3.

4.    The property line adjustment shall not create a lot or parcel that violates applicable site development regulations.

5.    The property line adjustment will not adversely affect existing easements or existing utilities unless an easement vacation is obtained, replacement easements are established, or any required utility relocations are paid for by the applicant. 

6.    Proposed property line adjustments that cannot meet these standards are subject to review under CDC 99.060(B)(2)(e).

7.    Any appeal must be filed in accordance with CDC 99.240.

B.    The provisions of CDC 85.070 shall also apply to property line adjustments. (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1635 § 35, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 57, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 54, 2018)


Chapter 89 SUBDIVISION AND PARTITION PLATS

Sections:

89.010    SUBMISSION OF SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION PLAT

89.020    INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLAT OR MAP

89.030    SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT

89.040    TECHNICAL PLAT REVIEW

89.050    APPROVAL AND APPROVAL CRITERIA

89.060    PROCESS FOLLOWING APPROVAL BY PLANNING DIRECTOR, CITY ENGINEER, AND CITY SURVEYOR OF PLAT FOR SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION

89.070    FILING OF PLAT

89.080    FINAL PLAT FILING FEE

89.090    EFFECTIVE DATE OF FINAL APPROVAL


89.010 SUBMISSION OF SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION PLAT

A.    Within three years after approval of the tentative plan and after the completion of all granted extensions, the developer shall cause the final plat, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat prepared by a licensed land surveyor and submitted to the Planning Director in conformance with:

1.    The approved tentative plan;

2.    The factors set forth in this chapter;

3.    The provisions of Chapter 55 CDC, Design Review; and

4.    The provisions of Chapter 91 CDC, Improvement Guarantee.

B.    The developer shall submit the original mylar plat intended for recording, a mylar plat copy and five prints of the final plat and any supplementary information to the Planning Director. The plat and copy shall be prepared to the standards for polyester film plats as adopted by this code. (Ord. 1201, 1987; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1604 § 66, 2011)


89.020 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLAT OR MAP

A.    In addition to that required for the tentative plan or otherwise specified by law, the following information shall be shown on the plat:

1.    The date, scale, north point (generally pointing up), legend, and controlling topography such as drainageways and highways.

a.    County roads shall show County road number.

b.    Adjacent plats, lots, parcels and/or unplatted land with fine dashed lines, and designated lots, blocks, plat names and County plat numbers. 

2.    Legal description of the tract boundaries and total plat area.

3.    Name and address of the surveyor.

4.    Reference points of existing surveys identified and related to the plat by distances and bearings, and references to a Record of Survey filed with the County Surveyor as follows:

a.    All monuments, or other evidence found on the ground and used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision.

b.    Adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions.

c.    Whenever the City or County has established the centerline of a street adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision, the location of this line and monuments found or reset must be tied and shown.

d.    All other monuments found or established in making the survey of the subdivision or required to be installed by provision of this chapter.

e.    The exact location, width and names of streets, pedestrian ways, and bicycle paths within and intersecting the boundary of the tract.

f.    Lines with dimensions, bearings, or central angles, radii, arcs, chords, chord bearings, points of curvature, and tangent bearings for tract, lot, and block boundaries, and street rights-of-way, and centerlines. Normal high water lines for any creek, drainageway, or other body of water. Tract boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest second of angle with basis of bearing noted on the plat. All distances shall be shown to at least the nearest 0.01 feet. No ditto marks shall be used. Lot, tract, parcel, and total plat areas should be shown to the nearest one square foot.

g.    The width of that portion of streets being dedicated or deeded, the width of any existing right-of-way and the width each side of the centerline. For streets on curvature, curve data shall be based on the street centerline.

h.    Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified, and, if already of record, their recorded reference. Each easement is to be definitely located. Each easement shall show the following: The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and/or sufficient ties to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner’s certificate of dedication and by other notes on the face of the plat.

i.    Plat name or partition number, lot and block or parcel number shall be per ORS 92.050(4) and 92.090(1). The numbers shall be solid, of sufficient size and thickness to stand out and so placed as not to obliterate any figure.

j.    Identification of land parcels to be dedicated or deeded for any purpose, public or private, to be distinguished from lots intended for sale.

k.    Building setback lines, if any are to be made a part of the subdivision restrictions and not shown on the recorded plat.

l.    The City may require a separate mylar copy of the plat with the setbacks added.

m.    Designation of proposed partitions of subdivisions to be platted, if any indicated proposed sequence of platting.

n.    The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate:

1)    A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and record of said map.

2)    A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all parcels of land shown on the final map and intended for any public use, except land dedicated for public roadways of partitions, in which case separate deeds shall be accepted by the City and recorded with the County. Those parcels which are for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licenses, visitors, tenants and servants shall require a signed certificate and be acknowledged as above.

3)    A certificate signed by the surveyor responsible for the survey and final map; the signature of the surveyor to be accompanied by his or her seal.

4)    All other certifications now or hereafter required by law.

B.    Standards for polyester film plats.

1.    All plats for subdivisions, partitions, condominiums, and cemeteries shall meet the following minimum standards and requirements in addition to any standards and requirements prescribed by Oregon Revised Statutes, County ordinances, or other similar documents.

2.    Plat materials. Plats shall be prepared upon material that is 18 inches by 24 inches in size with an additional three-inch binding edge on the left side for a total size of 18 inches by 27 inches.

Exact copies of the original plat shall be placed on either three- or four-mil base thickness, double-matted static-free polyester drafting film.

3.    Standards. In addition to the standards and requirements of the Oregon Revised Statutes, County ordinances, City ordinances and other similar documents, the following standards and requirements shall be met:

a.    All signatures of dedicators, surveyors, notaries, City and County officials, and others shall be in black India-type ink. Blue, red or other colors of ink; felt tip or similar pens; ballpoint pens; photographed or otherwise reproduced signatures; etc., are not acceptable. Notwithstanding subsections (B)(2) and (3) of this section, photographed signatures are acceptable on the exact copy so long as they are clear and legible.

b.    All lettering, lines and other work shall be either original black India-type ink or photographed on polyester film by a silver halide process meeting industry standards for archival permanency.

c.    Corrections to the polyester film shall be made in such a manner as to not remove or damage the matte or tooth of the polyester film in any manner that will affect the archival permanency of the plat. Damage to, or removal of, the matte or tooth of the polyester film will be cause to reject the plat for filing.

d.    Original plats shall be placed on only the face side of the polyester film. All lettering and lines shall be placed on the same side of the polyester film.

e.    All lettering on the plat shall be of such a size or type to be clearly legible. A lettering template shall be a minimum size “80” (0.08 inches) for upper case letters and a minimum size “100” (0.1 inches) for lower case letters. Hand lettering shall be done in such a manner so as to conform to these minimum sizes. Shadow lettering is not acceptable. All drafting shall be done with a line width compatible with the letter size.

f.    The plat boundary shall be a solid bold line completely around the tract platted.

g.    Drafting ink shall be suitable for drafting on polyester film, such as Pelikan FT, Higgens T 100 or equal.

h.    All surveyor, notary, corporate, or other stamps/seals shall be of a permanent nature and incapable of removal. Stamps/seals shall be black, opaque and legible.

i.    All plats and copies of plats prepared by a silver halide permanent photocopy process shall be accompanied by a certificate, from the person that prepared them, that they were prepared in accordance with industry standards for archival permanency.

j.    All corrections of silver halide permanent photocopies made by the use of a chemical eradicator shall be done in such a manner as to completely neutralize and remove all traces of the chemical from the plats.

k.    All pages of the plat copies shall bear a certificate signed in original ink, meeting the requirements of subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section, by the surveyor that prepared them, to wit: “I certify that this tracing is an exact copy of the original plat.” The certificate shall not appear on the original plat.

l.    No part of the survey or mathematical information, or any lettering, shall come nearer any edge than one inch.

m.    The plat shall be of such scale that all survey and mathematical information, all lettering and all other details and information are shown clearly thereon. The plat shall be capable of being microfilmed and reproduced from said microfilm clearly and legibly on such equipment as made available by the City or County.

n.    Standard engineering scales of one inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, or 60 feet shall be used. One inch equals 100 or 200 feet may be used only with specific approval of the City or County Surveyor having jurisdiction.

o.    Submitting any wrinkled, folded, creased, etc., polyester film plat will be cause to reject the plat for filing. (Ord. 1287, 1990)


89.030 SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT

The following information shall accompany the final plat:

A.    A preliminary title report, issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the premises.

B.    For subdivisions, a copy of the recorded plat boundary survey from the County Surveyor.

C.    Sheets and drawings showing the following:

1.    Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the land division and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners. The error of closure shall not exceed 1:10,000. All error is to be removed by adjusting the plat or map.

2.    The computations of all coordinates, distances, angles, courses shown on the final plat or map.

3.    Ties to existing monument, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions or partitions, street corners and State highway stationing.

D.    A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision or partition.

E.    A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.

F.    A list of all taxes and assessments on the tract which have become a lien on the tract.

G.    A certificate by a registered civil engineer certifying that the developer has complied with one of the following alternatives:

1.    All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the Planning Commission or Planning Director as applicable giving conditional approval of the tentative plan.

2.    An agreement has been executed as provided in Chapter 91 CDC to assure completion of all required improvements. (Ord. 1287, 1990)


89.040 TECHNICAL PLAT REVIEW

A.    Upon receipt by the City, the plat and other data shall be reviewed by the Planning Director who shall examine the information to determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared in the approved tentative plan, and that there has been compliance with provisions of the applicable implementing ordinances.

B.    The City Engineer shall review the plat to assure easements have been established to protect utilities, and that required improvements of Chapter 92 CDC and the improvements guarantee of Chapter 91 CDC have been established.

C.    The City Surveyor shall make such checks in the office and in the field as are desirable to assure compliance with Chapters 92 and 209 ORS to verify that the map is sufficiently correct on the ground. The City’s representatives may enter the property for this purpose.

D.    If the Planning Director, City Engineer and/or City Surveyor determines that full conformity has not been made, he or she shall advise the developer of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford the developer an opportunity to make the changes or additions.


89.050 APPROVAL AND APPROVAL CRITERIA

A.    No plat shall be approved unless the Planning Director finds:

1.    The provisions of this chapter have been satisfied.

2.    The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without any reservation or restriction other than reversionary right upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities.

3.    The streets and roads held for private use and indicated on the tentative plan of such subdivision or partition have been approved by the City.

4.    The plat complies with any applicable zoning ordinance or regulations adopted under ORS 92.044 that are in effect.

5.    The plat is in substantial conformity with the provisions of the tentative plan as approved.

6.    Where required as a condition of approval, the plan contains a dedication or deed to the public of all common improvements, including but not limited to streets, roads, parks, sewerage disposal, and water supply systems.

7.    Where common improvements are required as a condition of approval, explanations of the common improvements have been recorded and referenced on the plat.

B.    No plat of a subdivision or partition shall be approved unless the City Engineer finds:

1.    A certificate from the domestic water supplier that water is available to each and every lot, or a bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider that water will be installed to each and every lot or a statement that no domestic water supply facility will be provided as required by ORS 92.090(4).

2.    A certificate from the sewage disposal system supplier that a sewage disposal system will be available to each and every lot, or a bond, contract or other assurance by the developer that a sewer will be installed to each and every lot, or a statement that no sewage system will be provided as required by ORS 92.090(5).

3.    The requirements of Chapter 91 CDC, Improvement Guarantee, have been met.

C.    No plat of a subdivision or partition shall be approved unless the City Surveyor finds:

1.    The plat is in conformance with ORS 92.050 thru 92.090 and CDC 89.020.

2.    The plat mylar original and mylar copy conform to the standards for polyester film plats as required by CDC 89.020(B).

3.    The post monumentation bond or cash deposit in the amount of 120 percent of the estimated cost of placing the interior monumentation has been furnished to the City. The estimated cost shall be prepared by the platting surveyor and approved by the City Surveyor. (Ord. 1287, 1990)


89.060 PROCESS FOLLOWING APPROVAL BY PLANNING DIRECTOR, CITY ENGINEER, AND CITY SURVEYOR OF PLAT FOR SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION

Following review and approval of a subdivision or partition plat by the Planning Director, City Engineer, and City Surveyor, no plat shall be recorded by the developer unless:

A.    All ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed upon the tax will have been paid and the subdivider or partitioner shall pay all money owing and obtain the approval signature on the face of the plat from the County Department of Assessment and Taxation.

The subdivision and partition plat mylars shall include the following text to ensure that taxes have been properly paid.

ALL TAXES, FEES, ASSESSMENTS OR OTHER CHARGES AS PROVIDED BY ORS 92.095 HAVE BEEN PAID THROUGH __________________________________________________.

CERTIFIED/APPROVED THIS _____ DAY OF _________________, 20___.

Clackamas County Assessor and Tax Collector

BY ___________________________________________________ DEPUTY

BY ___________________________________________________ DEPUTY

B.    The Planning Director has signed the plat certifying the plat is approved.

C.    The City Engineer has signed the plat certifying the plat is approved.

D.    A licensed land surveyor has certified that the plat complies with all applicable laws.

E.    A majority of the Board of County Commissioners or the Board’s delegate has signed certifying that the plat is approved. (Ord. 1287, 1990; Ord. 1354, 1994)


89.070 FILING OF PLAT

A.    The developer shall, without delay, submit the plat for signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 90 days after the date the last required approving signatures have been obtained.

B.    One reproducible copy together with six prints of the recorded plat shall be supplied to the City. (Ord. 1287, 1990)


89.080 FINAL PLAT FILING FEE

The developer shall pay to the City a final plat filing fee as established by the City Council to defray the costs incurred to the City in checking, investigating and other matters required by State law, this chapter and other City ordinances. This fee must be paid at the time of submittal of a final plat application.


89.090 EFFECTIVE DATE OF FINAL APPROVAL

A.    A subdivision shall become final upon recording the plat under ORS 92.120(1) with Clackamas County.

B.    A partition shall become final upon recording the map under ORS 92.120 with Clackamas County.


Chapter 91 IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE

Sections:

91.010    IMPROVEMENTS

91.020    PERFORMANCE BOND WITH IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED

91.030    OPEN SPACE CONVEYANCE

91.050    APPLICABILITY


91.010 IMPROVEMENTS

A.    Before approval by the Planning Director and the City Engineer of a final subdivision, partition plat, building permit, or construction plans (other than plans for required improvements), the developer shall:

1.    Install required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the development of the property; or

2.    The developer shall also provide reimbursement to the City for costs of processing inspection, professional services, etc., of said required improvements by the City. Monthly costs of the City shall be billed against the six percent of construction cost deposit made by the developer to the City prior to construction of required improvements. The developer shall ensure that the deposit balance remains positive. If the developer is notified that the balance is negative, the developer has seven calendar days to correct the overage and provide additional deposit as specified by the City Engineer. Failure of the developer to correct the situation by that date will result in the issuance of a stop work order by the City which shall remain in force until said fees are paid in full and additional deposit provided. 

B.    The City shall install all street name signs and traffic control devices for the initial signing of a new development, with said costs to be reimbursed by the developer.

C.    Upon written acceptance by the City of required improvements, the developer shall execute a maintenance bond with a surety company authorized to transact business in the State; such bond to be in a form approved by the City Attorney. The maintenance bond shall guarantee satisfactory performance required and installed improvements included in the subdivision or partition for a maximum period of 18 months from the date of written approval/acceptance by the City of said improvements. The amount of said maintenance bond shall be in an amount equivalent to 20 percent of the total installation cost of required improvements. The maintenance bond shall also provide financial guarantee for any damage caused to said improvement during the period of the maintenance bond.

D.    Until such time as all required improvements within the subdivision or partition have been accepted by the City, the developer shall be solely responsible for the cleanup of debris, dirt, and foreign materials derived from this development or project upon sidewalks and roadways. To guarantee performance of this responsibility, the developer shall provide a cash deposit in the amount of five percent of the total installation of the improvements. The developer shall be responsible for all safety and cleaning all debris, dirt, and foreign material derived from his or her development or project by 5:00 p.m. of each workday; except that if said debris, dirt, or foreign material is found by the City Engineer to constitute an immediate traffic or safety hazard, it shall be immediately removed by the developer. The developer shall furnish the City with information as to where the developer or a designated subordinate may be reached at all times by the City regarding the performance of such cleanup work. Failure of the developer to clean up debris, dirt, or foreign material as hereinabove stated shall give the City the right to clean up said debris, dirt, or foreign material utilizing City crews, or to hire an independent contractor to do the same, and deduct same costs from the five percent cash deposit. The City shall bill the developer for all such cleanup services at the rate of twice the actual City labor costs incurred plus 35 percent of such actual labor costs reflecting utilization of City equipment. In the event that the City hires a private contractor to perform these services, the City shall bill the developer the actual cost incurred by the private contractor plus 50 percent of said actual costs reflecting the administrative costs incurred. The deposit shall be kept in a positive balance within the same criteria as the deposit noted in subsection (A)(2) of this section with the same ramifications for failure.

E.    Before the City accepts any required improvements within a subdivision or major partition and releases the performance bond, the developer shall furnish to the City certification of a registered civil engineer that said improvements have been installed and meet all applicable City, State, and federal requirements. (Ord. 1502, 2004)


91.020 PERFORMANCE BOND WITH IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED

A.    Prior to commencement of construction of said improvements and to assure full and faithful performance thereof, the developer shall file one of the following: 

1.    A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State, such bond to be in a form approved by the City Attorney;

2.    A personal bond co-signed by at least one additional person together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of those signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of ability to proceed in accordance with the agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney;

3.    Cash;

4.    Executed application for Bancroft bonding in approved improvement district; or

5.    An irrevocable assignment agreement executed by a financial institution in a form approved by the City Attorney.

B.    Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum approved by the City Engineer as sufficient to cover 125 percent of the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses, and to cover the cost of City inspections.

C.    In the event the developer fails to execute the completion of the said improvements within the timeframe mutually agreed upon by the developer and City Engineer, and the City has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the City shall call upon the bond or cash deposit. If said bond or cash deposit exceeds costs and expenses incurred by the City, it shall release the remainder after acceptance by the City of said repaired improvements. If the amount of the bond or cash deposit is less than the cost and expense incurred by the City, the developer shall be liable to the City for the difference. (Ord. 1502, 2004, Ord. 1547, 2007)


91.030 OPEN SPACE CONVEYANCE

When the tentative plan of a proposed subdivision or map of a partition includes open space, it shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

A.    By dedication to the City as publicly owned and maintained as open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the City must be acceptable to the City with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, and budgetary and maintenance limitations.

B.    By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, owners’ association, or other legal entity. Restrictions on development of the lot or parcel shall be placed on the final plat or otherwise recorded. The specific language of the restrictions shall be approved by the City prior to recordation. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the City Attorney for guaranteeing the following: 

1.    The continued use of such land for the intended purposes.

2.    Continuity of property maintenance.

3.    When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance.

4.    Adequate insurance protection.

5.    Recovery of loss sustained by casualty and condemnation or otherwise.

C.    By any method which achieves the objectives set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1636 § 58, 2014)


91.050 APPLICABILITY

The foregoing requirements apply to: 

1.    Any construction of public improvements within an existing public right-of-way and/or easement; and

2.    Any construction of public improvements within a tract that does not require replatting prior to building permit issuance. (Ord. 1502, 2004)


Chapter 92 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

92.010    PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT

92.020    IMPROVEMENTS IN PARTITIONS

92.030    IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES

92.040    SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS

92.050    CHANGES IN SUBDIVISION PHASE NUMBERS PROHIBITED


92.010 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT

The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the developer and meet all City codes and standards:

A.    Streets within subdivisions. 

1.    All streets within a subdivision, including alleys, shall be graded for the full right-of-way width and improved to the City’s permanent improvement standards and specifications which include sidewalks and bicycle lanes, unless the decision-making authority makes the following findings:

a.    The right-of-way cannot be reasonably improved in a manner consistent with City road standards or City standards for the protection of wetlands and natural drainageways.

b.    The right-of-way does not provide a link in a continuous pattern of connected local streets, or, if it does provide such a link, that an alternative street link already exists or the applicant has proposed an alternative street which provides the necessary connectivity, or the applicant has proven that there is no feasible location on the property for an alternative street providing the link.

2.    When the decision-making authority makes these findings, the decision-making authority may impose any of the following conditions of approval:

a.    A condition that the applicant initiate vacation proceedings for all or part of the right-of-way.

b.    A condition that the applicant build a trail, bicycle path, or other appropriate way.

If the applicant initiates vacation proceedings pursuant to subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, and the right-of-way cannot be vacated because of opposition from adjacent property owners, the City Council shall consider and decide whether to process a City-initiated street vacation pursuant to Chapter 271 ORS. 

Construction staging area shall be established and approved by the City Engineer. Clearing, grubbing, and grading for a development shall be confined to areas that have been granted approval in the land use approval process only. Clearing, grubbing, and grading outside of land use approved areas can only be approved through a land use approval modification and/or an approved Building Department grading permit for survey purposes. Catch basins shall be installed and connected to pipe lines leading to storm sewers or drainageways. 

B.    Extension of streets to subdivisions. The extension of subdivision streets to the intercepting paving line of existing streets with which subdivision streets intersect shall be graded for the full right-of-way width and improved to a minimum street structural section and width of 24 feet. 

C.    Local and minor collector streets within the rights-of-way abutting a subdivision shall be graded for the full right-of-way width and approved to the City’s permanent improvement standards and specifications. The City Engineer shall review the need for street improvements and shall specify whether full street or partial street improvements shall be required. The City Engineer shall also specify the extent of storm drainage improvements required. The City Engineer shall be guided by the purpose of the City’s systems development charge program in determining the extent of improvements which are the responsibility of the subdivider. 

D.    Monuments. Upon completion of the first pavement lift of all street improvements, monuments shall be installed and/or reestablished at every street intersection and all points of curvature and points of tangency of street centerlines with an iron survey control rod. Elevation benchmarks shall be established at each street intersection monument with a cap (in a monument box) with elevations to a U.S. Geological Survey datum that exceeds a distance of 800 feet from an existing benchmark.

E.    Storm detention and treatment. For Type I, II and III lands (refer to definitions in Chapter 02 CDC), a registered civil engineer must prepare a storm detention and treatment plan, at a scale sufficient to evaluate all aspects of the proposal, and a statement that demonstrates:

1.    The location and extent to which grading will take place indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed.

2.    All proposed storm detention and treatment facilities comply with the standards for the improvement of public and private drainage systems located in the West Linn Public Works Design Standards. 

3.    There will be no adverse off-site impacts, including impacts from increased intensity of runoff downstream or constrictions causing ponding upstream.

4.    There is sufficient factual data to support the conclusions of the plan.

5.    Per CDC 99.035, the Planning Director may require the information in subsections (E)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section for Type IV lands if the information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed site plan.

F.    Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to City standards to serve the subdivision and to connect the subdivision to existing mains.

1.    If the area outside the subdivision to be directly served by the sewer line has reached a state of development to justify sewer installation at the time, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council construction as an assessment project with such arrangement with the subdivider as is desirable to assure financing his or her share of the construction.

2.    If the installation is not made as an assessment project, the City may reimburse the subdivider an amount estimated to be a proportionate share of the cost for each connection made to the sewer by property owners outside of the subdivision for a period of 10 years from the time of installation of the sewers. The actual amount shall be determined by the City Administrator considering current construction costs.

G.    Water system. Water lines with valves and fire hydrants providing service to each building site in the subdivision and connecting the subdivision to City mains shall be installed. Prior to starting building construction, the design shall take into account provisions for extension beyond the subdivision and to adequately grid the City system. Hydrant spacing is to be based on accessible area served according to the City Engineer’s recommendations and City standards. If required water mains will directly serve property outside the subdivision, the City may reimburse the developer an amount estimated to be the proportionate share of the cost for each connection made to the water mains by property owners outside the subdivision for a period of 10 years from the time of installation of the mains. If oversizing of water mains is required to areas outside the subdivision as a general improvement, but to which no new connections can be identified, the City may reimburse the developer that proportionate share of the cost for oversizing. The actual amount and reimbursement method shall be as determined by the City Administrator considering current or actual construction costs.

H.    Sidewalks.

1.    Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public street and in any special pedestrian way within the subdivision, except that in the case of primary or secondary arterials, or special type industrial districts, or special site conditions, the Planning Commission may approve a subdivision without sidewalks if alternate pedestrian routes are available.

In the case of the double-frontage lots, provision of sidewalks along the frontage not used for access shall be the responsibility of the developer. Providing front and side yard sidewalks shall be the responsibility of the land owner at the time a request for a building permit is received. Additionally, deed restrictions and CC&Rs shall reflect that sidewalks are to be installed prior to occupancy and it is the responsibility of the lot or homeowner to provide the sidewalk, except as required above for double-frontage lots.

2.    On local streets serving only single-family dwellings, sidewalks may be constructed during home construction, but a letter of credit shall be required from the developer to ensure construction of all missing sidewalk segments within four years of final plat approval pursuant to CDC 91.010(A)(2).

3.    The sidewalks shall measure at least six feet in width and be separated from the curb by a six-foot minimum width planter strip. Reductions in widths to preserve trees or other topographic features, inadequate right-of-way, or constraints, may be permitted if approved by the City Engineer in consultation with the Planning Director. 

4.    Sidewalks should be buffered from the roadway on high volume arterials or collectors by landscape strip or berm of three and one-half-foot minimum width.

5.    The City Engineer may allow the installation of sidewalks on one side of any street only if the City Engineer finds that the presence of any of the factors listed below justifies such waiver:

a.    The street has, or is projected to have, very low volume traffic density;

b.    The street is a dead-end street;

c.    The housing along the street is very low density; or

d.    The street contains exceptional topographic conditions such as steep slopes, unstable soils, or other similar conditions making the location of a sidewalk undesirable. 

I.    Bicycle routes. If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle routes, existing or planned, the Planning Commission may require the installation of separate bicycle lanes within streets and separate bicycle paths.

J.    Street name signs. All street name signs and traffic control devices for the initial signing of the new development shall be installed by the City with sign and installation costs paid by the developer.

K.    Dead-end street signs. Signs indicating “future roadway” shall be installed at the end of all discontinued streets. Signs shall be installed by the City per City standards, with sign and installation costs paid by the developer.

L.    Signs indicating future use shall be installed on land dedicated for public facilities (e.g., parks, water reservoir, fire halls, etc.). Sign and installation costs shall be paid by the developer.

M.    Street lights. Street lights shall be installed and shall be served from an underground source of supply. The street lighting shall meet IES lighting standards. The street lights shall be the shoe-box style light (flat lens) with a 30-foot bronze pole in residential (non-intersection) areas. The street light shall be the cobra head style (drop lens) with an approximate 50-foot (sized for intersection width) bronze pole. The developer shall submit to the City Engineer for approval of any alternate residential, commercial, and industrial lighting, and alternate lighting fixture design. The developer and/or homeowners association is required to pay for all expenses related to street light energy and maintenance costs until annexed into the City.

N.    Utilities. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including but not limited to communication, street lighting, and cable television, shall be placed underground.

O.    Curb cuts and driveways. Curb cuts and driveway installations are not required of the subdivider at the time of street construction, but, if installed, shall be according to City standards. Proper curb cuts and hard-surfaced driveways shall be required at the time buildings are constructed.

P.    Street trees. Street trees shall be provided by the City Parks and Recreation Department in accordance with standards as adopted by the City in the Municipal Code. The fee charged the subdivider for providing and maintaining these trees shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

Q.    Joint mailbox facilities shall be provided in all residential subdivisions, with each joint mailbox serving at least two, but no more than eight, dwelling units. Joint mailbox structures shall be placed in the street right-of-way adjacent to roadway curbs. Proposed locations of joint mailboxes shall be designated on a copy of the tentative plan of the subdivision, and shall be approved as part of the tentative plan approval. In addition, sketch plans for the joint mailbox structures to be used shall be submitted and approved by the City Engineer prior to final plat approval. (Ord. 1180, 1986; Ord. 1192, 1987; Ord. 1287, 1990; Ord. 1321, 1992; Ord. 1339, 1993; Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1408, 1998; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1650 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 1662 § 17, 2017)


92.020 IMPROVEMENTS IN PARTITIONS

The same improvements shall be installed to serve each parcel of a partition as are required of a subdivision. However, if the approval authority finds that the nature of development in the vicinity of the partition makes installation of some improvements unreasonable, at the written request of the applicant those improvements may be waived. If the street improvement requirements are waived, the applicant shall pay an in-lieu fee for off-site street improvements, pursuant to the provisions of CDC 85.200(A)(1). 

In lieu of accepting an improvement, the Planning Director may recommend to the City Council that the improvement be installed in the area under special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of the City. (Ord. 1192, 1987; Ord. 1287, 1990; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1636 § 59, 2014)


92.030 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES

In addition to other requirements, improvements installed by the developer, either as a requirement of these regulations or at the developer’s own option, shall conform to the requirements of this title and permanent improvement standards and specifications adopted by the City and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:

A.    Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the City. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the proposal, the improvement plans may be required before approval of the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition. Plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the City.

B.    Improvement work shall not be commenced until the City has been notified in advance, and if work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until the City has been notified.

C.    Improvements shall be constructed under the Engineer. The City may require changes in typical sections and details in the public interest if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant the change.

D.    All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets by the subdivider or by any utility company shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets. Stubs for service connections for underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to a length obviating the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

E.    A digital and mylar map showing all public improvements as built shall be filed with the City Engineer upon completion of the improvements. (Ord. 1408, 1998)


92.040 SPECIFICATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS

The City Engineer shall prepare and submit to the City Council specifications to supplement the standards of this title based on engineering standards appropriate for the improvements concerned. Specifications shall be prepared for the design and construction of required public improvements, such other public facilities as a developer may elect to install, and private streets.


92.050 CHANGES IN SUBDIVISION PHASE NUMBERS PROHIBITED

Subdivision phase numbers shall remain the same from tentative approval through final platting. The only permitted change would be the addition of an alphabetic suffix. For example, tentatively approved Columbia Heights III could be broken down at final platting into Columbia Heights III-A, III-B, III-C, etc. It could not be broken down numerically into Columbia Heights III, IV, and V.


Chapter 96 STREET IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION

Sections:

96.010    CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED

96.020    STANDARDS


96.010 CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED

A.    New construction.

1.    Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of any new building or structure, or for the remodeling of any existing building or structure, which results in an increase in size or includes a change in use, including building permits for single-family dwellings but excepting building permits for alteration or addition to an existing single-family dwelling, unless the applicant for said building permit agrees to construct street improvements as required by the land use decision authorizing the construction activity. The placement of new curbs and the drainage facilities required shall be determined by the City Manager or the Manager’s designee.

2.    If the building permit did not require a prior land use decision, the applicant shall construct street improvements which shall include curbs, sidewalks, drainage facilities, and pavement widening to meet new curbs, along all City streets which abut the property described in the building permits.

3.    An applicant for a building permit may apply for a waiver of street improvements and the option to make a payment in lieu of construction. The option is available if the City Manager or the Manager’s designee determines the transportation system plan does not include the street improvement for which the waiver is requested.

4.    When an applicant applies for and is granted a waiver of street improvements under subsection (A)(3) of this section, the applicant shall pay an in-lieu fee equal to the estimated cost, accepted by the City Engineer, of the otherwise required street improvements. As a basis for this determination, the City Engineer shall consider the cost of similar improvements in recent development projects and may require up to three estimates from the applicant. The in-lieu fee shall be used for in kind or related improvements. 

B.    Remodeling of an existing building.

1.    Building permits shall not be issued for the remodeling and conversion of any existing building or structure which results in an increase in size or includes a change of use excepting building permits for the alteration or addition to an existing single-family dwelling, unless:

a.    The applicant for said building permit agrees to construct street improvements; and

b.    The City Manager or the Manager’s designee determines that the remodeling of a structure or change of use is sufficient to cause construction of street improvements.

2.    The determination of whether the remodeling of an existing building or structure is sufficient to cause the property owner to construct street improvements, shall be made by the City Manager or the Manager’s designee. This determination shall be based upon finding that the increase in building size or change of use results in either:

a.    An increase in floor area which creates the need for additional on-site parking in accordance with the Community Development Code; or

b.    A change in use that results in a need for additional on-site parking; or

c.    An increase in the dwelling unit density on the site; or

d.    A change in the type, number, or location of accessways where off-site traffic will be affected.

3.    An applicant for a remodeling of an existing building or structure change may apply for a waiver of street improvements and the option to make a payment in lieu of construction utilizing the process described in subsection (A)(3) of this section. 

C.    Replacement of an existing building.

1.    Building permits shall not be issued for the replacement of any existing building or structure which results in an increase in size unless:

a.    The applicant for said building permit agrees to construct street improvements; and

b.    The City Manager or the Manager’s designee determines the the replacement is sufficiently increased in size to cause construction of street improvements. 

D.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, in cases where the issuance of the building permit pertains to the construction or reconstruction of a building or structure within a large development owned by the same owner or owners, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, authorize the installation of street improvements of equivalent cost on another portion of the total development area. (Ord. 1314, 1992; Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1544, 2007; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1613 § 21, 2013)


96.020 STANDARDS

Street improvements shall be installed according to the City standards and shall be completed prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for the new or remodeled structure or building. In unimproved areas of the City, the City Engineer may grant a time extension of the provisions of this section; provided, that the applicant provides sufficient security in amount and quantity satisfactory to the City Attorney to assure payment of such improvement costs.


Chapter 97 STREET NAME CHANGES

Sections:

97.010    PURPOSE

97.020    ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

97.030    APPLICATION

97.040    PUBLIC NOTICE

97.050    APPROVAL CRITERIA

97.060    NOTICE OF FINAL DECISION


97.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for granting an alteration of a street name from the name given, and dedicate as a part of the original plat to a new name; or change a name created and dedicated outside of the filing of an original plat.


97.020 ADMINISTRATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS

A.    A street name change shall be decided by the City Council.

B.    All street name change requests shall be heard at the first meeting in December. In an emergency, the City Council may consider street name change requests at other times during the year.

C.    The City Council shall approve, alter, or amend the request, or deny an application for a street name change. Along with any approval shall be the establishment of an effective date. All street name changes approved in December shall be effective the following first day of June.


97.030 APPLICATION

A.    The street name change application shall be initiated by the City Council or any person who submits a petition for the street name change signed by the property owners of not less than 50 percent of those properties which abut the right-of-way which is the subject of the street name change.

B.    The application shall include the existing and proposed street names.

C.    The application shall include a description of the rights-of-way which will be affected by the name change.


97.040 PUBLIC NOTICE

Notice of the proposed street name change shall be given by the Planning Director in the following manner:

A.    At least four weeks prior to the public hearing, a notice shall be sent by mail to:

1.    The applicant.

2.    All abutting property owners of record subject to the provisions of CDC 99.100.

3.    All abutting residents.

4.    Any affected governmental agency which has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the City which includes provisions for such notice.

5.    The affected recognized neighborhood association or citizens advisory committee.

B.    At least two weeks prior to the hearing or meeting date, notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. An affidavit of publication shall be made part of the administrative record.


97.050 APPROVAL CRITERIA

The City Council shall approve, alter or amend, or deny a street name change based on findings of fact for each of the following criteria.

A.    Conformance with street naming standards contained under CDC 85.160(D)(1). 

B.    There is a public need for the change or the change can be demonstrated to be in the interest of the present and future community. (Ord. 1565, 2008)


97.060 NOTICE OF FINAL DECISION

The final decision shall be filed in the records of the Planning Director within 10 calendar days after the decision is signed and notice thereof shall be mailed to:

A.    The applicant;

B.    The abutting property owners;

C.    All abutting residents;

D.    All City departments including water/sewer;

E.    Clackamas County Assessor’s office;

F.    United States Postal Service;

G.    Clackamas County 9-1-1 system. (Ord. 1242, 1988)


Chapter 98 PROCEDURES FOR DECISION MAKING: LEGISLATIVE

Sections:

98.010    PURPOSE

98.030    DOCKET

98.035    CITIZEN ENGAGEMENT IN LEGISLATIVE CHANGES

98.040    DUTIES OF DIRECTOR

98.050    RECOMMENDATION AND ALTERNATIVE RECOMMENDATION BY DIRECTOR

98.060    CONSOLIDATION OF PROCEEDINGS

98.070    PUBLIC HEARINGS – NOTICE

98.080    MECHANICS OF GIVING NOTICE, FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE, COMPUTATION OF NOTICE PERIOD

98.090    CONTINUATION OF HEARING

98.100    STANDARDS FOR DECISION

98.110    APPROVAL PROCESS AND AUTHORITY

98.120    HEARINGS PROCEDURES

98.130    VOTE REQUIRED FOR LEGISLATIVE CHANGE

98.140    FINAL DECISION

98.150    RECORD OF HEARING

98.160    REINITIATION


98.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures applicable to this code for the consideration of legislative changes to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, implementing ordinances and maps. The procedures of this chapter are not required for adopting or amending Comprehensive Plan supporting documents which are not provisions of the plan. Plans that are supporting documents shall be adopted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 100 CDC. (Ord. 1434, 1999)


98.030 DOCKET

A.    Comprehensive Plan, CDC and zoning map amendments to be prepared and processed in a given year shall be listed on a docket established consistent with this section. 

1.    Proposing amendments and projects. Anyone may request a Comprehensive Plan, CDC or zoning map amendment or a related project on a form submitted to the Community Development Department. 

2.    Planning Commission review. Each year, staff shall present the proposed project list to the Planning Commission to give them the opportunity to review the proposed projects, add projects of interest, and to prioritize the proposed projects within their purview.

3.    City Council review and action. The City Council shall set the docket each year after considering the proposed project list. 

B.    Exception. The City Council may initiate Comprehensive Plan, CDC and zoning map amendments outside of the docketing process. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1613 § 22, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


98.035 CITIZEN ENGAGEMENT IN LEGISLATIVE CHANGES

A.    Purpose. The purpose of a legislative working group is to provide a forum to discuss different points of view on a proposed land use legislative change.

B.    Creation of working group. New and modified land use legislative changes to this code will be developed by a representative working group of citizens and assisted by planning staff, unless the City Council determines that a working group is not necessary. 

1.    After receiving direction from the City Council, the Committee for Citizen Involvement shall recommend a purpose, goals, and a list of appointees for each proposed working group to the City Council for approval. 

2.    The working group will contain interested stakeholders, a member of the Planning Commission, and a staff representative.

3.    The working group shall comply with WLMC 2.060 regarding the selection of officers and the other generally applicable citizen advisory group provisions.

C.    Conduct of working group meetings.

1.    Staff will prepare a suggested draft of the proposed changes. This draft will provide a starting point for discussion and education.

2.    The working group will use the draft as a starting point for discussion, but then reconcile the implications of the draft with the goals established by the Council for the working group. 

3.    After each working group meeting staff will incorporate approved changes and prepare an updated working draft.

4.    All working group meetings will be public meetings with an opportunity for anyone in attendance to provide public comment. The meetings and minutes will be conducted in accordance with the Council Rules, West Linn Municipal Code, City Charter, and State law.

5.    In the event a consensus cannot be reached on an issue, the working group will prepare alternatives. Each alternative and its rationale will be presented to the Planning Commission.

6.    Prior to submission to the Planning Commission, proposed code changes will be submitted to the City Attorney for review. The review should be limited to the identification of areas where the proposed language conflicts with other parts of this code, State law or Federal law. As an alternative, legal counsel may attend and advise during the creation of the draft.

D.    Presentation to the Planning Commission. When the working group reaches consensus that the code changes are ready, the proposed code changes will be presented by the Director to the Planning Commission pursuant to CDC 98.040(A)(2). If the working group fails to reach a consensus on the code changes, all proposals will be presented to the Planning Commission. Pursuant to CDC 98.110(A), the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, denial, or approval with modifications to the Council. (Ord. 1655 § 8, 2016)


98.040 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR

A.    The Director shall:

1.    If appropriate, or if directed by the City Council or Planning Commission in their motion, consolidate several legislative proposals into a single file for consideration;

2.    Upon the initiation of a legislative change, pursuant to this chapter:

a.    Give notice of the Planning Commission hearing as provided by CDC 98.070 and 98.080;

b.    Prepare a staff report that shall include:

1)    The facts found relevant to the proposal and found by the Director to be true;

2)    The Statewide planning goals and rules adopted under Chapter 197 ORS found to be applicable and the reasons why any other goal or rule is not applicable to the proposal except that goals 16 through 19 which are not applicable to the City of West Linn need not be addressed;

3)    Any federal or State statutes or rules the Director found applicable;

4)    Metro plans and rules the Director found to be applicable;

5)    Those portions of the Comprehensive Plan found to be applicable, and if any portion of the plan appears to be reasonably related to the proposals and is 	not applied, the Director shall explain the reasons why such portions are not applicable;

6)    Those portions of the implementing ordinances relevant to the proposal, and if the provisions are not considered, the Director shall explain the reasons why such portions of the ordinances were not considered; and

7)    An analysis relating the facts found to be true by the Director to the applicable criteria and a statement of the alternatives; a recommendation for approval, denial, or approval with modifications; and at the Director’s option, an alternative recommendation;

c.    Make the staff report and all case file materials available 10 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing under CDC 98.070;

d.    Cause a public hearing to be held pursuant to CDC 98.070;

3.    Administer the hearings process;

4.    Transmit the record to the Council for hearing; and

a.    Give notice of the Council hearing as provided by CDC 98.070 and 98.080; and

b.    Prepare a report which shall include at a minimum the following:

1)    A copy of the staff report submitted to the Planning Commission;

2)    A copy of the minutes of the Planning Commission hearing;

c.    Make a report to the Council; and

d.    Administer the hearings process;

5.    Maintain and preserve the file for each proposal. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given pursuant to CDC 98.070 and the accompanying affidavits, the proposal and all supporting information, the staff reports, the final adopted document, all correspondence, the minutes of any meetings at which the proposal was considered and any other exhibits, information or documentation which was considered with respect to the proposal. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


98.050 RECOMMENDATION AND ALTERNATIVE RECOMMENDATION BY DIRECTOR

A.    The Director shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission on the proposal; however, in addition, the Director may recommend an alternative or alternatives.

B.    Where the alternative recommendation involves a different plan designation, or a different zone designation than is the subject of the proposal, such alternative recommendation shall be considered only if:

1.    Notice of such an alternative is given as part of the hearing notice in addition to matters contained in CDC 98.080; and

2.    The staff report prepared as provided by CDC 98.040(A)(2) supports the alternative recommendation.

C.    As a result of the public hearing on the proposed change, the Planning Commission may on its own motion recommend to the Council an alternative recommendation; however, in addition, the Commission must take action on the specific proposal before it. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


98.060 CONSOLIDATION OF PROCEEDINGS

A.    In the event there is a proposal for a legislative change to the plan and a proposal for a legislative change to an implementing ordinance, both of which involve either the same geographic area or the same subject matter, the hearings may be consolidated; however

1.    The decision on the proposed plan change shall precede the decision on the proposed change to the implementation ordinances;

2.    Separate action shall be taken on each proposal; and

3.    The change to the implementing ordinance shall implement the change to the plan. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


98.070 PUBLIC HEARINGS – NOTICE

A.    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing;

B.    The City Council shall hold at least one public hearing;

C.    Legislative notice, where there is a proposal to amend the Comprehensive Plan or to amend or to adopt new land use regulations of this development code, shall be effected as follows:

1.    At least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date notice shall be sent to:

a.    Any affected governmental agency, including the Oregon Department of Transportation, Metro, and Tri-Met. 

b.    Affected recognized neighborhood associations or citizens advisory committees; and

c.    Any person who requests such notification in writing. 

2.    At least 10 days prior to the hearing or meeting date, notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. An affidavit of publication shall be made part of the administrative record.

3.    At least 10 days but no more than 40 days prior to hearing of a proposed zone change for manufactured home parks, notice shall be given to the respective manufactured home park residents.

4.    Notice shall be forwarded to the Director of the Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) in a format and at a time required by Oregon Revised Statutes and Oregon Administrative Rules governing such notification.

5.    If the Planning Director determines that the proposed change requires notice pursuant to ORS 227.186, the Planning Director shall provide such notice. The Planning Commission shall review the determination of the Planning Director and shall order additional notice as appropriate.

6.    The City should make reasonable efforts to post notice of the proposal on the City’s website at least 20 days prior to the hearing or meeting. Failure to comply with this section is not a procedural defect entitling any party to a delay in the hearing process.

D.    The Director shall:

1.    For each mailing of notice cause an affidavit of mailing of notice to be filed and made a part of the record as provided by CDC 98.150; and

2.    For each published notice cause an affidavit of publication to be filed and made a part of the record as provided by CDC 98.150. (Ord. 1287, 1990; Ord. 1354, 1994; Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1474, 2001)


98.080 MECHANICS OF GIVING NOTICE, FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE, COMPUTATION OF NOTICE PERIOD

A.    Where either the Planning Commission or the Council or both intend to hold more than one public hearing on the same proposal, notice of the several public hearings before the Commission may be given in one notice in the manner provided under CDC 98.070(C) and this section, and notice of the several public hearings before the Council may be given in one notice in the manner provided under CDC 98.070(C).

B.    The notice given to persons entitled to mailed or published notice pursuant to this section shall include the following information:

1.    The number and title of the file containing the proposal and the address and phone number of the Director’s office where additional information can be obtained;

2.    A description of the location of the proposal reasonably calculated to give notice as to the location of the affected geographic area, if any;

3.    A description of the substance of the proposal in sufficient detail for people to determine that a change is contemplated and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed; and

4.    The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s), a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited, and persons and other entities must establish standing by submittal of oral or written testimony to retain the right to appeal, and a statement that the hearing will be held under this chapter and rules of procedure adopted by the Council and available at City Hall or the rules of procedure set forth in CDC 98.120. 

C.    The failure of a person entitled to notice under CDC 98.070(C)(1) and (3) to receive notice shall not invalidate the action provided a good faith attempt was made to notify all persons entitled to notice.

D.    Personal notice is deemed given when the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service.

E.    Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published.

F.    In computing the length of time that notice was given, the first date notice is given shall be excluded and the day of the hearing shall be included. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1604 § 67, 2011)


98.090 CONTINUATION OF HEARING

The Planning Commission or the Council may continue any hearing and no additional notice shall be given of a continued hearing if the matter is continued to a place, date, and time certain.


98.100 STANDARDS FOR DECISION

A.    The recommendation of the Planning Commission and the decision by the City Council shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

1.    The Statewide planning goals and rules adopted under Chapter 197 ORS and other applicable State statutes;

2.    Any federal or State statutes or rules found applicable;

3.    Applicable plans and rules adopted by the Metropolitan Service District;

4.    The applicable Comprehensive Plan policies and map; and 

5.    The applicable provisions of the implementing ordinances.

B.    Consideration may also be given to:

1.    A mistake or inconsistency in the Comprehensive Plan or implementing ordinance as it relates to the property which is the subject of the proposal; and

2.    Factual oral testimony or written statements from the parties, other persons and other governmental agencies relevant to the existing conditions or factors in subsection A or (B)(1) of this section. (Ord. 1226, 1988; Ord. 1474, 2001)


98.110 APPROVAL PROCESS AND AUTHORITY

A.    The Planning Commission shall, after notice and a public hearing, formulate a recommendation to the Council to approve, to deny, or to approve with modifications.

B.    Any member of the Commission who voted in opposition to a recommendation by the Commission on a proposed change may file a written statement of opposition with the Director prior to any Council hearing on the proposed change, and the Director shall transmit a copy to each member of the Council and place a copy in the record.

C.    If the Commission fails to recommend approval or denial or approval with modifications of the proposed legislative change within 60 days of its first hearing on the proposed change, the Director shall report the failure, together with the proposed change to the Council. The Council may then choose to either refer the proposed change back to the Planning Commission with specific instructions, or may direct the Planning Director to place the proposed change on the Council agenda and cause notice to be given, hold a public hearing, and make a decision on the proposed change.

D.    The Council shall:

1.    Have the sole authority to approve, deny, or approve with modifications a proposal for a legislative change or to remand to the Commission for rehearing and reconsideration all or part of a proposal transmitted to it under this chapter;

2.    Consider the recommendation of the Planning Commission; however, it is not bound by the Commission’s recommendation; and

3.    Act by ordinance, which shall be signed by the Mayor within 10 days after the Council’s adoption of the ordinance.

4.    If the Council determines that the proposed amendments being considered for adoption include issues not raised before the Planning Commission during its deliberations, the Council shall remand the legislative change back to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation regarding the new issues.

5.    When making a determination pursuant to subsection (D)(4) of this section, the Council shall deem an issue not to have been raised only if an issue bears no reasonable relation to the proposed amendments previously considered by the Commission. Furthermore, for the purposes of subsection (D)(4) of this section, when an entire code chapter is being considered for amendment, all issues contained in that chapter shall be considered to have been raised by the Commission in its deliberations. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


98.120 HEARINGS PROCEDURES

A.    Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the Council:

1.    The presiding officer of the Commission and of the Council shall have the authority to:

a.    Regulate the course, sequence and decorum of the hearing;

b.    Dispose of procedural requirements or similar matters; and

c.    Impose reasonable time limits for oral presentations.

2.    No person shall address the Commission or the Council without:

a.    Receiving recognition from the presiding officer; and

b.    Stating their full name and residence address.

3.    Disruptive conduct such as audience demonstrations in the form of applause, cheering, or display of signs shall be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer.

B.    Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the Council, the presiding officer of the Commission and of the Council shall conduct the hearing as follows:

1.    The hearing shall be opened by a statement from the presiding officer setting forth the nature of the matter before the body, a general summary of the procedures set forth in this section, a summary of the standards set forth in CDC 98.100 and whether the decision which will be made is a recommendation to the Council or whether it will be the final decision of the Council.

2.    A presentation by the Director or staff that explains the request, shows the location and site plan, explains existing conditions, and discusses the applicable approval criteria.

3.    If a neighborhood association has initiated the proposed change, then the association shall make its presentation.

4.    The Director or staff will present the staff report with particular emphasis upon major issues and issues raised by the public at the hearing, and recommendations.

5.    The public will be invited to provide oral testimony in support of, in opposition to, or neutral to the proposal.

6.    If a neighborhood association has initiated the proposed change, then the association has the opportunity for a rebuttal of earlier testimony and a closing presentation.

7.    The hearing may be continued or it may be closed.

8.    The decision-making body’s deliberation may include questions to the staff or comments from the staff.

9.    A decision is made to approve or deny the proposal, or to approve with modifications. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


98.130 VOTE REQUIRED FOR LEGISLATIVE CHANGE

A.    An affirmative vote by a majority of the voting members present of the Commission shall be required for a recommendation for the approval or approval with modifications. Any other result shall be considered a recommendation to the City Council to deny the proposal.

B.    An affirmative vote by a majority of the qualified members of the Council present shall be required to decide any motion made with respect to the proposed change. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1604 § 68, 2011)


98.140 FINAL DECISION

A.    The approved legislative change shall take effect on the thirtieth day after its enactment unless it is declared to be an emergency, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately.

B.    Notice shall be forwarded to the Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) if required by Oregon Revised Statutes and Oregon Administrative Rules governing such notification. 

C.    Not later than five working days after the final decision, the Planning Director shall mail or otherwise submit notice to persons who:

1.    Participated in the proceedings leading to the adoption of the amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation, or the new land use regulation; and

2.    Requested of the Planning Director in writing that they be given such notice.

D.    The notice required by this subsection shall:

1.    Describe briefly the action taken by the City;

2.    State the date of the decision;

3.    List the place where, and the time when, the amendment to the acknowledged Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation, or the new land use regulation, and findings, may be reviewed;

4.    Explain the requirements for appealing the action of the City under ORS 197.830 to 197.845. (Ord. 1354, 1994; Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1604 § 69, 2011)


98.150 RECORD OF HEARING

A.    A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic or mechanical means. It shall not be necessary to transcribe testimony.

The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record.

B.    All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked so as to provide identification and shall be part of the record.

C.    The official record shall include:

1.    All material considered by the hearing body;

2.    All materials submitted by the Planning Director to the hearings body with respect to the proposal; 

3.    The verbatim record made by stenographic or mechanical means, the minutes of the hearing and other documents considered;

4.    The final ordinance;

5.    All correspondence; and

6.    A copy of the notice which was given as provided by CDC 98.070, accompanying affidavits, and list of persons who were sent mailed notices. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


98.160 REINITIATION

If any proposal has been made and denied in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter or by action of the Land Use Board of Appeal, the Land Conservation and Development Commission or the courts, no new proposal for the same or substantially similar change shall be accepted within one year from the date of the final action denying the proposal except the Council may reinitiate a proposal upon a finding that there has been a substantial change in the facts surrounding the proposal which would support the reconsideration. (Ord. 1474, 2001)


Chapter 99 PROCEDURES FOR DECISION MAKING: QUASI-JUDICIAL

Sections:

99.010    PURPOSE

99.030    APPLICATION PROCESS: WHO MAY APPLY, PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE, REQUIREMENTS, REFUSAL OF APPLICATION, FEES

99.033    FEES

99.035    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED, WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS AND REPORT REQUIRED

99.038    NEIGHBORHOOD CONTACT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN APPLICATIONS

99.040    DUTIES OF DIRECTOR

99.060    APPROVAL AUTHORITY

99.070    CONSOLIDATION OF PROCEEDINGS

99.080    NOTICE

99.090    CONTENTS OF NOTICE

99.100    MECHANICS OF GIVING NOTICE AND FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE

99.110    DECISION-MAKING PROCESS OF APPROVAL AUTHORITY

99.120    AMENDMENTS

99.125    STAGED OR PHASED DEVELOPMENT

99.130    NOTICE OF FINAL DECISION

99.140    ESTABLISHING STANDING TO APPEAL

99.160    DECISION BY DIRECTOR

99.170    HEARING PROCEDURES

99.180    EX PARTE CONTACTS, IMPARTIALITY, DISQUALIFICATION, AND ABSTENTION

99.190    CONTINUATION OF HEARING – NOTICE

99.200    EVIDENCE

99.220    RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

99.230    EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION – APPEAL OR REVIEW

99.240    AUTHORITY TO APPEAL OR SEEK REVIEW OF A DECISION – EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES

99.250    APPLICATION FOR APPEAL OR REVIEW

99.260    PERSONS ENTITLED TO NOTICE ON APPEAL – TYPE OF NOTICE

99.270    CONTENTS OF PUBLIC NOTICE OF APPEAL HEARING

99.280    TYPE OF APPEAL HEARING AND SCOPE OF REVIEW

99.290    ACTION ON APPEAL OR REVIEW – TIME LIMIT AND AUTHORITY TO CHANGE DECISION

99.300    PARTICIPATION BY MEMBERS OF APPROVAL AUTHORITY IN DECISION AND VOTING

99.320    DENIAL OF APPLICATION – RESUBMITTAL

99.325    EXTENSIONS OF APPROVAL

99.330    REVOCATION OF APPROVALS – FAILURE TO FULFILL CONDITIONS


99.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures applicable to the Community Development Code for the consideration of development applications, for the consideration of quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan amendments, and for the consideration of appeals or petitions for review of decisions. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.030 APPLICATION PROCESS: WHO MAY APPLY, PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE, REQUIREMENTS, REFUSAL OF APPLICATION, FEES

A.    Who may apply.

1.    Applications for approval required under this chapter may be initiated by:

a.    The owner of the property that is the subject of the application or the owner’s duly authorized representative;

b.    The purchaser of such property who submits a duly executed written contract or copy thereof, which has been recorded with the Clackamas Clerk;

c.    A lessee in possession of such property who submits written consent of the owner to make such application; or

d.    Motion by the Planning Commission or City Council. 

2.    Any person authorized by this chapter to submit an application for approval may be represented by an agent who is authorized in writing by such a person to make the application.

B.    Pre-application conferences.

1.    Subject to subsection (B)(4) of this section, a pre-application conference is required for, but not limited to, each of the following applications:

a.    Boundary changes, per Chapter 81 CDC;

b.     Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan;

c.    Amendments to the Zoning Map;

d.    Conditional uses;

e.     Design review (Class I and Class II);

f.     Historic design review (Class II);

g.    Designation of a historic resource or removal of a historic resource designation;

h.    Demolition of a historic resource;

i.    Relocation of a historic resource;

j.     New construction or remodels in the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District, except as provided for in subsection (B)(2)(h) of this section;

k.     Minor partitions;

l.    Land divisions;

m.    Enlargement of non-conforming uses or alteration of a structure containing a non-conforming use;

n.     Planned unit developments;

o.     Variances;

p.     Development subject to Chapter 32 CDC, Water Resource Area Protection;

q.     Development subject to Chapter 27 CDC, Flood Management Areas;

r.     Development subject to Chapter 28 CDC, Willamette and Tualatin River Protection;

s.     Right-of-way and easement vacations; and

t.    Extensions of approval with modifications to original approval.

2.    Subject to subsection (B)(3) of this section, the following applications are exempt from subsection (B)(1) of this section, Pre-Application Conference: 

a.    Signs;

b.    Home occupations;

c.    Temporary use permits;

d.    Sidewalk uses;

e.    Final plats;

f.    Property line adjustments;

g.    Re-vegetation plans;

h.     Painting, signage, awnings, or architectural in-kind replacements in the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District;

i.     Appeals of land use decisions; and

j.    Extensions of approval with no modification to original approval.

3.    The Planning Director shall have the authority to require a preapplication conference prior to the submittal of any application that is not listed in subsection (B)(1) of this section if he or she determines that the potential development is of significant complexity or magnitude to merit a preapplication conference.

4.     The Planning Director may waive the requirement for a pre-application conference for any application if he or she determines that such a conference is not warranted. Upon making such a determination, the Planning Director shall provide written notification (i.e., e-mail or letter) to the Planning Commission and applicable neighborhood association.

5.    At such conference, the Planning Director or designee shall:

a.    Cite the Comprehensive Plan map designation;

b.    Cite the applicable substantive and procedural ordinance provisions;

c.    Provide technical data and assistance which will aid the applicant;

d.    Identify other policies and regulations that relate to the application;

e.    Identify other pertinent factors that relate to the application; and

f.    Provide the applicant with a written description of all rights for appeal and provide access to all administrative procedures. 

6.    The failure of the Director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria, or requirements of the application.

7.    At least 10 days prior to the scheduled date of the conference, the City shall make the pre-application conference schedule available to the public. Within 10 days following the conference, the City shall make staff-prepared written notes summarizing the contents of the meeting available to the public. Failure to comply with this section due to technical or administrative problems is not a procedural defect entitling any party to a delay in the hearing process.

8.    The Planning Director shall prepare administrative procedures designed to allow citizens to attend and participate in pre-application conferences for applications. Lack of neighborhood association participation in a pre-application conference is not a procedural defect entitling any party to a delay in the hearing process. 

9.    If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the applicant shall provide written evidence that the owner has consented to the pre-application conference prior to it being scheduled.

C.    The requirements for making an application.

1.    The application shall be made on forms provided by the Director as provided by CDC 99.040(A)(1);

2.    The application shall be complete and shall contain the information requested on the form, shall address the appropriate submittal requirements and approval criteria in sufficient detail for review and action, and shall be accompanied by the deposit or fee required by CDC 99.033. No application will be accepted if not accompanied by the required fee or deposit. In the event an additional deposit is required by CDC 99.033 and not provided within the time required, the application shall be rejected without further processing or deliberation and all application materials shall be returned to the applicant, notwithstanding any determination of completeness. (Ord. 1527, 2005; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1599 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1614 § 14, 2013; Ord. 1622 § 30, 3014; Ord. 1635 § 36, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 60, 2014; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1675 § 55, 2018)


99.033 FEES

The Council shall adopt a schedule of fees reasonably calculated to defray the expenses of the administrative process. The Council may establish either a set fee or a deposit system in which the applicant pays a deposit and the City determines the total administrative cost at the end of the process and refunds any unused amount of the deposit to the applicant. No additional deposit shall be required for additional costs that are incurred because the matter is referred to or called up by a higher decision-making authority. The Council shall charge no fees for City-initiated land use applications or appeals filed by a recognized neighborhood association pursuant to the provisions of CDC 99.240. (Ord. 1527, 2005; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1604 § 70, 2011)


99.035 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED, WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS AND REPORT REQUIRED

A.    The Planning Director may require information in addition to that required by a specific chapter in the Community Development Code; provided, that:

1.    The chapter expressly authorizes that additional information may be required;

2.    The information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed site plan or proposal; and

3.    The need can be justified on the basis of a special or unforeseen circumstance.

B.    The Planning Director may waive a specific requirement for information or a requirement to address a certain approval standard subject to the provisions of subsection C of this section provided:

1.    The Planning Director finds that specific information is not necessary to properly evaluate the application; or

2.    The Planning Director finds that a specific approval standard is not applicable to the application.

C.    Where a requirement is waived, the Planning Director shall cite in the staff report on the application the specific requirements waived and the reasons for the waiver. The decision of the Planning Director to waive the requirement is subject to review and denial by the approval authority or the appeal authority. (Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.038 NEIGHBORHOOD CONTACT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN APPLICATIONS

Prior to submittal of an application for any subdivision, conditional use permit, multi-family project, planned unit development of four or more lots, non-residential buildings over 1,500 square feet, or a zone change that requires a Comprehensive Plan amendment, the applicant shall contact and discuss the proposed development with any affected neighborhood as provided in this section. Although not required for other or smaller projects, contact with neighbors is highly recommended. The Planning Director may require neighborhood contact pursuant to this section prior to the filing of an application for any other development permit if the Director deems neighborhood contact to be beneficial. 

A.    Purpose. The purpose of neighborhood contact is to identify potential issues or conflicts regarding a proposed application so that they may be addressed prior to filing. This contact is intended to result in a better application and to expedite and lessen the expense of the review process by avoiding needless delays, appeals, remands, or denials. The City expects an applicant to take the reasonable concerns and recommendations of the neighborhood into consideration when preparing an application. The City expects the neighborhood association to work with the applicant to provide such input.

B.    The applicant shall contact by letter all recognized neighborhood associations whose boundaries contain all or part of the site of the proposed development and all property owners within 500 feet of the site.

C.    The letter shall be sent to the president of the neighborhood association, and to one designee as submitted to the City by the neighborhood association, and shall be sent by regular mail to the other officers of the association and the property owners within 500 feet. If another neighborhood association boundary is 	located within the 500-foot notice radius, the letter shall be sent to that association’s president, and to one designee as submitted to the City by the neighborhood association as well. The letter shall briefly describe the nature and location of the proposed development, and invite the association and interested persons to a meeting to discuss the proposal in more detail. The meeting shall be scheduled at the association’s regularly scheduled monthly meeting, or at another time at the discretion of the association, and not less than 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice. If the meeting is scheduled as part of the association’s regular monthly meeting, the letter shall explain that the proposal may not be the only topic of discussion on the meeting agenda. The letter shall encourage concerned citizens to contact their association president, or their association designee, with any questions that they may want to relay to the applicant. 

Neighborhood contact shall be initiated by the applicant by mailing the association president, and to one designee as submitted to the City by the neighborhood association, a letter, return receipt requested, formally requesting, within 60 days, a date and location to have their required neighborhood meeting. The 60 days shall be calculated from the date that the applicant mails this letter to the association. If the neighborhood association does not want to meet within the 60-day timeframe, or if there is no neighborhood association, the applicant may hold a public meeting during the evening after 6:00 p.m., or on the weekend no less than 20 days from the date of mailing of the notice. All meetings shall be held at a location open to the public within the boundaries of the association or at a public facility within the City of West Linn. If the meeting is held at a business, it shall be posted at the time of the meeting as the meeting place and shall note that the meeting is open to the public and all interested persons may attend.

D.    On the same date the letters described in subsections A through C of this section are mailed, the applicant shall provide and post notice on the property subject to the proposed application. The notice shall be posted at a location visible from the public right-of-way. If the site is not located adjacent to a through street, then an additional sign shall be posted on the nearest through street. The sign notice shall be at least 11 inches by 17 inches in size on durable material and in clear, legible writing. The notice shall state that the site may be subject to a proposed development (e.g., subdivision, variance, conditional use) and shall set forth the name of the applicant and a telephone number where the applicant can be reached for additional information. The site shall remain posted until the conclusion of the meeting.

E.    An application shall not be accepted as complete unless and until the applicant demonstrates compliance with this section by including with the application:

1.    A copy of the certified letter to the neighborhood association with a copy of return receipt;

2.    A copy of the letter to officers of the association and to property owners within 500 feet, including an affidavit of mailing and a copy of the mailing list containing the names and addresses of such owners and residents;

3.    A copy of the required posted notice, along with an affidavit of posting;

4.    A copy of the minutes of the meetings, produced by the neighborhood association, which shall include a record of any verbal comments received, and copies of any written comments from property owners, residents, and neighborhood association members. If there are no minutes, the applicant may provide a summary of the meeting comments. The applicant shall also send a copy of the summary to the chair of the neighborhood association. The chair shall be allowed to supplement the summary with any additional comments regarding the content of the meeting, as long as such comments are filed before the record is closed;

5.    An audiotape of the meeting; and

6.    In the event that it is discovered by staff that the aforementioned procedures of this section were not followed, or that a review of the audio tape and meeting minutes show the applicant has made a material misrepresentation of the project at the neighborhood meeting, the application shall be deemed incomplete until the applicant demonstrates compliance with this section. (Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1613 § 23, 2013; Ord. 1635 § 37, 2014)


99.040 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR

A.    The Director shall:

1.    Prepare application forms made pursuant to the standards contained in the applicable State law, Comprehensive Plan and implementing ordinance provisions;

2.    Accept all development applications that comply with the provisions of CDC 99.030;

3.    After accepting an application pursuant to this chapter:

a.    Determine whether an application is complete, and comply with State statutes governing the completeness determination for applications. The determination of the Director is subject to review by the approval authority in its deliberation on the application;

b.    Give notice as provided by CDC 99.080 and 99.090;

c.    Prepare a staff report which shall include findings as to whether or not the application meets the approval criteria of the applicable Community Development Code sections as presented in the application, and whether or not the criteria can be met with conditions;

d.    Make the application, all documents or evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria available at least 20 days prior to the hearing or date of the Director’s decision. Make the staff report available at least 10 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing(s);

e.    Act on the development application pursuant to CDC 99.060(A) and 99.160 or cause a hearing to be held pursuant to CDC 99.060(B) through (D) and CDC 99.170 through 99.230, unless the applicant has requested or consented to a delay;

4.    Administer the hearings process pursuant to CDC 99.170 through 99.230;

5.    Maintain a register of all applications that have been filed for a decision. The register shall at all times identify at what stage the application is in the process. The register shall be posted on the City website unless technical problems prevent this;

6.    File notice of the final decision in the records of the Community Development Department and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant and all parties with standing.

The notice of the final decision shall contain the information set forth under CDC 99.130(B);

7.    Maintain and preserve the file for each application. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given pursuant to CDC 99.080 and the accompanying affidavits; the application and all supporting information; the staff report; the final decision including the findings, conclusions, and conditions, if any; all correspondence; the minutes of any meetings at which the application was considered; and any other exhibit(s), information, or documentation which was considered by the hearing body with respect to the application; and

8.    Administer the appeals and review process pursuant to CDC 99.240 through 99.320. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


99.060 APPROVAL AUTHORITY

This section explains the authority of the Planning Director, Planning Commission, City Council, and Historic Review Board as it relates to quasi-judicial and legislative action.

A.    Planning Director authority. The Planning Director shall have the authority to:

1.    Approve, deny, or approve with conditions the following applications:

a.    A temporary use or structure application for a period no more than 120 days, including all extensions (Chapter 35 CDC), and not associated with another land use approval.

b.    A home occupation application (Chapter 37 CDC).

c.    Access restrictions (Chapter 48 CDC).

d.    A minor partition (Chapter 85 CDC).

e.    A final subdivision plat (Chapter 89 CDC).

f.    A final partition plat (Chapter 89 CDC).

g.    A lot line adjustment (Chapter 85 CDC).

h.    Enlargement or alteration of a non-conforming single-family structure containing a conforming use (Chapter 66 CDC).

i.    Decide applications for a determination of unlisted parking requirements (Chapter 46 CDC).

j.    A minor alteration to a historic landmark or a structure in the Historic District (Chapter 25 CDC).

k.    Parks Design Review, Class I (Chapter 56 CDC).

l.    Design Review, Class I (Chapter 55 CDC).

m.    A sign application (Chapter 52 CDC).

n.    Sidewalk use permit (Chapter 53 CDC).

o.    Flood management area permit (Chapter 27 CDC). 

p.    Repealed by Ord. 1622.

q.    Tualatin River protection permit (Chapter 28 CDC).

r.    Water resource area permit (Chapter 32 CDC).

s.    Class I variance (Chapter 75 CDC).

t.    Willamette River Greenway permit (Chapter 28 CDC).

u.    Extensions of approval when the Planning Director acted as the initial decision-making authority.

v.     Class I historic design review (Chapter 25 CDC). 

w.    A demolition permit for a non-contributing or not in period primary structure or an accessory structure (Chapter 25 CDC).

2.    Approve a use permitted under prescribed conditions provided all of the conditions are satisfied.

3.    Make initial interpretations of the provisions of the code.

4.    Make the initial determination regarding the status of the following:

a.    Non-conforming structure (Chapter 66 CDC).

b.    Non-conforming structure involving a non-conforming use (Chapter 65 CDC).

c.    Non-conforming use of land (Chapter 67 CDC). 

B.    Planning Commission authority. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to:

1.    Make a recommendation to approve, deny, or approve with conditions to the Council:

a.    A quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan Map amendment (Chapter 105 CDC).

b.    A quasi-judicial zone change application pursuant to Chapter 105 CDC, excluding applications requesting the designation or removal of a designation for a historic resource.

2.    Approve, deny, or approve with conditions the following applications:

a.    A temporary use or structure application (Chapter 35 CDC) for a minimum of 121 days to no more than one year, or an application associated with another land use approval.

b.    A conditional use (Chapter 60 CDC).

c.    Enlargement of a non-conforming use or alteration for a structure containing a non-conforming use (Chapter 66 CDC).

d.    Enlargement or alteration of a non-single-family residential non-conforming use (Chapter 66 CDC).

e.    Class II variance or special waiver (Chapter 75 CDC).

f.    Subdivision (Chapter 85 CDC).

g.    Planned unit development (Chapter 24 CDC).

h.    Design review, Class II (Chapter 55 CDC).

i.    Parks design review, Class II (Chapter 56 CDC).

j.    Any matter not specifically assigned to another approval authority. 

k.    Extensions of approval when the Planning Commission acted as the initial decision-making authority.

3.    Revoke or modify an approval as provided by CDC 99.330 for any application approved by the Planning Commission or Planning Director.

4.    Make an unlisted use determination.

5.    An appeal of the Planning Director’s interpretation of the code pursuant to CDC 01.060.

C.    City Council authority. The Council shall have the authority to:

1.    Approve, deny, or approve with conditions applications for the following development applications:

a.    A quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan Map amendment (Chapter 105 CDC).

b.    A quasi-judicial zone change application pursuant to Chapter 105 CDC.

c.    Boundary change proposals (Chapter 81 CDC). 

2.    Consider an appeal or review of a decision made by the Planning Director under the provisions of CDC 99.240(A) and 99.080(B).

3.    Consider an appeal or review of a decision made by the Planning Commission or Historic Review Board whether on the Council’s own motion, or otherwise as provided by CDC 99.240.

4.    Decide an appeal of the Director’s interpretation of zoning boundaries as provided by CDC 05.040.

5.    Revoke or modify an approval as provided by CDC 99.330 for any application approved by the City Council, including an application approved by the City Council on appeal from another City decision-making authority.

D.    Historic Review Board authority. The Historic Review Board shall review an application for compliance with Chapters 25 and 58 CDC, as applicable. The Historic Review Board shall have the authority to:

1.    Approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application regarding the following: 

a.    Class II historic design review;

b.    A demolition permit for a historic landmark or primary contributing structure within a historic district;

c.    Relocation of a historic resource;

d.    Revocation or modification of an approval as provided by CDC 99.330 for any application approved by the Historic Review Board; and 

e.     An extension of an approval when the Historic Review Board acted as the initial decision-making authority.

2.    Make recommendations to the approval authority specified in this section regarding the following: 

a.    Designation of a historic resource;

b.    Removal of historic resource designation;

c.    Class I or Class II design review on a property within the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District that is not a historic landmark or within the Willamette Historic District;

d.    New construction within the Willamette Falls Drive Commercial Design District that is not a historic landmark or within the Willamette Historic District;

e.    A partition or subdivision of property containing a historic resource;

f.    Conditional use of property containing a historic resource.

E.    Expedited land divisions. Expedited land divisions shall be processed by the Planning Commission without a public hearing pursuant to Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) 197.360 through 197.380. Pursuant to ORS 197.360(3), the following City permits may be processed concurrently with an expedited land division application:

1.    Pursuant to ORS 197.360(3), the following City permits may be processed concurrently with an expedited land division application:

a.    Planned unit development.

b.    Willamette River Greenway.

c.    Flood management area.

d.    Tualatin River.

e.    Water resource area.

f.    Design review.

2.    The Planning Commission shall make their decision based solely upon the record and staff recommendation.

3.    Appeals of the Planning Commission decision on an expedited land division shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 197 ORS. (Ord. 1442, 1999; Ord. 1463, 2000; Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1510, 2004; Ord. 1525, 2005; Ord. 1545, 2007; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1597 §§ 17, 18, 2010; Ord. 1613 § 24, 2013; Ord. 1614 § 15, 2013; Ord. 1622 §§ 9, 28, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 38, 2014; Ord. 1638 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1655 § 9, 2016)


99.070 CONSOLIDATION OF PROCEEDINGS

A.    When an applicant requests more than one approval, and more than one approval authority is required to decide the applications, the proceedings shall be consolidated so that one approval authority shall decide all applications in one proceeding. In such cases, the hearings shall be held by the approval authority having original jurisdiction over one of the applications under CDC 99.060, in the following order of preference: City Council, Planning Commission or Historic Review Board, or the Planning Director.

1.    However, expedited land division applications shall be processed as described in Chapter 197 ORS, regardless of the number of approvals requested.

B.    When an applicant requests to undertake preliminary work, for site preparation or analysis, the Director may allow decisions within the Director’s authority to precede the subsequent decision required for review by the decision-making body. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1635 § 39, 2014)


99.080 NOTICE

Notice shall be given in the following ways:

A.    Class A Notice. Notice of proposed action or a development application pursuant to CDC 99.060 shall be given by the Director in the following manner:

1.    At least 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing date notice shall be sent by mail to:

a.    The applicant or the applicant’s agent, and the property owner of record on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located.

b.    All property owners of record on the most recent property tax assessment roll where such property is located within 500 feet of the site.

c.    Any affected governmental agency which has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the City which includes provision for such notice; plus, where applicable, the Oregon Department of Transportation, Tri-Met, neighboring local jurisdictions, Clackamas County Department of Transportation and Development, and Metro.

d.    The affected recognized neighborhood association or citizens advisory committee.

e.    For a hearing on appeal or review, all parties and persons with standing described in CDC 99.140 to an appeal or petition for review.

2.    At least 10 days prior to the hearing or meeting date, notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. An affidavit of publication shall be made part of the administrative record.

a.    Decisions pursuant to CDC 99.060(A), Planning Director authority, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection.

3.    At least 10 days prior to the hearing or meeting date, the Planning Director shall cause a sign to be placed on the property which is the subject of the decision or, if the property does not have frontage on a public street, adjacent to the nearest public street frontage in plain view and shall state, “This property is the subject of a land use decision,” with the type of use or request indicated.

If the application is not located adjacent to a through street, then an additional sign shall be posted on the nearest through street.

4.    At least 10 days but no more than 40 days prior to hearing of a proposed zone change for manufactured home parks, notice shall be given to the respective manufactured home park residents.

5.    The Director shall cause an affidavit of mailing of notice and posting of notice to be filed and made part of the administrative record.

6.    At the conclusion of the land use action the signs shall be removed.

B.    Class B Notice. Notice of a proposed action on a development application pursuant to CDC 99.060 shall be given by the Director in the following manner:

1.    At least 14 days prior to the decision date, a notice shall be sent by mail to:

a.    The applicant or his or her agent;

b.    The affected recognized neighborhood association or citizens advisory committee; and

c.    All property owners of record within 300 feet of the site perimeter;

2.    At least 10 days prior to the earliest date that the approval authority can take action on the application, the applicant shall place a sign, provided by the Community Development Department, on the subject property in plain view. The sign shall state, “This property is the subject of a land use decision,” with the type of use or request indicated. 

3.    The Director shall cause an affidavit of mailing of notice and posting of notice to be filed and made part of the administrative record.

4.    At the conclusion of the land use action the signs shall be removed.

C.    Notice for expedited and division applicants shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 197 ORS.

D.    Notice for a boundary change application shall comply with the requirements of ORS 197.763, Chapter 222 ORS, and the Metro Code.

E.    Table of notices. The following notice summary identifies the appropriate type of notice for the various land use applications of CDC 99.060.

 

	Land Use Action	Type of Notice

	Amendment or Modification of Application or Permit	Same as original application

	Appeal or Review of Decision	A

	Boundary Change	Special

	Code Interpretation	Notice to parties requesting the interpretation

	Comprehensive Plan:	 

	 	Map Amendment	A

	 	Plan/Code Text Amendment (Legislative Action)	A***

	Conditional Use	A

	Design Review:	 

	 	Class I	B

	 	Class II	A

	Determination of Unlisted Use	No Notice

	Enlarge or Alter Non-conforming Use/Structure:	 

	 	Commercial or Industrial	A

	 	Single-Family Residential	B

	Erosion and Sediment Control Permit	No Notice

	Expedited Land Division	per State statute requirements

	Extensions of Approvals	Same notice as original application

	Flood Management Area	B**

	Final Plat and Partition Plat	No Notice

	Historic Resources:	 

	 	Class I Historic Design Review	B

	 	Class II Historic Design Review	B

	 	Designation or Removal of Historic Resource Designation	A

	 	Demolition	A

	 	Relocation	B

	Home Occupation	No Notice

	Minor Partition	A

	Planned Unit Development	A

	Property Line Adjustment	No Notice

	Revocation of Approval	A

	Sidewalk Use Permit	No Notice

	Sign Permit	No Notice

	Subdivision	A

	Temporary Use Permit:	 

	 	60 days or less; 60-day extension	No Notice

	 	Over 60 days, up to 1 year	A

	Tualatin River Setback:	 

	 	Uses permitted outright and not subject to design review	No Notice

	 	Uses permitted outright and subject to design review	B

	 	Uses requiring conditional use permit and design review	A

	Street Vacations	(per State statute requirements)

	Variances:	 

	 	Class I (involves a small change with minor or no effect)	B

	 	Class II (involves a significant change from code requirements)	A

	Water Resource Area Permit (NDW)	A**

	Willamette River Greenway:	 

	 	Development Permit	A**

	 	Uses requiring conditional use permit and design review	A**

	Zone Change	A

**Plus COE/DSL is notified

***Plus DLCD notice

(Ord. 1425, 1998; Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1545, 2007; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1565, 2008; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1613 § 25, 2013; Ord. 1614 § 16, 2013; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 40, 2014; Ord. 1636 § 61, 2014)


99.090 CONTENTS OF NOTICE

A.    Notices mailed pursuant to this code shall comply with applicable provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS). Except for expedited land division review, for which Chapter 197 ORS shall apply, notice given to persons entitled to mailed or published notice pursuant to CDC 99.060 shall:

1.    Explain the type of application and what proposed uses could be authorized.

2.    List the applicable criteria from the ordinance and plan.

3.    Set forth street address (if existing) and other easily understood geographical reference of the subject property.

4.    State the date, time, and location of hearing or, for the Planning Director’s decisions, the earliest date upon which the Director will make a decision.

5.    State that failure to raise an issue in a hearing, in person, or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, precludes appeal to LUBA on that issue.

6.    Include the name of government contact and phone number.

7.    State that the application, all documents or evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost, and copies at reasonable cost.

8.    State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least 10 days prior to the hearing, and copies at reasonable cost. 

9.    A statement that public and written testimony are invited, and including a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings.

B.    In addition to the ORS requirements, the notice shall identify the following:

1.    The type of land use action proposed (e.g., “four-lot subdivision”).

2.    Community Development Department file number. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


99.100 MECHANICS OF GIVING NOTICE AND FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE

A.    The notification list used for giving notice required by this code under CDC 99.080 shall be compiled from the most recent property tax assessment roll.

B.    The failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the action provided a good faith attempt was made to notify all persons entitled to notice.

C.    Personal notice is deemed given when the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service. Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published.

D.    In computing the length of time that notice was given, the first date notice is given shall be excluded and the day of the hearing or decision by the Director shall be included. (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.110 DECISION-MAKING PROCESS OF APPROVAL AUTHORITY

A.    The decision shall be based on proof by the applicant that the application fully complies with:

1.    The applicable standards of any provision of this code or other applicable implementing ordinance.

B.    Consideration may also be given to:

1.    A mistake or inconsistency in the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Map as it relates to the property which is the subject of the development application; and

2.    Factual oral testimony or written statements from the parties, neighborhood plans, other persons and other governmental agencies relevant to the existing conditions or factors in subsection A or (B)(1) of this section.

C.    In all cases, the decision shall include a statement in a form which includes findings as to whether or not the application meets the approval criteria of the applicable Community Development Code sections. 

D.    The approval authority may:

1.    Adopt the findings and conclusions contained in the staff report;

2.    Adopt the findings and conclusions of a lower approval authority;

3.    Adopt its own findings and conclusions;

4.    Adopt the findings and conclusions submitted by any party; or

5.    Adopt the findings and conclusions from another source, either with or without modifications, having made a tentative decision and having directed the staff to prepare findings for review and to provide an opportunity for all parties to comment upon them.

E.    The decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions, pursuant to CDC 99.160 and 99.170, where such conditions are necessary to satisfy the applicable standards of any provision of this code or other applicable implementing ordinance. 

F.    The final decision shall be a decision which is in writing and which has been:

1.    Formally adopted by the decision-making authority and filed with the Director within 14 working days of the formal adoption of the decision; or

2.    Signed by the Director in the case of a decision by the Director and filed as a final decision within 14 working days of the signed decision; or

3.    Formally adopted by the Council and signed by the Mayor or the president of the Council in the case of an appeal. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.120 AMENDMENTS

This section explains how amendments to projects subject to the quasi-judicial decision making process are processed.

A.    An amendment application shall be required if the Planning Director determines that the proposed revisions will change the project by a factor greater than 10 percent in a quantifiable manner (e.g., number of proposed lots, square footage of proposed buildings, number of parking spaces, relocation of building footprints). Non-quantifiable changes shall also require an amendment if they result in significant differences between the approved project and the revised project, or if the changes call into question compliance with a relevant approval criterion.

B.    Amendments shall be reviewed by the initial decision-making authority. For example, if the Planning Commission heard the application initially, then it would hear the amendment application.

C.    Rather than provide full submittal, the Planning Director shall identify the parameters of the submittal appropriate to the amendment and applicable approval criteria. For example, if the applicant only requests to redesign the architecture of a building, but not increase square footage or building mass, then the submittal of a site plan, architectural elevations, material/color board, and narrative specific to the architecture and relevant design review approval criteria would be appropriate. Conversely, no new landscaping, grading plans, etc., would be necessary since no changes are proposed for those items. The submittal should be comprehensive and sufficient to provide the decision-making authority with all necessary information while not being redundant and requiring information which is already part of the record of the original application.

D.    If the proposed revisions will change the project by a factor greater than 25 percent in a quantifiable manner, or if the land area upon which the project is proposed changes, then a new application shall be required. (Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.125 STAGED OR PHASED DEVELOPMENT

An applicant may elect to develop a proposed project in phases. The timing of each development phase shall be set forth in the application and subject to approval by the appropriate approval authority. Each phase shall meet all applicable development standards individually (e.g., access, parking, landscaping, utilities, etc.) without having to rely upon subsequent phases. Each phase shall also install all necessary improvements to serve the development within that phase. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.130 NOTICE OF FINAL DECISION

A.    The final decision by the Planning Director shall be filed in the records of the Community Development Department after the decision is signed by the Planning Director, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant, all parties to the matter as established under CDC 99.140, and those persons who requested copies of such notice.

B.    The final decision by the Planning Commission, Historic Review Board, or City Council shall be filed in the records of the Community Development Department, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant, all parties to the matter as established under CDC 99.140, and those people requesting copies of such notice.

C.    Notice of a final decision shall conform to applicable provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes.

D.    The appeal period is as provided in CDC 99.230. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)


99.140 ESTABLISHING STANDING TO APPEAL

A.    Any person or recognized neighborhood association with standing may pursue an appeal or seek review of any land development decision. Standing is established in the following way:

B.    The person or recognized neighborhood association appeared before an approval authority other than the Director, either orally or in writing, and provided their name and address; signed the testimony form provided at the hearing; or submitted comments to the Director, in writing, and provided their name and address to the Director regarding a decision. Neighborhood association standing can only be established by a person identifying, either in testimony or in writing, that they represent a specific neighborhood association. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 8, 2014)


99.160 DECISION BY DIRECTOR

A.    Pursuant to CDC 99.060(A), the Director is authorized to make certain decisions, and no hearing shall be held except where the Director has an interest in the outcome of the decision, due to some past or present involvement with the applicant or other interested persons or in the property or surrounding property, and cannot render an impartial decision. In such cases, the application shall be reviewed by the Director’s designee, and in the event the designee cannot render a decision, the application shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission.

B.    A decision made by the Director shall be made in accordance with the provisions of CDC 99.110, and a record shall be made which shall include:

1.    A copy of the application and all supporting information, plans, exhibits, graphics, etc.;

2.    All correspondence relating to the application;

3.    All information considered by the Director in making the decision;

4.    The staff report of the Director prepared under CDC 99.040(A)(3)(c);

5.    A list of the conditions, if any are attached, to the approval of the application;

6.    A copy of the notice which was given pursuant to CDC 99.080(A), and accompanying affidavits, and a list of all persons who were given mailed notice; and

7.    A signed statement by the Director stating the nature of any past or present involvement with the applicant, other interested persons or the property if the Director makes a decision, and if there could reasonably be expected to be a challenge to the fairness of the decision.

C.    A decision made by the Director shall be final as provided by CDC 99.230 unless:

1.    A party to the action files a written appeal with the Director within 14 days of the final decision pursuant to CDC 99.240; or

2.    A majority of the members of the Commission or the Council order a review within 14 days of the final decision pursuant to CDC 99.240.

D.    No Director’s decision may modify the request from that set out in the notice given under CDC 99.080 and 99.090, unless new notice be given, except that conditions may be attached to the approval. (Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 41, 2014)


99.170 HEARING PROCEDURES

A.    The Planning Commission, City Council, and Historic Review Board shall conduct a public hearing on all matters over which the Board, Commission, or Council has original jurisdiction pursuant to CDC 99.060; and:

1.    Determine who qualifies as a party.

2.    Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing. The sequence of the hearing shall also include the right to establish procedures for continuances of hearings.

3.    Dispose of procedural requirements or similar matters.

4.    Rule on offers of proof and relevancy of evidence and testimony.

5.    Impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses heard and set reasonable time limits for oral presentation, cross-examination of witnesses and rebuttal testimony.

6.    Take such other action appropriate for conduct commensurate with the nature of the hearing.

7.    Approve or deny applications or approve with conditions pursuant to CDC 99.110. 

B.    At the commencement of the hearing, a statement shall be made to those in attendance that:

1.    Lists the applicable substantive criteria (by chapter) that apply to the application before the hearing body.

2.    States that testimony, arguments and evidence must be directed toward the applicable substantive criteria which the person testifying believes to apply to the decision. 

3.    States that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes an appeal to the State Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue.

C.    Unless otherwise provided in rules of procedure adopted by the Council, the following rules shall apply to the general conduct of the hearing:

1.    The approval authority may ask questions at any time prior to the final decision; however, the answers shall be limited to the substance of the question and if new evidence is admitted after the close of the hearing, upon request, rebuttal shall be allowed;

2.    Parties or the Director must receive approval from the approving authority to submit directly questions to other parties or witnesses or the Director;

3.    A reasonable amount of time shall be given to persons to respond to questions;

4.    No person shall testify without first receiving recognition from the approval authority and stating a full name and address;

5.    The approval authority may require that testimony be under oath or affirmation;

6.    Audience demonstrations such as applause, cheering and display of signs or other conduct disruptive of the hearing shall not be permitted. Any such conduct may be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer; and 

7.    No person shall be disorderly, abusive, or disruptive of the orderly conduct of the hearing.

D.    The Planning Commission or Historic Review Board may refer any matter for Council action on the record made before it.

E.    Prior to the conclusion of the initial evidentiary public hearing on the application, any participant may request an opportunity to present additional evidence, arguments, or testimony regarding the application. The request shall be granted through one of the following means:

1.    Continuation of the public hearing to a date, time, and place certain at least seven days from the date of the initial evidentiary public hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the continued hearing for persons to present and rebut new evidence, arguments or testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request prior to the conclusion of the continued hearing that the record be left open for at least seven days to submit additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony for the purpose of responding to the new written evidence.

2.    Leaving the record open for at least seven days for the presentation of additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony. At the conclusion of this period, any participant may file a request for an opportunity to respond to any additional written evidence, arguments, or testimony. Such a request shall be granted with an additional seven days (at minimum) to file such a written response.

F.    If requested, an applicant shall be granted an additional period of at least seven days after the record is closed to all other parties to submit final written arguments in support of the application. The applicant’s final submittal shall be considered part of the record, but shall not include any new evidence. Any such time period granted to the applicant shall not be subject to the time limit provisions of Chapter 227 ORS regarding local government hearing procedures found in ORS 227.170 for quasi-judicial applications.

G.    A decision made by the Planning Commission or Historic Review Board shall be final as provided by CDC 99.230 unless:

1.    A party to the action files a written appeal with the Director within 14 days of the final decision pursuant to CDC 99.240;

2.    A majority of the Council order a review within 14 days of the final decision pursuant to CDC 99.240; or

3.    It is an expedited land division application for which the provisions of Chapter 197 ORS shall apply. 

H.    If a Planning Commission or a Historic Review Board decision for a project that requires a decision by both bodies is appealed, both decisions shall be automatically appealed and will be reviewed in a combined hearing. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1597 § 19, 2010; Ord. 1604 § 71, 2011; Ord. 1622 § 7, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 56, 2018)


99.180 EX PARTE CONTACTS, IMPARTIALITY, DISQUALIFICATION, AND ABSTENTION

A.    Ex parte contacts. The general public has a right to have hearing body members free from pre-hearing or ex parte contacts on the matter to be heard. It is recognized that an equal public right is free access to public officials on any matter.

1.    Therefore, hearing body members shall reveal any significant pre-hearing or ex parte contacts with regard to any matter at the commencement of the public hearing on the matter. “Ex parte contacts” are defined as meetings, conversations, or communication outside of the City hearing process between the decision-making authority (e.g., Planning Commission member) and any person concerning the substance of the application. Essentially, both sides of the issue are not fairly represented. An ex parte contact does not compel abstention, but if such contacts have impaired the members’ impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall so state and shall abstain from voting.

2.    In addition, parties who had the communication with the member have the right to rebut the substance of the communication, or the subject to which the communication relates, with the member at the commencement of the public hearing on the matter.

3.    All ex parte contacts shall be reported on the record.

4.    This section shall not apply to Director decisions made under CDC 99.060(A).

5.    Members of the City Council, Planning Commission, and Historic Review Board shall be governed by the relevant provisions of Chapters 227 and 244 ORS and the provisions of this section. Where inconsistencies exist, the ORS shall prevail.

B.    Challenges to impartiality.

1.    An affected party or a member of a hearing body may challenge the qualifications of a member of the hearing body to participate in the hearing and decision. The challenge shall state the facts relied upon by the challenger relating to a person’s bias, pre-judgment, personal interest, or other facts from which the challenger has concluded that the member of the hearing body cannot participate in an impartial manner.

2.    The challenged person shall have an opportunity to respond orally to the challenge. The challenge shall be incorporated into the record of the hearing.

3.    Any challenge shall require that the hearing body vote on the challenge pursuant to subsection E of this section.

C.    Disqualification. No member of a hearing body may participate in a discussion of the proposal or vote on the proposal when any of the following conditions exist:

1.    Any of the following have a direct or substantial financial interest in the proposal: the member or member’s spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment.

2.    For any other valid reason, the member has determined that participation in the hearing and decision cannot be in an impartial manner.

D.    Participation by interested officers or employees. No officer or employee of the City who has a financial or other private interest in a proposal may participate in discussion with, or give an official opinion to, the hearing body on the proposal without first declaring for the record the nature and extent of such interest.

E.    Abstention or disqualification. Disqualification for reasons other than the member’s own judgment may be ordered by a majority of the members of a hearing body present and voting. The member who is the subject of the motion for disqualification may not vote on the motion but shall be allowed to participate in the deliberation of the hearing body on that motion.

F.    Rights of abstaining or disqualified member of the hearing body.

1.    An abstaining or disqualified member of the hearing body shall be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. A member who represents a personal interest at a hearing may do so only after making full disclosure for the record of the hearing, abstaining from voting on the proposal, and vacating the seat on the hearing body.

2.    If sufficient members of a hearing body abstain or are disqualified, that renders the hearing body unable to take action on the application consistent with the applicable authority of the hearing body, then the application shall be reviewed as follows:

a.    Planning Director disqualified – referred to Planning Director’s designee, or if no alternatives are available, referred to the Planning Commission for hearing and decision.

b.    Historic Review Board disqualified – referred to Planning Commission for hearing and decision.

c.    Planning Commission disqualified – referred to City Council for hearing and decision.

d.    City Council disqualified – City Council will hear it and make a decision if the disqualified member’s vote is required to achieve a quorum and reach a decision on the matter, and no other person can act in the place of the disqualified person. 

e.    City Council acting as appellate hearing authority disqualified – decision of the original authority becomes the final City decision.

3.    Council members who appear as a party in another hearing process on an application, such as testifying before the Planning Commission in a case that is then appealed to the City Council, shall be disqualified from Council consideration of that application.

4.    Council members of a hearing body who participate in a meeting, such as a neighborhood association or a Chamber of Commerce meeting, etc., wherein they state their support or opposition to an application that appears before the City Council, shall be disqualified from the hearing body consideration of that application.

G.    A member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or decision unless the member has reviewed the evidence received. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1604 §§ 72, 73, 2011; Ord. 1635 § 42, 2014)


99.190 CONTINUATION OF HEARING – NOTICE

An approval authority may continue the hearing from time to time to gather additional evidence, to consider the application fully, to comply with State statutes, or to give notice to additional persons. Unless otherwise provided by the approval authority, no additional notice need be given of the continued hearing if the matter is continued to a date certain. (Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.200 EVIDENCE

A.    All evidence offered and not objected to may be received unless excluded by the approval authority.

B.    Evidence received at any hearing shall be of the quality that reasonable persons rely upon in the conducting of their everyday affairs.

C.    No person shall present irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence.

D.    Formal rules of evidence, as used in courts of law, shall not apply. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.220 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

A.    A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by video recording, or other available means. It shall not be necessary to transcribe testimony. The minutes and other evidence of the proceedings shall be part of the record and the basis for deciding a decision on review. Inadvertent loss of a verbatim record due to technical or mechanical problems unforeseen by the City shall not be grounds for invalidating a public hearing or decision.

B.    All exhibits received shall be marked so as to provide identification upon review and shall be part of the record.

C.    The official record shall include:

1.    All materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations, and motions submitted by any party to the proceeding and recorded or considered by the hearings authority as evidence;

2.    All materials submitted by the Director to the approval authority with respect to the application;

3.    The verbatim record made by video recording or other available means, the minutes of the hearing, and other evidence of the proceedings before the hearings body;

4.    The written findings, conclusions, decision and, if any, conditions of approval of the approval authority;

5.    All visual displays, both in paper form and in electronic form, presented as part of the proceedings;

6.    All correspondence relating to the application; and

7.    A copy of the notice which was given as provided by CDC 99.080, accompanying affidavits and list of persons who were sent mailed notice.

D.    The record of the proceedings for a hearing on appeal or review by the City Council shall consist of all the above items and all similar items presented during the Council proceedings. (Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.230 EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION – APPEAL OR REVIEW

A.    Any Planning Director or Planning Commission decision made under the provisions of this chapter shall become effective at 5:00 p.m. on the fourteenth day from the date of mailing the notice of the final decision, unless a local appeal or review is taken pursuant to CDC 99.240. If the fourteenth day falls on any legal holiday or on a Saturday or Sunday, then the effective date and time shall be at 5:00 p.m. on the next business day.

B.     City Council decisions are final upon the date of the signature on the decision. The effective date shall be 21 days from the date that the final, signed decision is mailed. If the twenty-first day falls on any legal holiday or on a Saturday or Sunday, then the effective date and time shall be at 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


99.240 AUTHORITY TO APPEAL OR SEEK REVIEW OF A DECISION – EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES

The Oregon Revised Statutes require that prior to filing an appeal at the State Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), an appellant must first utilize the appeal opportunities provided by the City. A case cannot be brought before LUBA unless an appeal or petition for review is first filed with the appropriate City review body. It is the purpose of this section to provide parties information about possible remedies prior to litigation. To that end, the filing of an appeal or petition for review is a condition precedent for further administrative or judicial review.

A.    Any decision made by the Planning Director pursuant to CDC 99.160, or the Planning Commission or Historic Review Board (except for expedited land divisions) on a development application as provided by CDC 99.170, may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to CDC 99.160(C)(1) or 99.170(G)(1) or may be reviewed by the City Council pursuant to CDC 99.160(C)(2) or 99.170(G)(2).

B.    Any decision made by the Historic Review Board or Planning Commission under CDC 99.170 may be reviewed by the Council if the matter is referred under CDC 99.170(D) to the Council, upon closure of the hearing, when the case presents a policy issue which required Council deliberation and determination.

C.    Formally recognized neighborhood associations may appeal land use decisions to the appropriate bodies without cost if the Planning Director finds:

1.    The Community Development Code appeal procedures are followed.

2.    A member of the association must have established standing on behalf of the association. The member must have explicitly identified themselves, in writing or in testimony, as representing the association.

3.    The association submits a copy of the meeting minutes and vote taken supporting the appeal.

4.    The neighborhood association appeal is related to the property within the association’s recognized boundaries, or an application outside the association’s boundaries that shall have significant impacts upon the association’s neighborhood.

5.    The neighborhood association may appeal without cost on behalf of an individual or group with standing who is not represented by a recognized association if subsections A, B and C of this section are met and the neighborhood association finds the issue(s) are of City-wide concern related to the West Linn Comprehensive Plan or the West Linn CDC. 

D.    The Planning Commission shall have standing in all Historic Review Board decisions and may appeal such decisions, following Community Development Code appeal procedures, without cost.

E.    The Historic Review Board shall have standing in all Planning Commission decisions involving property or structures within a historic district or designated as a landmark and may appeal such decisions, following Community Development Code appeal procedures, without cost. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1597 § 20, 2010)


99.250 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL OR REVIEW

A.    The notice of appeal shall contain:

1.    A reference to the application sought to be appealed; and

2.    A statement explaining how the petitioner qualifies as a party of standing, as provided by CDC 99.140.

B.    The appeal application shall be accompanied by the required fee.

C.    The hearing on the appeal or review shall be de novo; however, all evidence presented to any lower approval authority shall be made part of the record and shall be considered and given equal weight as evidence presented on appeal.

D.    The appeal or review application may state grounds for appeal or review. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1663 § 1, 2017)


99.260 PERSONS ENTITLED TO NOTICE ON APPEAL – TYPE OF NOTICE

Upon appeal, notice shall be given by the Director to all persons having standing as provided by CDC 99.140 to notice as required by CDC 99.080. (Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 5, 2014)


99.270 CONTENTS OF PUBLIC NOTICE OF APPEAL HEARING

Notice given to persons entitled to mailed notice under CDC 99.260 shall:

A.    Reference the application sought to be appealed;

B.    List the date, time, and location of the hearing;

C.    State the appellant or petitioner name(s);

D.    List any grounds for appeal or review stated in the application for appeal or review, but state that the appeal or review is not limited to the stated grounds for appeal or review and that all relevant issues may be considered;

E.    State that the hearing on appeal shall be de novo; however, evidence presented to the lower approval authority shall be considered and given equal weight as evidence presented on appeal;

F.    Include the name of government contact and phone number; and

G.    State that the application and record are available for inspection at no cost, and copies at a reasonable cost. (Ord. 1382, 1995; Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1547, 2007; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1663 § 2, 2017)


99.280 TYPE OF APPEAL HEARING AND SCOPE OF REVIEW

A.    All appeals and reviews shall be de novo.

1.    The record of the previous application, hearing, and decision shall be incorporated and considered as evidence in the appeal procedure.

2.    If any party requests a continuance of the appeal hearing, the City Council may grant a continuance to allow a further hearing or may allow only written submissions. The City Council may limit the scope of any additional testimony or argument after the initial hearing on appeal. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1622 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1663 § 3, 2017)


99.290 ACTION ON APPEAL OR REVIEW – TIME LIMIT AND AUTHORITY TO CHANGE DECISION

A.    The approval authority shall act upon the appeal or review within 120 days of the application being deemed complete, unless the applicant consents to an extension of time; and

B.    The approval authority may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision which is the subject of the appeal; however, the decision shall be made in accordance with the provisions of CDC 99.110; or

C.    The approval authority may remand the matter if it is not satisfied that testimony or other evidence could not have been presented or was not available at the hearing. In deciding to remand the matter, the approval authority shall consider and make findings and conclusions regarding:

1.    The prejudice to parties;

2.    The convenience or availability of evidence at the time of the initial hearing;

3.    The surprise to opposing parties;

4.    The date notice was given to other parties as to an attempt to admit; or

5.    The competency, relevancy, and materiality of the proposed testimony or other evidence. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.300 PARTICIPATION BY MEMBERS OF APPROVAL AUTHORITY IN DECISION AND VOTING

A.    The provisions of CDC 99.180 apply and, in addition:

1.    A majority of the qualified voting members of the approval authority must vote affirmatively to affirm, affirm with conditions, or reverse or remand the decision. If no majority is in favor of any motion, then the previous decision shall be considered affirmed.

B.    Unless a decision be deferred, in the event of a tie, the decision which is the subject of appeal or review shall stand. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008)


99.320 DENIAL OF APPLICATION – RESUBMITTAL

An application which has been denied and, if appealed, has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission, or the courts, may not be resubmitted for the same or a substantially similar proposal, or for the same or substantially similar action, for a period of at least 12 months from the date the final decision is made denying the application. (Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1590 § 1, 2009)


99.325 EXTENSIONS OF APPROVAL

A.    An extension may be granted by the original decision-making body by an additional two years from the effective date of approval pertaining to applications listed in CDC 99.060(A), (B), (C), (D) or (E), as applicable, upon finding that:

1.    The applicant has demonstrated that the application is in conformance with applicable CDC provisions and relevant approval criteria enacted since the application was initially approved; and

2.    There are no demonstrated material misrepresentations, errors, omissions, or changes in facts that directly impact the project, including, but not limited to, existing conditions, traffic, street alignment and drainage; or

3.    The applicant has modified the approved plans to conform with current approval criteria and remedied any inconsistency with subsection (A)(2) of this section, in conformance with any applicable limits on modifications to approvals established by the CDC.

B.    Repealed by Ord. 1675.

C.    Repealed by Ord. 1675.

D.    Repealed by Ord. 1635.

E.    Extension procedures.

1.    The application for extension of approval with modifications to the original approval may be submitted only after a pre-application meeting under CDC 99.030(B). If no modifications are made to the original approval, a pre-application conference is not required.

2.    The application for extension of approval with modifications to the original approval shall satisfy the neighborhood meeting requirements of CDC 99.038 for those cases that require compliance with that section. If no modifications are made to the original approval, no neighborhood meeting is required.

3.    Applications for extensions must be submitted along with the appropriate deposit to the Community Development Department.

4.    Notice of the decision shall be issued consistent with CDC 99.080.

5.    The decision shall not become effective until resolution of all appeal periods, including an opportunity for City Council call-up pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014; Ord. 1635 § 43, 2014; Ord. 1675 § 57, 2018)


99.330 REVOCATION OF APPROVALS – FAILURE TO FULFILL CONDITIONS

A.    Conditions of approval shall be fulfilled within the time limit set forth in the decision, or by specific provisions in this code or, if no time limit is set forth, within three years unless an extension is granted per CDC 99.325. Failure to fulfill any condition of approval within the time limitations provided will be grounds for revocation of approval after notice and an opportunity to be heard as an administrative action as provided in this section. Alternately, the Planning Director shall pursue compliance through Chapter 106 CDC. 

B.    Substantial changes, alterations, or amendments to the substance of the conditions of approval shall be processed as a new administrative action per CDC 99.120.

1.    Substantial changes in an application made after approval, but without applicant seeking approval under CDC 99.120, shall result in revocation of approval after notice and opportunity to appeal revocation order.

2.    Director determination of what does or does not constitute substantial changes, alterations, or amendments is appealable to the City Council by anyone having standing in the original land use decision.

C.    The conditional approval may require the owner of the property to sign within a time certain or, if no time is designated, within a reasonable time, a contract with the City for enforcement of the conditions. The Council shall have the authority to execute such contracts on behalf of the City. If a contract is required by a conditional approval, no building permit shall be issued for the use covered by the applications until the executed contract is recorded in the real property records of the County and filed in the County records. Such contracts shall be enforceable against the signing parties, their heirs, successors, and assigns by the City by appropriate action in law or suit in equity for the benefit of public health, safety, and welfare.

D.    A performance bond or other type of surety in a form acceptable to the Director, or upon appeal or review by the appropriate approval authority, or a cash deposit from the property owners or contract purchases in such an amount as will assure compliance with the conditions imposed pursuant to this section may be required. Such bond, surety, or deposit shall be posted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the use covered by the application.

E.    The hearings authority may, after a hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter, modify or revoke any approval granted pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:

1.    A material misrepresentation or mistake of fact made by the applicant in the application or in testimony and evidence submitted, whether such misrepresentation be intentional or unintentional; or

2.    A failure to comply with the terms and conditions of approval; or

3.    A failure to use the premises in accordance with the terms of the approval; or

4.    A material misrepresentation or mistake of fact or policy by City in the written or oral report regarding the matter, whether such misrepresentation be intentional or unintentional.

F.    In the event that a revocation hearing is deemed appropriate, per subsection A of this section, the hearing shall be conducted by the decision-making authority that granted the final City approval. The Planning Director or the approval authority with jurisdiction may initiate revocation proceedings. For the Planning Director’s decisions made without a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed revocation. (Ord. 1474, 2001; Ord. 1568, 2008; Ord. 1589 § 1 (Exh. A), 2010)


Chapter 100 PROCEDURES FOR ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT OF SUPPORTING PLANS

Sections:

100.010    DEFINITION

100.020    SCOPE

100.030    INITIATION OF PROCESS

100.050    PROCESS

100.070    NOTICE

100.090    ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES


100.010 DEFINITION

For the purposes of this chapter, “supporting plan” means any public facilities system or master plan or program that is a supporting document to the Comprehensive Plan. Supporting plans include, but are not limited to, any master parks plan, public facilities plan, capital improvement program, water system plan, drainage master plan, and transportation funding program.


100.020 SCOPE

This chapter establishes procedures for amendment or adoption of supporting plans.


100.030 INITIATION OF PROCESS

The procedure for adopting or amending supporting plans may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, or the Planning Director.


100.050 PROCESS

The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall hold at least one public hearing before adopting or amending any supporting plan. The City Council shall adopt any amendments or new supporting plan by resolution, but may deny a requested amendment or supporting plan by motion.


100.070 NOTICE

Notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 days prior to the initial hearing of the Planning Commission and at least 10 days prior to the initial hearing of the City Council.


100.090 ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES

The procedures set forth in CDC 98.090, 98.110, 98.120, 98.130, and 98.150 shall apply.


Chapter 103 FACT-FINDING

Sections:

103.010    PURPOSE

103.030    APPLICATION

103.040    FACT-FINDING BODY

103.050    NOTICE – CONTENTS OF NOTICE – MECHANICS OF NOTICE

103.060    HEARING

103.070    DETERMINATION – VOTING – RECORD – EFFECTIVE DATE – NOTICE

103.080    PARTY STATUS STANDING – PETITION FOR REVIEW – NOTICE

103.090    TYPE OF REVIEW – ACTION – VOTING – EFFECTIVE DATE

103.100    REVOCATION OF APPROVALS


103.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for finding the facts necessary to make a non-discretionary determination.


103.030 APPLICATION

An application for a determination may be filed with the Planning Director by a property owner, purchaser of property, lessee, authorized agent, or the Council.


103.040 FACT-FINDING BODY

The Planning Commission shall sit as a fact-finding body on the following:

A.    A determination of non-conforming use status under CDC 65.050(B).

B.    A determination of non-conforming structures status under CDC 66.040(B).

C.    A determination of a non-conforming use of land status under CDC 67.030(B).

D.    A determination of lot of record status under CDC 68.030(B).


103.050 NOTICE – CONTENTS OF NOTICE – MECHANICS OF NOTICE

A.    Notice shall be as provided by CDC 99.080(B).

B.    The contents of the notice shall be as provided by CDC 99.090.

C.    The mechanics of giving notice shall be as provided in CDC 99.100.


103.060 HEARING

A.    The hearing shall be limited to ascertaining the relevant facts required to make a determination.

B.    The hearing shall be conducted in the manner set forth in CDC 99.170(A) and (C).


103.070 DETERMINATION – VOTING – RECORD – EFFECTIVE DATE – NOTICE

A.    The determination shall include:

1.    A statement of the applicable standard;

2.    A statement of the facts found to be relevant and true;

3.    An analysis relating the facts to the standards; and

4.    A determination.

B.    The fact-finding body shall be impartial and each member shall act in accordance with the provisions of CDC 99.110.

C.    An affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified voting members is required for a determination.

D.    The record shall be as provided by CDC 99.220.

E.    The effective date of the determination shall be as provided by CDC 99.230.

F.    Notice of the final determination shall be given in the manner set forth in CDC 99.130.


103.080 PARTY STATUS STANDING – PETITION FOR REVIEW – NOTICE

A.    Any person shall be considered a party and thus have standing if the requirements of CDC 99.140 are satisfied.

B.    Any party to the decision may file a petition for review provided:

1.    The notice of review is filed within 14 days of mailing the notice of final determination. The time computation shall be as provided by CDC 99.230; and

2.    The notice of review is prepared and submitted in accordance with the provisions of CDC 99.250.

C.    Notice of the hearing on the petition of review shall be given in the manner set forth in CDC 103.050.


103.090 TYPE OF REVIEW – ACTION – VOTING – EFFECTIVE DATE

A.    Review by the Council shall be as provided by CDC 99.280.

B.    Action on the petition shall be as provided by CDC 99.290.

C.    Voting shall be as provided in CDC 99.300.

D.    The final order or final determination shall become effective as provided in CDC 99.230.


103.100 REVOCATION OF APPROVALS

A fact-finding body may revoke its final determination upon finding any of the factors set forth in CDC 99.330.


Chapter 104 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:

104.010    ADOPTED

104.020    LAND USE POLICY

104.030    EXHIBIT “B” ADOPTED BY REFERENCE

104.040    COPIES FILED


104.010 ADOPTED

The West Linn Comprehensive Plan composed of goals, objectives, policies, standards, implementation strategies, and Comprehensive Plan Land Use Maps, is hereby adopted as the West Linn Comprehensive Plan as required by ORS 197.010 and 197.175. The text and map of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “A” and incorporated herein by reference.


104.020 LAND USE POLICY

From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the West Linn Comprehensive Plan shall serve as the land use policy for the City, and shall govern the exercise of the planning and zoning responsibilities of the City thereafter.


104.030 EXHIBIT “B” ADOPTED BY REFERENCE

The West Linn Comprehensive Plan is adopted and based upon the findings of fact, inventory and analysis, database and evaluation contained in the text and maps contained in the West Linn Comprehensive Plan, and in the planning background reports of the West Linn comprehensive planning program set forth in Exhibit “C” of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan, which are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “B” and adopted herein by reference. The information contained and incorporated in the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “B” is adopted only as additional justification for the adoption of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan set forth in Exhibit “A,” and shall not govern the exercise of the planning and zoning responsibilities of the City.


104.040 COPIES FILED

Certified copies of the West Linn Comprehensive Plan shall be filed with the City Recorder, Clackamas County, the Metropolitan Service District, and the Land Conservation and Development Commission of the State of Oregon.


Chapter 105 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE AND MAP

Sections:

105.010    PURPOSE

105.030    LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENTS TO THIS CODE AND MAP

105.040    QUASI-JUDICIAL AMENDMENTS AND PROCEDURES

105.050    QUASI-JUDICIAL AMENDMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR MAKING DECISION

105.060    CONDITION OF APPROVAL

105.070    RECORD OF AMENDMENTS


105.010 PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the standards and procedures for legislative amendments to this code and to the map and for the quasi-judicial changes to the map as provided by the code chapters setting forth the procedures and by the Comprehensive Plan. Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes or to address changes in the law.


105.030 LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENTS TO THIS CODE AND MAP

Legislative amendments to this code and to the map shall be in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 98 CDC.


105.040 QUASI-JUDICIAL AMENDMENTS AND PROCEDURES

Quasi-judicial amendments to this code and to the map shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code and the following:

A.    The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council on a zone change application which does not involve Comprehensive Plan Map amendments as provided by CDC 99.060(B).

B.    The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council on an application for a Comprehensive Plan Map amendment. The Council shall decide the application on the record as provided by CDC 99.060(C).

C.    The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council on a zone change application which also involves a concurrent application for a Comprehensive Plan Map amendment. The Council shall decide the applications on the record as provided by CDC 99.060(C). (Ord. 1401, 1997; Ord. 1613 § 26, 2013; Ord. 1635 § 44, 2014)


105.050 QUASI-JUDICIAL AMENDMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR MAKING DECISION

A decision to approve, approve with conditions, or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following standards:

A.    The standards set forth in CDC 99.110(A), which provide that the decision shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

1.    The applicable Comprehensive Plan policies as identified in subsection C of this section and map designation.

2.    The applicable standards of any provision of this code or other applicable implementing ordinance.

B.    The standards set forth in CDC 99.110(B), which provide that, in making the decision, consideration may also be given to the following:

1.    Proof of change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or inconsistency in the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Map as it relates to the property which is the subject of the development application.

2.    Factual oral testimony or written statements from the parties, other persons and other governmental agencies relevant to the existing conditions, other applicable standards and criteria, possible negative or positive attributes of the proposal or factors in sub-section A or (B)(1) of this section.

C.    The Comprehensive Plan, Plan and Ordinance Revision Process, and Specific Policy No. 4, which provides that the decision shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:

1.    Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan policies and criteria.

2.    There is a public need for the change or the change can be demonstrated to be in the interest of the present and future community.

3.    The changes will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the community.

D.    Transportation Planning Rule compliance.

1.    Review of applications for effect on transportation facilities. When a development application, whether initiated by the City or by a private interest, includes a proposed comprehensive plan amendment zone change or land use regulation change, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the Transportation Planning Rule: “TPR”). “Significant” means the proposal would:

a.    Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility (exclusive of correction of map errors in an adopted plan);

b.    Change standards implementing a functional classification system; or

c.    As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the adopted transportation system plan:

1)    Allow land uses or levels of development that would result in types or levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility;

2)    Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan; or

3)    Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan.

2.    Amendments that affect transportation facilities. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and land use regulations that significantly affect a transportation facility shall ensure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the TSP. This shall be accomplished by one or a combination of the following:

a.    Adopting measures that demonstrate allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function, capacity, and performance standards of the transportation facility.

b.    Amending the TSP or Comprehensive Plan to provide transportation facilities, improvements or services adequate to support the proposed land uses consistent with the requirements of OAR 660-012-0060 of the TPR.

c.    Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation.

d.    Amending the TSP to modify the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility.

3.    Traffic impact analysis. A traffic impact analysis shall be submitted with a plan amendment or land use district change application. (Ord. 1584, 2008)


105.060 CONDITION OF APPROVAL

A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions as provided by CDC 99.110(E).


105.070 RECORD OF AMENDMENTS

The Planning Director shall maintain a record of amendments to the text and map of this code in a format convenient for the use of the public and in accordance with CDC 98.150.


Chapter 106 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

106.010    PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

106.020    VIOLATION OF CODE PROHIBITED

106.030    COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS

106.040    INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY

106.045    CONSENT ORDER

106.050    ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS


106.010 PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this code are at variance with other provisions of this code, or with the requirements of any other adopted City rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. (Ord. 1370, 1995)


106.020 VIOLATION OF CODE PROHIBITED

No person shall:

A.    Erect, construct, establish, occupy, alter, maintain, enlarge, use or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement, or premises, in violation of this code; or

B.    Transfer any land in violation of this code. (Ord. 1635 § 45, 2014)


106.030 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS

Whenever a violation of this code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a signed, written complaint. Such complaints, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Planning Director or his or her designee. He or she shall record properly such complaints, investigate and take action thereon as provided by this code. 


106.040 INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY

Whenever the Planning Director has reasonable cause to suspect a violation of any provision of this chapter exists, or when necessary to investigate an application for, or revocation of, any approval under any of the procedures described in this code, the Planning Director may enter on any site or into any structure for the purposes of investigation; provided, that no premises shall be entered without first attempting to obtain the consent of the owner or person in control of the premises if other than the owner. If consent cannot be obtained, the Planning Director shall secure a search warrant from the City’s Municipal Court before further attempts to gain entry, and shall have recourse to every other remedy provided by law to secure entry.


106.045 CONSENT ORDER

A.    If the Director determines that a violation of this code has been committed, the Director may negotiate a consent order with the alleged violator. Any consent order issued under this section must result in abatement of the violation. The consent order shall contain conditions to ensure full abatement of the violation and full compliance with all provisions of this code. The consent order may provide for the payment of civil penalties and payment for the City’s enforcement, inspection, oversight, and administrative costs, including attorney fees. Any consent order under this section must result in an abatement of the violation according to a specified timetable, not to exceed one year.

B.    All consent orders must be signed by the Director and by the alleged violator. No consent order may be issued without the written permission of all owners of property where work required by the consent order will be conducted.

C.    No permit or approval otherwise required by this code shall be required of any action required by a consent order. The consent order shall act as the necessary land use approval for the action required by the consent order.

D.    Notice of the consent order shall be provided to all owners of property within 500 feet of the place where the violation occurred and to all owners of property within 500 feet of the location of any remedial work to be taken under the consent order. Notice of the consent order shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Any person who is not a party to the consent order may appeal the order to the City Council under the provisions of Chapter 99 CDC.

E.    If a consent order is issued and fully complied with, the City shall not take any abatement action under CDC 106.050.

F.    The Director shall have discretion to determine whether to attempt to negotiate a consent order. The Director may choose to proceed with abatement under CDC 106.050 without attempting to negotiate a consent order or at any time prior to issuance of a consent order. The City may proceed with abatement under CDC 106.050 if a violator does not comply with a consent order. No City land use application or permit shall be required for any work by the City to abate in response to a violation pursuant to CDC 106.050 or West Linn Municipal Code 5.510. (Ord. 1484, 2002)


106.050 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS

A.    All violations of this code, any development contrary to a permit approval, and any failure to comply with approval conditions arising out of this code are Class A violations and shall be enforced pursuant to Sections 1.205 through 1.260 of the West Linn Municipal Code:

1.    Knowing or intentional violation. The maximum forfeiture for a knowing or intentional violation shall be $1,000.

2.    Other violations. The maximum forfeiture for all violations other than knowing or intentional violations shall be the standard forfeiture for Class A violations set out in West Linn Municipal Code Section 1.255.

3.    Increased maximum penalty for subsequent violations. The maximum forfeiture otherwise applicable shall be increased by 50 percent over the previous violation if a judgment of violation of this code has been issued against the violator within five years prior to the violation.

B.    The commission, continuance, or maintenance of a violation on more than one day shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued, or maintained.

C.    All violations of this code, any development contrary to a permit approval, and any failure to comply with approval conditions imposed under this code are public nuisances and may be abated pursuant to Sections 5.400 through 5.530 of the West Linn Municipal Code.

D.    The City’s remedies are cumulative. The City may enforce any violations under the violation procedure, under the nuisance procedure, or under both procedures, either simultaneously or concurrently. The City’s remedies listed in this section are in addition to any other remedy or claim the City may have against the violator. (Ord. 1604 § 74, 2011; Ord. 1621 § 25, 2014)



-----------------------------

The West Linn Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 1709, passed March 9, 2020, and Resolution 2020-03, passed June 8, 2020.

Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the West Linn Municipal Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://westlinnoregon.gov/ City Telephone: (503) 657-0331

Code Publishing Company