CHARTER
for the City of Wood Village
Multnomah County, Oregon
An Act
To provide for the government of the City of Wood Village, Multnomah County, Oregon.
Be it enacted by the people of the City of Wood Village, Multnomah County, Oregon:

Chapter I NAME AND BOUNDARIES

Section 1. Title of enactment.
This enactment may be referred to as the Wood Village Charter of 1953 as amended November 6, 1962, February 14, 1968, May 20, 1986, November 4, 1997, November 5, 2002, May 16, 2006, and May 19, 2015.

Section 2. Name of city.
The City of Wood Village, Multnomah County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name "City of Wood Village."

Section 3. Boundaries.
The City of Wood Village includes all territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or may be modified by the voters, the city council, or any other agency with the legal power to modify the boundaries.

Chapter II POWERS

Section 4. Powers of the city.
The city shall have all powers, rights, privileges and immunities which the constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States of America and the State of Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers, rights, privileges and immunities.

Section 5. Construction of charter.
In this charter, no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the city would have if the particular power were not mentioned. The charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the city may have all powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers that cities may assume pursuant to the laws and to the municipal home rule provisions of the constitution of the State of Oregon.

Section 6. Distribution.
The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. The council has legislative, administrative and quasi­judicial authority. The council exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority to adopt ordinances.

Chapter III FORM OF GOVERNMENT

Section 7. Where powers vested.
Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council.

Section 8. Council.
The council shall be composed of five councilors elected from the city at large.

Section 9. Councilors.
Councilors shall be elected at the biennial general election for· a term of office of four years. Terms shall be staggered so that three councilors are elected at one general election and two at next general election.

Section 10. Mayor.
The council, from its members shall elect a mayor at the first meeting of the council in each odd numbered year for a term of two years.

Section 11. Other officers and employees.
A. Additional officers of the city shall be a city manager and a city attorney. These officers shall be appointed and may be removed by vote of a majority of the whole council including the mayor.  The appointment of these officers must be made without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of education and experience in competencies and practices of local government management and local government law, respectively. Their tenure shall not be for any stated or fixed period of time.  They shall serve at the pleasure of the council.
B. Additional employee positions may be created or eliminated as deemed necessary or convenient for the operation of the City and within the city budget.  The council may adopt personnel policies and a classification and compensation plan to govern the employment relationship

Section 12. Compensation.
The council must authorize the compensation of city officers and employees as part of its approval of the annual city budget.

Section 13. Qualifications of officers.
No person shall be eligible for an elective office of the city unless at the time of election the person is a qualified voter within the meaning of the state constitution and has resided in the city ring the twelve months immediately preceding the election. No person currently employed by the city shall be eligible for an elective office of the city. The council shall be final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members, subject, however, to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. The voter and residence qualifications provided in this section shall not have application to appointive officers.

Chapter IV COUNCIL

Section 14. Meetings.
The council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month at a time and at a place in the city which it designates. It shall by resolution adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings. The mayor may, upon his or her own motion or at the request of three members of the council then in the city, call a special meeting of the council. All meetings shall comply with the State of Oregon Public Meetings Law.

Section 15. Quorum.
A majority of members of the council shall constitute a quorum to transact business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members as prescribed by council rules.

Section 16. Journal.
The council shall keep a record of its proceedings pursuant to the State of Oregon Public Records and Public Meetings Laws.

Section 17. Meetings to be public.
All deliberations and proceedings of the council shall comply with the State of Oregon Public Meetings Law.

Section 18. Mayor.
The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council rules, and determines the order of business under council rules. The mayor is a voting member of the council and has no veto authority. With the consent of council, the mayor appoints members of commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution. The mayor must sign all records of council decisions. The mayor serves as the political head of the city government.

Section 19. President of the council.
At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council must elect a president from its membership. The president presides in the absence of the mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform duties.

Section 20. Vote required.
Except as this charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the council present at a council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the council.

Chapter V APPOINTED OFFICERS

Section 21. City manager.
A. The office of city manager is established as the administrative head of the city government.  The city manager is responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of all city business. The city manager will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies, and carry out policies established by ordinances and resolutions.
B. The city manager must:
    1. Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council;
    2. Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the needs of the city;
    3. Administer  and  enforce  all  city  ordinances,  resolutions,  franchises,  leases,  contracts, permits, and other city decisions;
    4. Appoint, supervise and remove city employees;
    5. Organize city departments and administrative structure;
    6. Prepare and administer the annual city budget;
    7. Administer city utilities and property;
    8. Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation;
    9. Promote cooperation among the council, staff and citizens in developing city policies, and building a sense of common goals.
    10. Perform other duties as directed by the council;
    11. Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all subordinates.
C. The city manager is entitled to sit with the council, but has no vote on questions before it.  The city manager may take part in all Council discussions.
D. In case of the city manager's unauthorized absence from the city, disability to act as city manager, discharge by the council, or resignation, the mayor, with advice and consent of the councilors, shall appoint a city manager pro tem, who shall possess the powers and duties of the city manager.  No city manager pro tem, however, may appoint or remove a city employee except with the approval of a majority of the entire Council.
E. No council member may directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence or coerce the city manager in the making of any appointment or the removal of any employee in the purchase of supplies or to exact a promise relative to an appointment from any candidate for city manager.  A violation of this Subsection forfeits the office of the offending Council member after a public hearing by the council is held and the council determines that a violation of this Subsection has taken place.  Nothing in this Subsection, however, prohibits the council in open session from fully and freely discussing with or suggesting to the manager anything pertaining to city affairs or the interest of the city.

Section 22. City attorney.
The city attorney shall be established as the chief legal officer of the city and perform whatever duties consistent with this Charter are required by the council or the city manager. The city attorney may be an employee or retained as outside counsel and shall be a member in good standing of the Oregon State Bar.

Chapter VI ELECTIONS

Section 23. State law.
City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan.

Section 24. Tie votes.
In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the council.

Section 25. Commencement of term of office.
The term of office of a person elected at a regular city election shall commence the first of the year immediately following the election.

Section 26. Oath of office.
Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm that he will support the constitutions and laws of the United States and of Oregon and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office.

Section 27. Candidacy for city office.
A person shall file or be nominated for candidacy for an elected city office as provided by state law or city ordinance.

Chapter VII VACANCIES IN OFFICE

Section 28. Vacancies.
The mayor or a council office becomes vacant:
a. Upon the incumbent's:
    1. Death;
    2. Adjudicated incompetence; or
    3. Recall from office.
b. Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent 's:
    1. Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin,
    2. Absence from the city for 30 days without council consent, or from all council meetings within a 60-day period,
    3. Ceasing to reside in the city,
    4. Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,
    5. Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty,
    6. Resignation from the office, or
    7. Removal under Section 21(E).

Section 29. Filling vacancies.
A vacancy in an elective office will be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining council members. The appointee's term of office runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office, unless the vacancy occurs during the first two years of the predecessor's term and 90 days prior to the regular general election. In the latter case, the appointee's term expires on the first day of January following the general election, and the remaining two years of the unexpired term will be filled by nomination and election at the general election. If a disability prevents a council member from attending council meetings or a member is absence from the city a majority of the council may appoint a councilor pro tem.

Chapter VIII ORDINANCES

Section 30. Enacting clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter enacted shall be "The City of Wood Village ordains as follows."

Section 31. Ordinance adoption.
a. Except as authorized by subsection (b), adoption of an ordinance requires approval by a majority of the council at two meetings.
b. The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of at least a quorum of the council, provided the proposed ordinance is available in writing to the public at least one week before the meeting.
c. Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the ordinance at that meeting.
d. After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.
e. After adoption of an ordinance, the city recorder must endorse it with the date of adoption and the city recorder's name and title.

Section 32. When ordinances take effect.
A. An ordinance enacted by the council shall take effect on the thirtieth day after its enactment.  When the council deems it advisable, however, an ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect, and in the case of an emergency, it may take effect immediately.
B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, no ordinance creating a new tax or increasing an already existing tax shall become effective unless the tax is approved by a majority of the voters of Wood Village at the next regularly scheduled election.  Added May 16, 2006.

Section 33. Penalties for violation of ordinances.
The council may by ordinance establish the penalties for violation of any city ordinance.

Chapter IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Section 34. Condemnation.
Any necessity of taking property for the city by condemnation shall be determined by the council and declared by a resolution of the council describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted.

Section 35. Acquisition and disposition.
The city shall have power to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, or condemnation any property either within or without its corporate boundaries for any municipal purpose, for the purpose of protecting, preserving, or facilitating any improvements, for the purpose of bringing about such development of property along or in the vicinity of an improvement as will make the development harmonious with and adjusted to the improvement, or for any combination of such purposes. The city shall also have power to acquire by condemnation property in excess of that needed for the actual improvement and to sell or lease the excess of that needed for the actual improvement and to sell or lease the excess with such building and use restrictions and conditions as will tend to make its development harmonious with and adjusted to adjacent public improvements. The city shall have power to provide for the payment of any part or all of the cost of land or other property acquired for public use, of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, repairing, operating or maintaining any structure or work in the nature of a public facility or improvement including a public utility, and of the cost of any other public work or service by levying and collecting assessments upon the property specially benefited thereby.

Section 36. Improvements.
The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable general laws of the state. A remonstrance by the owners of property representing at least two-thirds of the land area within the boundaries of the territory to be specially assessed for a proposed public improvement shall suspend action regarding the improvement for six months. For the purpose of this section, "owner" shall mean the record holder of legal title to the land, except that if there is a purchaser of the land according to a recorded land sale contract or according to a verified writing by the record holder of legal title to the land filed with the city recorder, the said purchaser shall be deemed the owner.

Section 37. Special assessments.
The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general ordinance.

Section 38. Bids procedures.
Bids for public contract, including public improvements, shall be governed by State law, including competitive bidding procedures, exemptions and emergency conditions, and the requirements of city ordinance consistent therewith. Amended November 4, 1997.

Chapter X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 39. Debt limit.
The debt limit of Wood Village shall not exceed debt limits imposed by State law. Any city officer or employee who expends any public moneys in excess of this limitation or for different purpose than authorized by law shall be civilly liable for the return of the money, if the expenditure constitutes malfeasance in office or willful or wanton neglect of duty. Amended November 4, 1997.

Section 40. Existing ordinances continued.
All ordinances of the city consistent with this charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.

Section 41. Existing rights and liabilities continued.
Except as this charter provides otherwise, its adoption shall not impair or destroy any right, power, privilege, immunity or liability of the city existing at the time of its adoption.

Section 42. Time and effect of charter.
This charter shall take effect upon enactment by the voters of the City of Wood Village.

Section 43. Severability.
The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Wood Village Charter is current as amended May 19, 2015.
Disclaimer: The City Recorder’s office has the official version of the Wood Village Charter. Users should contact the City Recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
Note: This site does not support Internet Explorer. To view this site, Code Publishing Company recommends using one of the following browsers: Google Chrome, Firefox, or Safari.

City Website: www.woodvillageor.gov
Code Publishing Company

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wood Village Municipal Code

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:
1.01         Code Adoption
1.04         General Provisions
1.06         Code Enforcement
1.08         Initiative and Referendum
1.10         Emergency Management

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
(Reserved)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
1.04.010     Definitions.
1.04.020     Interpretation of language.
1.04.030     Grammatical interpretation.
1.04.040     Acts by agents.
1.04.050     Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
1.04.060     Computation of time.
1.04.070     Construction.
1.04.080     Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

1.04.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
“City” means the City of Wood Village, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
“Council” means the City Council of the City of Wood Village. “All its members” or “all Council members” means the total number of Council members holding office.
“County” means the County of Multnomah.
“Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state Oregon, the ordinances of the City, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
“May” is permissive.
“Month” means a calendar month.
“Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.
“Oath” means and includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
“Owner” applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
“Person” means and includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
“Personal property” means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.
“Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.
“Property” means and includes real and personal property.
“Real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
“Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
“State” means the state of Oregon.
“Street” means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.
“Tenant” and “occupant” applied to a building or land, mean and include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
“Written” means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
“Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 3-1996 § 1, 1996)

1.04.020 Interpretation of language.
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the English language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 3-1996 § 2, 1996)

1.04.030 Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:
A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.
B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 3-1996 § 3, 1996)

1.04.040 Acts by agents.
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 3-1996 § 4, 1996)

1.04.050 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
Whenever in the ordinances of the City any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 3-1996 § 5, 1996)

1.04.060 Computation of time.
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded unless specifically provided otherwise. (Ord. 3-1996 § 6, 1996)

1.04.070 Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the City, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to affect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 3-1996 § 7, 1996)

1.04.080 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 3-1996 § 8, 1996)

Chapter 1.06 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
1.06.010     Civil Infraction and Violation defined; Penalty for violation.
1.06.020     Citation for civil infractions.
1.06.030     Contents of the civil infraction citation.
1.06.035     Procedures for Civil Violations.
1.06.040     Remedies Cumulative.
1.06.050     Interest on monies owed city.
1.06.060     Collections.

1.06.010 Civil Infraction and Violation defined; Penalty for violation.
A. Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of the Wood Village Municipal Code ("Code"), of any state statute, county or municipal ordinance incorporated by reference in this Code, or of any of the terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the City pursuant to this Code, is hereby deemed a civil infraction, or, in the case of such failure to comply with the Building Code, a civil violation, punishable as provided herein. Every day during which such civil infraction or civil violation is committed, continued or permitted to continue, shall be a separate offense. Any such civil infraction or civil violation includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing such offense.
B. A civil infraction is declared to be an offense, but not a crime, and is enforced pursuant to Sections 1.06.020 and 1.06.030. It is intended to be an offense which can be disposed of in all respects as a civil proceeding and not governed by procedural, evidentiary, substantive and constitutional rules applicable to criminal charges and proceedings. A person adjudged responsible for an infraction shall not be deemed “guilty” of the infraction and a judgment of responsibility shall not be deemed a “conviction” for any purpose.
C. A civil violation is not a crime or an offense, but is an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to Section 1.06.035.
D. Maximum penalties for civil infractions or civil violations shall be as follows:
    1. A civil penalty of not more than $1000.00 per offense, or such lesser sum as may be provided in the ordinance defining the offense.
    2. Notwithstanding subsection (D)(1) of this section or any other provision in this Code to the contrary, no greater penalty shall be imposed for any civil infraction or civil violation under this Code than the maximum penalty prescribed under Oregon Statute for the same offense.
E. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty under subsection (D) of this section, a court, or, in the case of a civil violation, the Building Official or City Manager, should consider any of the following factors deemed relevant:
    1. The actions taken by the person or entity to mitigate or correct the violation;
    2. The financial condition of the person or entity charged with the violation;
    3. Whether the violation or the failure to comply is repeated or continuous in nature;
    4. The magnitude or gravity of the violation or failure to comply;
    5. The cooperativeness of the person or entity with the city;
    6. The cost to the city of investigating, correcting, attempting to correct and/or prosecuting the violation or failure; and
    7. Any other factor deemed by the court, the Building Official, or the City Manager to be relevant.
F. For the purpose of facilitating disposition of infractions, the court may promulgate a schedule of forfeitures for particular infractions, and the person charged with such an infraction may deposit with the court the amount so scheduled, waive further appearance, and have the sum so deposited forfeited as a plea of “no contest.” The court shall not, however, be bound by the schedule on appearance and admission by the person charged, or on trial and judgment against the person charged; the court in such a case may impose any forfeiture allowed by this section.

1.06.020 Citation for civil infractions.
Upon a determination by a duly authorized officer that one or more civil infractions have occurred, the officer shall issue a citation to the person, who in the officer’s opinion, is responsible for the activity or failure to act that is deemed to be the civil infraction(s) or the owner or person responsible for the property where the infraction occurred.

1.06.030 Contents of the civil infraction citation.
A. The citation for a civil infraction shall include at least the following information:
    1. The name and address of the respondent;
    2. The time, date and place the civil infraction was alleged to have occurred;
    3. A statement of the civil infraction(s) alleged to have occurred with a reference to the pertinent Municipal Code Section(s) or other commonly understood reference to the law or ordinance alleged to have been violated.
    4. A certification that the officer issuing the citation has reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the respondent committed the civil infraction, contrary to law. This certificate shall be deemed equivalent to a sworn complaint.
B. A uniform traffic citation and complaint and provided in state law shall be an acceptable form for a civil infraction citation.

1.06.035 Procedures for Civil Violations.
A. Notice of Violation. Upon a determination by the Building Official that a person has committed a civil violation of the Building Code as defined in Section 1.06.010(A), the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose upon the violator or other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as described in Section 1.06.010(D) and (E). For the purposes of this section, a “responsible person” includes the violator, and if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, may include the owner as well. If no appeal is filed as provided in this section, the civil penalty shall become final upon expiration of the appeal period.
B. Contents of Notice. The notice shall:
    1. Describe the alleged violation, including any relevant code or ordinance provisions violated.
    2. States that City intends to impose a civil penalty and state the amount of the penalty.
    3. State that the responsible person or persons may appeal the civil penalty to the City Manager.
    4. Describe the process and requirements for filing an appeal and the deadline by which the appeal must be filed.
C. Service of Notice. The notice shall be served by personal service or by registered or certified mail, and by regular mail.
D. Filing an Appeal. Any person subject to a notice of violation under this section may file an appeal of the notice of violation within fifteen days of the date of mailing of the notice. The City shall not consider appeals filed after this deadline. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall include:
    1. The name, address and telephone number of the appellant.
    2. The nature of the determination being appealed.
    3. The reason the appellant believes the determination is incorrect.
    4. The relief requested by the appellant.
    5. Payment of the appeal fee set by resolution of the City Council.
A notice of appeal that does not comply with the above requirements may be rejected by the City Manager.
E. Appeal Hearing. The City Manager shall schedule a hearing within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The city shall mail notice of the time and location of the hearing to the appellant at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The City Council may appoint a designee to hear the appeal, except that the designee may not be the Building Official or any person supervised by the Building Official. The City Council or designee shall hear and decide the appeal based upon appellant’s written notice of appeal and additional evidence that the City Council or designee deems relevant. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The burden of proof shall be on the Building Official. The hearing will begin with a staff report from Building Official, followed by the appellant’s presentation, followed by response from the Building Official, if any, followed by any rebuttal by the appellant, if any.
F. Decision on Appeal. The City Council or designee shall issue a written decision within ten days of the date of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant. The written decision of the City Council or designee is final as of the date of issuance.
G. If a notice of revocation of a license or permit is the subject of the appeal, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. Notwithstanding this paragraph, an emergency suspension shall take effect upon issuance of the notice of suspension.
H. Failure to pay a penalty imposed hereunder within ten days of the date the penalty becomes final as provided in Sections 1.06.035(A) or (F) of this section, which ever is applicable, shall constitute a civil violation of this Code as provided in Section 1.06.010(A). Unpaid penalties shall accrue interest from the date due as provided in Section 1.06.050 and may be collected pursuant to 1.06.060. In addition to any other enforcement mechanisms provided in this Code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty when due shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy.

1.06.040 Remedies Cumulative.
The remedies provided in this Chapter are supplementary and in addition to any other penalty or remedy provided for or available to the City in this Code, the City Charter, state statute or other law or ordinance.

1.06.050 Interest on monies owed city.
Unless specifically agreed to otherwise via a duly approved contract or agreement between the city and some third party or unless otherwise specifically set out in another provision of this Code, any and all amount(s) due and owing the City of Wood Village from and after the effective date of this provision, shall accrue interest at the legal rate as the same is set forth in ORS Chapter 82 from the time it becomes due until fully paid.

1.06.060 Collections.
Any unpaid fees, late payment charges, abatement charges, or fines assessed against a person arising from noncompliance with the Wood Village Municipal Code with regard to the person’s real property constitute a debt to the City. The debt shall be entered in the City lien docket and shall be a lien on the subject property from the date of entry and shall be recorded with Multnomah County. The interest provided in Section 1.06.050 shall commence running on the date of the entry of the lien in the City lien docket. The lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided by ORS 223.505 to 223.650 or as otherwise provided by law. The City may collect an administrative fee for the release of any lien issued by the City that shall be set and adjusted by City Council resolution. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

Chapter 1.08 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:
1.08.010     Petition requirements.
1.08.020     Submission of prospective petition—Form of petition—Statement regarding paid petition circulators, other requirements.
1.08.030     Ballot title preparation.
1.08.040     Council preparation of ballot titles.
1.08.050     Ballot title appeals.
1.08.060     Signature requirements.
1.08.070     Filing officer—Filing requirements.
1.08.080     Council action.
1.08.090     Retention of petition materials.
1.08.100     Date of election.
1.08.110     Election notice.
1.08.120     Information to county.
1.08.130     Election returns.
1.08.140     Effective date of measures.
1.08.150     Conflicting measures.
1.08.160     Unlawful acts.
1.08.170     Applicability of state statutes.
1.08.180     Penalties.

1.08.010 Petition requirements.
All election petitions concerning exercise of the initiative and referendum powers reserved to the qualified voters of the city shall conform substantially with the requirements of the Secretary of State for initiative and referendum petitions. (Ord. 9-1993 § 1, 1993)

1.08.020 Submission of prospective petition—Form of petition—Statement regarding paid petition circulators, other requirements.
A. Before circulating a petition to initiate or refer a measure, the petitioner shall file the prospective petition with the City Elections Officer. A prospective petition for a referendum shall be filed with the City Elections Officer prior to the effective date of the matter being referred. The City Elections Officer shall immediately date and time stamp the prospective petition and specify the form on which the petition shall be printed for circulation. The officer shall retain the prospective petition.
B. A petition for an initiative measure submitted to the City Elections Officer shall meet the requirements of Section 1(2)(d), Article IV of the Oregon Constitution and shall embrace one subject only and matters properly connected therewith.
C. A petition shall designate the name and residence address of not more than three persons as chief petitioners. Chief petitioners shall be registered voters within the City. The cover of a referendum petition shall contain the title of the measure enacted by the City Council or as set forth in Section 1.08.030, if applicable. The cover of an initiative petition shall contain the ballot title described in Section 1.08.030. (Ord. 5-2005, 2005)
D. The chief petitioners shall include with the prospective petition a statement declaring whether one or more persons will be paid money or other valuable consideration for obtaining signatures of electors on the initiative or referendum petition. After the prospective petition is filed, the chief petitioners shall notify the City Elections Officer not later than the tenth day after any of the chief petitioners first have or should have knowledge that:
    1. Any person is being paid for obtaining signatures, when the statement included with the prospective petition declared that no person would be paid.
    2. No person is being paid for obtaining signatures, when the statement included with the prospective petition declared that one or more persons would be paid.
E. Each sheet of signatures on an initiative petition shall contain the caption of the ballot title. Each sheet of signatures on a referendum petition shall contain the number of the ordinance or resolution to be referred, if any, and the date it was adopted by the City Council. Each sheet of signatures shall be attached to a full and correct copy of the measure to be initiated or referred.
F. The reverse side of the cover of an initiative or referendum petition and both sides of a signature sheet may be used for obtaining signatures on an initiative or referendum petition. If both sides of a signature sheet are used, each side shall contain the information required on a signature sheet under subsection E of this section.
G. Not more than twenty (20) signatures on the cover or on each side of each sheet of the petition shall be counted. The cover of the petition, if the cover is used to gather signatures, and each signature sheet shall be verified on its face by the signed statement of the circulator that the individuals signed in the presence of the circulator and that the circulator believes each individual is an elector registered in the city. (Ord. 9-1993 § 2, 1993)

1.08.030 Ballot title preparation.
A. When a prospective petition for a measure to be referred is filed with the City Elections Officer, that official shall authorize the circulation of the petition containing the title of the measure as enacted by the Council, or, if there is no title, the title supplied by the petitioner filing the prospective petition. The City Elections Officer shall immediately send two copies of the prospective petition to the City Attorney.
B. When a prospective petition for a city measure to be initiated is filed with the City Elections Officer, that official immediately shall send two copies to the City Attorney if the measure has been determined to be in compliance with Section 1(2)(d), Article IV of the Oregon Constitution as provided in Section 1.08.020B.
C. Not later than the fifth business day after receiving the copies of the prospective petition, the City Attorney shall provide a ballot title for the City measure to be initiated or referred, and return one copy of the prospective petition and the ballot title to the City Elections Officer. Unless the Council certifies a different title, this ballot title shall be the title printed on the ballot.
D. In preparing such ballot title said attorney shall to the best of his or her ability give a true and impartial statement of the purpose of the measure in such language that the ballot title shall be clear and objective and not be an argument for, or liable to create prejudice against such measure.
E. A copy of the ballot title shall be furnished to the chief petitioners.
F. After receiving a ballot title for a city measure from the City Attorney or Council, the elections officer shall publish in the next available edition of a newspaper of general distribution in the city a notice of receipt of ballot title, including notice that an elector may file a petition for review of the ballot title not later than the seventh business day after the title is filed with the City Elections Officer. (Ord. 9-1993 § 3, 1993)

1.08.040 Council preparation of ballot titles.
A. When the Council refers a measure to the people, a ballot title for the measure may be prepared by the Council. The ballot title shall be filed with the City Elections Officer.
B. If the title is not prepared under subsection A of this section, when the measure is filed with the City Elections Officer, the officer shall send two copies to the City Attorney. Not later than the fifth business day after receiving the copies, the City Attorney shall provide a ballot title for the measure and send a copy of it to the Council and the City Elections Officer. (Ord. 9-1993 § 4, 1993)

1.08.050 Ballot title appeals.
A. Any elector dissatisfied with a ballot title filed with the City Elections Officer by the City Attorney or Council may petition the City Council seeking a different title and stating the reasons the title filed is insufficient, not concise, or unfair. The petition shall be filed not later than the seventh business day after the title is filed with the City Elections Officer. The Council shall review the title and measure to be initiated or referred, hear arguments, if any, and certify to the elections officer a title for the measure that meets the requirements of applicable state law.
B. The review by the City Council shall be the first and final review, and shall be conducted expeditiously to insure the orderly and timely circulation of the petition or conduct of the election at which the measure is to be submitted to the electors. (Ord. 9-1993 § 5, 1993)

1.08.060 Signature requirements.
A. A petition to refer a city measure must be signed by not less than ten percent of the electors registered in the city at the time the
prospective petition is filed. The petition must be filed with the City Elections Officer not later than the thirtieth day after adoption of the city legislation sought to be referred.
B. A petition to initiate a city measure must be signed by not less than fifteen (15) percent of the electors registered in the city at the time the prospective petition is filed. (Ord. 9-1993 § 6, 1993)

1.08.070 Filing officer—Filing requirements.
A. An initiative or referendum petition relating to a city measure shall be filed with the City Elections Officer for signature verification. The filed petition shall contain only original signatures.
B. An initiative or referendum petition relating to a city measure shall not be accepted for filing if it contains less than one hundred (100) percent of the required number of signatures.
C. Within ten business days after a petition is filed with the City Elections Officer under this section, that official shall certify the number and genuineness of the signatures and voting qualifications of the persons signing the petition by reference to the Multnomah County voter registration records. (Ord. 9-1993 § 7, 1993)

1.08.080 Council action.
A. If an initiative petition contains the required number of verified signatures, the City Elections Officer shall file the initiated measure with the City Council at its next regular meeting.
B. The Council, not later than the thirtieth day after the measure is filed with it, may adopt or reject the measure unless the measure is required to be submitted to the city electors under the City Charter or state law. If the measure is not adopted, or the measure is required to be submitted to the city electors, it shall be submitted to the city electors at the next regular biennial election unless an earlier election date is approved by the Council, but not sooner than ninety (90) days after the measure was filed with the Council.
C. The Council may refer a competing measure to city electors at the same election at which the initiated measure is submitted. If the Council refers a competing measure to city electors, it must prepare the measure not later than the thirtieth day after the initiated measure is filed with it. (Ord. 9-1993 § 8, 1993)

1.08.090 Retention of petition materials.
The City Elections Officer shall retain the signature sheets of a filed initiative or referendum petition with a copy of the city measure. If the measure is approved by the electors, a copy of the measure shall be preserved as a permanent public record, and the signature sheets shall be preserved for six years. (Ord. 9-1993 § 9, 1993)

1.08.100 Date of election.
If a referendum petition contains the required number of verified signatures, the city measure election shall be held at the next regular biennial election, unless an earlier election date is approved by the Council, but not sooner than the ninetieth day after the referendum measure was filed with City Elections Officer. (Ord. 9-1993 § 10, 1993)

1.08.110 Election notice.
The City Elections Officer shall give notice of all elections in accordance with the requirements of the City Charter and state law. (Ord. 9-1993 § 11, 1993)

1.08.120 Information to county.
The City Elections Officer shall provide the director of elections, Multnomah County, with a certified copy of the ballot title of each measure or each candidate to be voted upon in accordance with the time requirements of state law. (Ord. 9-1993 § 12, 1993)

1.08.130 Election returns.
The votes on an initiated or referred measure shall be counted, canvassed and returned by the county elections official as provided by state law. (Ord. 9-1993 § 13, 1993)

1.08.140 Effective date of measures.
A measure submitted to the electors shall take effect when approved by a majority of the electors voting upon it, unless the measure provides for another effective date. Such measure shall have no effect while it is subject to a referendum. (Ord. 9-1993 § 14, 1993)

1.08.150 Conflicting measures.
In the event of a conflict between measures approved by the electors at an election, the measure receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall prevail. (Ord. 9-1993 § 15, 1993)

1.08.160 Unlawful acts.
A. No person other than a registered elector who is a resident of the city may sign a petition on a city measure.
B. No person may sign a petition with a name not her or his own.
B. No person may knowingly sign the same petition more than once.
C. No person may knowingly circulate or deposit with the City Elections Officer a petition that contains a signature signed in violation of this chapter.
D. No person may procure or attempt to procure a signature on a petition by fraud.
E. No person may knowingly make a false statement concerning a petition.
F. No person may make a document required or provided for by this chapter that contains a false statement.
G. No City officer or employee may willfully violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 9-1993 § 16, 1993)

1.08.170 Applicability of state statutes.
Where not otherwise provided herein or by City Charter or ordinance, city initiative and referendum measures and ballot title requirements therefor shall be governed by applicable state law. (Ord. 9-1993 § 17, 1993)

1.08.180 Penalties.
A violation of a provision of Section 1.08.160 is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 1, 2006; Ord. 9-1993 § 18, 1993)

Chapter 1.10 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:
1.10.010     Purpose.
1.10.020     Emergency.
1.10.030     Declaration of Emergency.
1.10.040     Executive Responsibilities.
1.10.050     Regulation of Persons and Property.
1.10.060     Penalty.

1.10.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a plan to minimize injury to persons and property and to preserve the established civil authority in the event that a state of emergency exists within the city.

1.10.020 Emergency.
A state of emergency may include any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering, or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or release of oil or hazardous materials defined in ORS 466.605, contamination utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight infestation, civil disturbance, unrest, sabotage, and war.

1.10.030 Declaration of Emergency.
Whenever a state of emergency exists, the Mayor shall make a declaration to that effect until a special meeting of the City Council can be convened to ratify the declaration. In the event that a quorum of Council members is unable to assemble, the Declaration of Emergency remains in effect. In the event that the Mayor is unable or unavailable, the declaration shall be performed in the following order of succession: (1) Council President and (2) City Manager.
A. The Declaration of Emergency shall state the nature of the emergency, designate the geographic boundaries of the area which is subject to the emergency controls, and state any special regulations imposed as a result of the state of emergency. The Declaration shall be submitted immediately to the appropriate authorities.
B. The ratification by the City Council of a declaration of emergency, in addition to the statements enumerated in section A, shall state the duration of time during which the area so designated shall remain an emergency area and authorize specific emergency powers for the duration of the emergency period set forth in the declaration. (Ord. 6-2009, 2009)

1.10.040 Executive Responsibilities.
If the City Manager, for any reason, is unable or unavailable to perform his or her duties, the duties of the City Manager shall be performed in the following order of succession: (1) Public Works Director and (2) Finance Director. The powers of the successor to the City Manager shall be limited in duration to the duration of the Declaration of Emergency or until such time as the City Manager is able and available to perform such duties, whichever circumstance occurs first.

1.10.050 Regulation of Persons and Property.
After a Declaration of Emergency has been made under this Chapter, the City may order any or all of the following measures in the interest of the public health, safety, or welfare in the emergency area designated in the declaration:
A. Redirect City funds available for emergency use and suspend standard City procurement procedures pursuant to ORS 279B.080;
B. Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may be upon the public streets or other public places;
C. Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place;
D. Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate the same on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances;
E. Evacuate persons;
F. Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages;
G. Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids;
H. Curtail or suspend commercial activity;
I. Turn off water, gas, or electricity; and
J. Order any such other measure as may be necessary for the protection of life or property, or for the recovery from the emergency.

1.10.060 Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a civil infraction pursuant to Chapter 1.06 and is subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 7-2013, 2013; Ord. 5-2009, 2009)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:
2.04         City Council
2.06         City Manager
2.08         City Recorder
2.16         Municipal Judge Pro Tempore
2.20         Parks and Recreation Commission
2.24         Planning Commission
2.32         Contracts
2.36         Development Agency
2.38         Urban Renewal Agency

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:
2.04.005     Council Rules of Procedure to be Adopted by Resolution.

2.04.005 Council Rules of Procedure to be Adopted by Resolution.
Pursuant to Wood Village Charter Chapter IV, Section 14, the Wood Village City Council shall adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings by resolution. The City Council may amend such procedures from time to time as the Council deems appropriate. (Ord. 6-2011, 2011)

Chapter 2.06 CITY MANAGER

Sections:
2.06.010     City Manager.
2.06.020     Manager Pro Tem.
2.06.030     Interference in Administration.
2.06.040     Surety Bond.

2.06.010 City Manager.
A. Authority; Appointment; Qualifications:
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of those city affairs over which s/he is charged under this section. The office of City Manager shall be filled appointment by a majority of the City Council. The City Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of administrative qualifications and experience, without regard to political considerations.
B. Term:
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term. Appointment and removal of the Manager by the Council shall require the prior consent of a majority of the full Council recorded at a public meeting. The Manager shall serve at the discretion and pleasure of the City Council.
C. Duties and Responsibilities:
The City Manager shall:
    1. Attend all Council meetings unless excused therefrom by three Councilors or by the Mayor;
    2. Keep the Council advised of the affairs, needs, and financial condition of the City;
    3. Provide for the administration and enforcement of all City ordinances and regulations to the satisfaction of the Council;
    4. Ensure that all terms of franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City are fulfilled;
    5. Appoint, discipline and remove appointive personnel, except for appointees of the City Council;
    6. Supervise and control all appointed officers and employees in their service to the City except for the municipal judge in the exercise of his/her judicial duties;
    7. Organize and reorganize the departmental structure of city government to the end of obtaining the utmost efficiency;
    8. Prepare and transmit an annual City budget to the Budget Committee for consideration and recommendation to the City Council. The Manager shall have the authority to freeze or to administratively reduce appropriations within any department as s/he deems necessary for the proper fiscal management of the City.
    9. Act as purchasing agent for the City, execute such contracts as approved by Council or for which the Council has delegated authority, and administer City contracts and purchases
    10. Supervise operation of all City-owned public utilities and property.
    11. After authorization from the Council, conduct all aspects of real property transactions on behalf of the City; and
    12. Perform other duties as the Council prescribes consistent with the city charter.

2.06.020 Manager Pro Tem.
During the absence of the Manager from the City, during a temporary disability to act as Manager or during the interim when the Council is seeking a Manager, the Council may appoint a Manager Pro Tem who shall have the responsibilities and discharge the duties of the Manager during such absence or disability only.

2.06.030 Interference in Administration.
No member of the Council shall directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence or coerce the Manager in the making of any appointment or removal of any officer or employee or in the purchase of supplies; or attempt to extract any promise relative to any appointment from any candidate for Manager; or discuss directly or indirectly with him/her the matter of specific appointments to any City office or employment. Nothing in this section shall be construed however, as prohibiting the Council from fully and freely discussing with or suggesting to the Manager anything pertaining to City affairs or the best interests of the City. (Ord. 14-2000 § 1, 2000)

2.06.040 Surety Bond.
Before assuming the duties of office, the Manager shall give a surety bond for such penal sum as the Council shall necessary to safeguard the finances of the city, which bond shall be executed by the manager as principal, and as surety by a corporate surety company authorized and licensed by the Insurance Commissioner of the state of Oregon to transact a surety business within the state of Oregon, and which bond shall continue in full force and effect during the incumbency of the Manager. Such bond shall be approved by the Council. All premiums for surety bonds for the Manager shall be paid by the city.
At the discretion of the Council the City may purchase insurance in lieu of the surety bond requirement if such insurance is equivalent to said surety bond and is deemed to provide more appropriate coverage. (Ord. 5-2015, 2015; Ord. 8-2007 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 2.08 CITY RECORDER

Sections:
2.08.010     Office and Duties.

2.08.010 Office and Duties.
The City Recorder is the person or persons designated by the City Manager to perform the functions of the city recorder as set forth in the Charter, Municipal Code, and state statute.

Chapter 2.16 MUNICIPAL JUDGE PRO TEMPORE

Sections:
2.16.010     Office created.
2.16.020     Appointment—Qualifications—Compensation.
2.16.030     Performance of duties when.
2.16.040     Powers and duties.

2.16.010 Office created.
The office of pro tempore municipal judge of the municipal court of the city is created. (Ord. 2-1974 § 1, 1974)

2.16.020 Appointment—Qualifications—Compensation.
The municipal judge pro tempore of the municipal court of the city shall be appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the Wood Village City Council. The City Council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications necessary for the appointment of such office. The amount and manner of compensation payable for the services of said judge pro tempore shall be provided by the Council. (Ord. 2-1974 § 2, 1974)

2.16.030 Performance of duties when.
The municipal judge pro tempore of the municipal court of the city shall serve and act only when the chief municipal judge of the city, the City Recorder, is unable to perform his duties by reason of absence from the city, illness, vacations, or disqualification by reason of knowledge or relationship to the cause before him, or in case of disqualification due to potential or actual conflicts relating to the matters at hand. (Ord. 2-1974 § 3, 1974)

2.16.040 Powers and duties.
When serving in the capacity as municipal judge of the city, the municipal judge pro tempore shall have and exercise all the inherent and statutory powers and duties granted to the municipal judge of the city in accordance with Chapter 5, Section 22, of the Charter of the city and as provided by applicable city ordinances and state law. (Ord. 2-1974 § 4, 1974)

Chapter 2.20 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Sections:
2.20.010     Established—Membership and compensation.
2.20.020     Terms of office and vacancies.
2.20.030     Meetings and records.
2.20.040     Powers and duties.

2.20.010 Established—Membership and compensation.
There is established a Parks and Recreation Commission for the city which shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council: one a member of the City Council; one a member of the Planning Commission; and five (5) citizens at large. Commission members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 5-2010 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3-1990 § 1, 1990)

2.20.020 Terms of office and vacancies.
The first appointments shall be made so that the terms of three of the Commission members, including the City Council member, expire on December 31, 1992, and the terms of the two remaining members, including the Planning Commission member, expire on December 31, 1991. Thereafter, appointments shall be for terms of two years. Three consecutive unexcused absences for any commissioner shall constitute an automatic resignation and the position is then vacant. An unexcused absence is any absence from a regular or special meeting of the Commission without the prior authorization from the Commission Chair. Should the Chair require an absence, the Chair must report such in advance to the City Manager. Members must live in or have a business in Wood Village to be eligible to serve, and shall constitute an automatic resignation for any member who does not live or have a business in the City, and the position is then vacant. Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired portion of the vacant term. (Ord. 3-2020, 2020; Ord. 14-2010, 2010; Ord. 3-1990 § 2, 1990)

2.20.030 Meetings and records.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall hold meetings at the direction of the City Council and as determined by the Commission. The Commission shall annually elect one of its members as chairman. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and a record of the proceedings shall be made and kept on file in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 3-1990 § 3, 1990)

2.20.040 Powers and duties.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be advisory to the City Council on matters pertaining to development, operation and maintenance of city park facilities and recreation services for the public. Responsibilities shall include recommending an adequate system of recreation areas and facilities, and reviewing the effectiveness of the city's park and recreation program in meeting the public need. (Ord. 3-1990 § 4, 1990)

Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
2.24.010     Established.
2.24.020     Membership and compensation.
2.24.030     Terms of office and vacancies.
2.24.040     Officers.
2.24.050     Meetings, quorum, offices.
2.24.060     Interest limitations.
2.24.070     Conflict of interest.
2.24.080     Powers and duties.
2.24.090     Coordination with other governmental agencies.
2.24.100     Report to the Council.
2.24.110     Expenses.

2.24.010 Established.
There is established a Planning Commission for the city, and the name of this Commission shall be and so referred to as the Planning Commission of the City of Wood Village. (Ord. 1-1974 § 1, 1974)

2.24.020 Membership and compensation.
The membership of this Commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the City Council; one member of the Commission may be a city officer who shall serve as ex officio members without vote; all other members shall be voting members. Commission members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for duly authorized expenses. (Ord. 5-2015, 2015; Ord. 1-1974 § 2, 1974)

2.24.030 Terms of office and vacancies.
At the first meeting of the Commission the members thereof, except the ex officio members, shall choose their terms of office by lot as follows: one for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and two for four years. Immediately thereafter, the members shall notify the Council in writing of such allotment. Their successors shall hold office for four years; vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired portion of the vacant term. A member may be removed by the City Council after hearing for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. Three consecutive unexcused absences for any commissioner shall constitute an automatic resignation and the position is then vacant. An unexcused absence is any absence from a regular or special meeting of the Commission without the prior authorization from the Commission Chair. Should the Chair require an absence, the Chair must report such in advance to the City Manager. Members must live in or have a business in Wood Village to be eligible to serve, and shall constitute an automatic resignation for any member who does not live or have a business in the City, and the position is then vacant.  (Ord. 3-2020, 2020; Ord. 14-2010, 2010; Ord. 1-1974 § 3, 1974)

2.24.040 Officers.
The Commission shall elect from among its members appointed by the City Council, a president and vice president; these officers shall hold office at the pleasure of the Commission; a secretary shall also be elected by the Commission but need not be a member thereof

2.24.050 Meetings, quorum, offices.
The Commission may make and establish such rules and regulations as prove necessary for its government and procedure, consistent with the laws of the state, the City Charter and ordinances; a majority of the members of the Commission constitute a quorum; meetings shall be held as necessary to complete all issues pending before the Commission. The City shall assure the Planning Commission has appropriate staff capacity to maintain all official records, complete notice and posting requirements, and to receive appropriate reports on issues pending for consideration.

2.24.060 Interest limitations.
No more than two voting members of the Commission shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation that is engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of business, trade or profession. (Ord. 1-1974 § 6, 1974)

2.24.070 Conflict of interest.
A member of a Planning Commission shall not participate in any Commission proceeding or action in which any of the following has a direct or substantial financial interest: a member or his spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which he is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which he is negotiating for, has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the Commission where the action is being taken. (Ord. 1-1974 § 7, 1974)

2.24.080 Powers and duties.
The Commission is charged with the express duty of administering and enforcing the zoning ordinance of the city and shall have the powers and duties set forth therein and govern themselves accordingly; in addition, the Commission is charged with the duties and given the powers as set forth in Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 227, as may be applicable to Planning Commissions so formed, and in particular those enumerated in Oregon Revised Statutes 227.090. At all times, said Commission shall act in a manner consistent with the laws of the state of Oregon, the Charter and ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1-1974 § 8, 1974)

2.24.090 Coordination with other governmental agencies.
In those instances in which other governmental agencies, including those agencies of other cities, Multnomah County, a regional or state agency, may be involved by their duties in the processes of determining overall area planning or land use guidelines, directives or requirements which could or may relate to the planning and land use function of the city, this agency shall, upon directive given by resolution of the City Council, have the responsibility to coordinate the planning functions of the city with those of the other agency or agencies concerned, consistent with the goals and objectives set forth by this Commission and adopted by the City Council and consistent with the ordinances and resolutions and policies of this city pertaining thereto. This Commission may, upon directive of the City Council, appoint one of its members to serve as a “coordinating” member of such other agency or Commission to serve as representative of this Commission and the City thereupon. (Ord. 1-1974 § 9, 1974)

2.24.100 Report to the Council.
The Commission shall may provide annual reports to the City Council of activities undertaken, and shall provide any other reports requested by the City Council.

2.24.110 Expenses.
Such expenses as the Commission may lawfully incur, including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of their duties as members of the Commission, shall be paid from duly appropriated funds designated therefore, and subject to all adopted administrative and policy requirements adopted by the City.

Chapter 2.32 CONTRACTS

Sections:
2.32.010     Contract review board.

2.32.010 Contract review board.
The City Council of the City of Wood Village d serves as the local contract review board under ORS 279A.060. The City Council shall exercise all of the powers conferred on the local public contract review board by state law, except as those powers may be limited by the City Charter. The City Council may adopt and amend public contracting rules, special procurements, and exemptions pursuant to the State of Oregon Public Contracting Code by resolution. (Ord. 8-2002 § 1, 2002; Ord. 3-1976 § 6, 1976)

Chapter 2.36 DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

Sections:
2.36.010     Authorization to create development agency.
2.36.020     Advisory board.
2.36.030     Funding, salaries and expenditures.

2.36.010 Authorization to create development agency.
Upon the approval and resolution by the City Council as a whole, a city development agency may be established for the purpose of promoting and assisting in the development of recreational, tourist, commercial and industrial facilities within the city, either directly by the city or through private means and organizations, in such ways and manner as would promote the best interests of and benefit the city, its residents and inhabitants. (Ord. 1-1979 § 1 (part), 1979)

2.36.020 Advisory board.
If such an agency is created, an advisory board shall be established, consisting of not more than five interested citizens who are residents of the city, one of whom shall be a member of the City Council; the board members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council. It shall be the purpose of the board to formulate plans and projects and otherwise recommend procedures to the Council, which shall promote and encourage the development of tourist, commercial and industrial and recreational facilities within the city, which shall, in fact, promote and benefit the city, its residents and inhabitants. (Ord. 1-1979 § 1 (part), 1979)

2.36.030 Funding, salaries and expenditures.
The city development agency, if established, shall be funded by the city by the designation of not more than one percent of the tax collected under Section 3.08.020; provided, however, that said agency shall be authorized to accept donations and contributions from interested persons and organizations to assist in its work. No member of the development agency shall receive a wage or salary for his or her service thereupon, and all expenditures must be made in accordance with established budgetary procedures and only after Council approval. (Ord. 1-1979 § 1 (part), 1979)

Chapter 2.38 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:
2.28.010     Purpose.
2.38.020     District Established.
2.38.030     Membership.
2.38.040     Powers of the Urban Renewal Board.

2.28.010 Purpose.
Based on the findings in the Wood Village Urban Renewal Plan and Report, blighted areas exist within the City as defined by state statute, and such blighted areas negatively affect economic value, health, safety and welfare of the City. As such, there is a need for an Urban Renewal Agency to function within the City. (Ord. 6-2010, 2010)

2.38.020 District Established.
After consideration and recommendation of approval by the Planning Commission on January 25, 2010 and the Urban Renewal Agency on February 23, 2010, the City Council adopted Ordinance 6-2010 on February 23, 2010. This ordinance approves the Urban Renewal Plan and Report and establishes the Wood Village Urban Renewal District.

2.38.030 Membership.
The Urban Renewal Board shall consist of a minimum of five (5) members appointed by a majority vote of the Council and consisting of a minimum of three (3) members of the City Council and minimum of two (2) members of the public at-large, who may or may not be residents of the City.

2.38.040 Powers of the Urban Renewal Board.
All powers and authority as provided by statute, the City Charter, and the Wood Village Municipal Code shall be vested in the Wood Village Urban Renewal Board.

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:
3.04         Fiscal Provisions Generally
3.08         Transient Occupancy Tax
3.12         Special Assessment Procedures for Public Works
3.16         Establishing a System Development Charge and Program
3.18         Privilege Tax Upon Electric Public Utilities
3.20         Reimbursement Districts
3.22         Marijuana Retail Tax

Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY

Sections:
3.04.010     Depositaries for city moneys—Payment of warrants.
3.04.020     Notice of warrant call.
3.04.030     Monthly statements of City's finances.

3.04.010 Depositaries for city moneys—Payment of warrants.
The Council shall select one or more depositaries in which the city's moneys shall be deposited, and may authorize that the moneys belonging to one or more funds may be co-mingled in the same account in such depositary, and the Council may permit warrants drawn by the Recorder to be paid by such depositary bank and charged to the account containing the fund on which the warrant is drawn. Whenever there is not sufficient money in the fund upon which the warrant is drawn or in the account containing such fund, the city treasurer shall endorse on the face of such warrant the words “Not Paid for Want of Funds” and the date on which such endorsement is made, giving such information under his signature as city treasurer. Warrants so endorsed shall draw interest at the rate of five percent per annum from the date of such endorsement until the date such warrants are called for payment as hereinafter provided. A record shall be made of all warrants endorsed “Not Paid for Want of Funds.” (Ord. 4 § 2, 1951)

3.04.020 Notice of warrant call.
When the Council deems that the balance of any fund is sufficient for the calling for payment of a part or all of the warrants outstanding against the fund, it shall direct the city treasurer to publish in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Wood Village a notice which shall be in substantially the following form:NOTICE OF WARRANT CALL
Notice is hereby given that the following warrants issued by the City of Wood Village, Oregon, and drawn on the  (Name of Fund)  Fund, and endorsed “Not Paid for Want of Funds” are called for payment.
Commencing with Warrant No. ____, dated ________, and including Warrant No., dated ________.
Interest on the above numbered warrants ceases.
(Name of City Treasurer)
City Treasurer
(Ord. 4 § 3, 1951)

3.04.030 Monthly statements of City's finances.
The City Treasurer shall prepare and present to the Council an accurate statement of the city's finances for the previous month at the first regular meeting of the Council each month. The statement shall show:
A. The amount of money received during the previous month;
B. The amount of money withdrawn from each fund, and the balance on hand therein;
C. The total amount of money remaining in his custody at the end of each month. (Ord. 4 § 4, 1951)

Chapter 3.08 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections:
3.08.010     Definitions.
3.08.020     Tax imposed.
3.08.030     Collection of tax by operator.
3.08.040     Responsibility of hotel operator.
3.08.050     Exemptions.
3.08.060     Registration of operator, form and certification.
3.08.070     Due date—Returns and payments.
3.08.080     Penalties and interest.
3.08.090     Deficiency determinations—Fraud, evasion, operator delay.
3.08.100     Redeterminations.
3.08.110     Security for collection of tax.
3.08.120     Refunds.
3.08.130     Administration.
3.08.140     Appeals from City Recorder determination under this chapter.
3.08.150     Appeal to City Council.
3.08.160     Violation—Penalty.

3.08.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
“Accrual accounting” means the operator enters the rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.
“Cash accounting” means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his records until rent is paid.
“City Recorder” means the City Recorder of the City of Wood Village, or duly appointed deputy.
“Council” means the City Council of Wood Village, Oregon.
“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy for thirty (30) days or less for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, public or private club or fraternal organization, and also means space in mobile home or trailer parks, or similar structure or space or portions thereof so occupied, provided such occupancy is for less than a thirty (30) day period.
“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, or space in a mobile home or trailer park or portion thereof.
“Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.
“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.
“Rent package plan” means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this chapter shall be the same charge made for rent when not a part of a package plan.
“Tax” means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collections.
“Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the thirty (30) day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than thirty (30) consecutive days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient. (Ord. 9-1975 § 1, 1975)

3.08.020 Tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel in the city, from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on his records when rent is collected if the operator keeps his records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the operator keeps his records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations, and space occupancy in mobile home parks or trailer parks. (Ord. 1-1979 § 1 (part), 1979: Ord. 9-1975 § 2, 1975)

3.08.030 Collection of tax by operator.
A. Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in the city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.
B. In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectables.
C. The City Recorder shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.
D. For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted. (Ord. 9-1975 § 3, 1975)

3.08.040 Responsibility of hotel operator.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator's records, and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 9-1975 § 4, 1975)

3.08.050 Exemptions.
No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:
A. Any occupant for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days (a person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such month, shall not be deemed a transient);
B. Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars ($2.00) per day;
C. Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who rents such facilities incidentally to his own use thereof. (Ord. 9-1975 § 5, 1975)

3.08.060 Registration of operator, form and certification.
Every person engaging or about to engage an business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall register with the City Recorder on a form provided by him. Operators engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register not later than twenty (20) calendar days after passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Operators starting business after the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register within fifteen (15) calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration shall set forth the name under which an operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the City Recorder may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The City Recorder shall, within ten days after registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant. Certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the City Recorder upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.
Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:
A. The name of the operator;
B. The address of the hotel;
C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;
D. “This TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the TRANSIENT LODGINGS TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE, OREGON, by registration with the City Recorder for the purpose of collecting from transients the lodgings tax imposed by said City and remitting said tax to the City Recorder. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 9-1975 § 6, 1975)

3.08.070 Due date—Returns and payments.
A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the City Recorder on a quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding three months, and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. The City Recorder has authority to classify the operators for determination of applicable tax periods, and shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator's returns. The initial return under this chapter may be for less than the three months preceding the due date; thereafter, returns shall be made for the applicable quarterly period.
B. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each quarter of collection, a return for the preceding quarter's tax collections shall be filed with the City Recorder. The return shall be filed in such form as the City Recorder may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.
C. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The City Recorder may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of operator for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.
D. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the City Recorder at his office, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.
E. For good cause, the City Recorder may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the City Council. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter.
F. The City Recorder, if he deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. (Ord. 9-1975 § 7, 1975)

3.08.080 Penalties and interest.
A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.
B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.
C. Fraud. If the City Recorder determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.
D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. (Ord. 9-2004 § 1, 2004)
E. Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
F. Petition for Waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated, provided, however, the operator may petition the City Council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the City Council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. (Ord. 9-1975 § 8, 1975)

3.08.090 Deficiency determinations—Fraud, evasion, operator delay.
A. Deficiency Determinations. If the City Recorder determines that the returns are incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in Section 3.08.080.
    1. In making a determination the City Recorder may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 3.08.080.
    2. The City Recorder shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears on the records of the City Recorder. In case of service by mail or any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.
    3. Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later.
    4. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the City Recorder has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.
B. Fraud, Refusal to Collect, Evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the city Recorder shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the City Recorder has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit said tax, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the City Recorder shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the City Recorder of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect said tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the City Recorder has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.
C. Operator Delay. If the City Recorder believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the City Recorder after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed 3.08.090 within ten days from the date of service of notice by the City Recorder. (Ord. 9-1975 § 9, 1975)

3.08.100 Redeterminations.
A. Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 3.08.090 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in Section 3.08.090. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in Section 3.08.090, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.
B. If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the City Recorder shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him ten days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The City Recorder may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.
C. The City Recorder may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.
D. The order or decision of the City Recorder upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final ten days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the City Council within the ten days after service of such notice.
E. No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof. (Ord. 9-1975 § 10, 1975)

3.08.110 Security for collection of tax.
A. The City Recorder, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the City Recorder may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the City Recorder but shall not be greater than twice the operator's estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such manner as the City Recorder deems proper, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the City Recorder subject to the limitations herein provided.
B. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the City Recorder may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. (Ord. 9-1975 § 11, 1975)

3.08.120 Refunds.
A. Refunds by City to Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City Recorder under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Recorder within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the City Recorder. If the claim is approved by the City Recorder, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such operator, his administrators, executors or assigns.
B. Refunds by City to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator, and deposited by the operator with the City Recorder, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City Recorder, it may be refunded by the City Recorder to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Recorder within three years from the date of payment.
C. Refunds by Operator to Tenant. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupies the hotel for a period exceeding thirty (30) days without interruption, the operator shall refund to such tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for such collection and refund to the City Recorder. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to refund or credit to the tenant, he shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section. (Ord. 9-1975 § 12, 1975)

3.08.130 Administration.
A. Records Required from Operators, Etc. — Form. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.
B. Examination of Records —Investigations. The City Recorder, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator, after notification to the operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.
C. Confidential Character of Information Obtained — Disclosure Unlawful. It is unlawful for the City Recorder or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:
    1. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment to another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;
    2. The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the City Recorder may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;
    3. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued;
    4. The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 9-1975 § 13, 1975)

3.08.140 Appeals from City Recorder determination under this chapter.
A. The City Council of the City is designated as a committee to hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the City Recorder made upon petitions for redetermination of tax or other pertinent matters for which the City Recorder is herein designated or directed to perform. The City Council, in such capacity, shall act as a committee to hear and determine such appeals and may affirm, modify or reverse such orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the City Recorder's decision or order, the Council committee may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of notice of the City Recorder's decision and shall file a copy of each such determination with the City Recorder with certification thereon of the date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final ten days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the City Recorder in like manner as an order or decision of the City Recorder.
B. The City Council sitting as a committee as provided in subsection A of this section shall have the authority:
    1. To approve, modify or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations prescribed by the City Recorder in the administration and enforcement of this chapter;
    2. To hear and determine in such manner as shall be just, any protest which may be made by any person who may be interested, to any form, rule or regulation;
    3. To grant for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month, for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules therefor;
    4. To make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient lodgings tax and to propose the adoption, amendment or repeal of legislation pertaining thereto. With respect to this function, the City Council may appoint a separate committee not composed of Council members to advise and report such findings and recommendations to the Council. (Ord. 9-1975 § 14, 1975)

3.08.150 Appeal to City Council.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City Recorder may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Recorder within ten days of the serving or mailing of the notice of a decision given by the City Recorder. The City Recorder shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the City Council in its rules and regulations and shall give the appellant ten days' written notice of the time and place of hearing. (Ord. 9-1975 § 15, 1975)

3.08.160 Violation—Penalty.
Any operator or other person who shall fail or refuse to register as required herein, or who shall fail or refuse to furnish any return, supplemental return or other data required herein or by the City Recorder, or, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due hereunder, shall make, render, sign or verify any false or fraudulent report, commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 2, 2006; Ord. 9-2004 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 3.12 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS

Sections:
3.12.010     Definitions.
3.12.020     Declaration of intention, report of city engineer, recommendations.
3.12.030     Council considerations of engineer's report.
3.12.040     Public hearing on Council-approved report.
3.12.050     Hearing and written remonstrance.
3.12.060     Manner of doing work, contracts, bids, bonds.
3.12.070     Special hearing when low bid exceeds estimate.
3.12.080     Proposed assessment.
3.12.090     Assessment ordinance.
3.12.100     Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.
3.12.110     Appeal.
3.12.120     Lien recording, interest, foreclosure.
3.12.130     Notice of assessment, bonding.
3.12.140     Errors in assessment calculations.
3.12.150     Deficit assessment.
3.12.160     Rebate.
3.12.170     Abandonment of proceedings.
3.12.180     Curative provisions.
3.12.190     Reassessment.

3.12.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“City engineer” means the duly appointed incumbent of the office of city engineer of the City of Wood Village, if such office then exists and is occupied. If no such office shall exist or said office shall be vacant, the Council shall designate an engineer or firm of engineers, or other duly qualified person or firm, in connection with any proposed improvement in which event the term “city engineer” shall be held to refer to the engineer, firm of engineers or other duly qualified person or firm so designated.
“Owner” means the record holder of the legal title to the land in question, except that if there is a purchaser of the land whose interest therein is evidenced by a recorded land sale contract thereof, or by a written verified statement by the record holder of the legal title to the land duly filed with the Recorder of the city, then such purchaser shall be deemed the “owner.” (Ord. 2-1961 § 1, 1961)

3.12.020 Declaration of intention, report of city engineer, recommendations.
Whenever the Council shall deem it advisable to construct, alter, repair or improve any street, sidewalk, sewer, or other public improvement, to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments according to benefits, it shall, by resolution, declare its intention to initiate such improvement and direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report of such project and file the same with the City Recorder within the time set forth by the Council in said resolution. Such report shall contain:
A. A plat or map showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvements and the lands to be assessed to pay all or any part of the costs thereof;
B. Plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done;
C. An estimate of the probable costs of the improvement, including legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;
D. A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the costs of the improvement to the property specially benefited, which recommendation shall be in accord with the provisions of Section 3.12.100;
E. An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties, derived from applying the recommended assessment method to the estimated cost of the improvement;
F. A description of the location and assessed value of each lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, to be specially benefited by the improvement, with the names of the record owners thereof, and, when readily available the names of other owners thereof as herein defined;
G. A statement showing outstanding assessments against the property to be assessed;
H. Any other information required by the Council, who may designate the City Recorder or other public official to assist the city engineer in obtaining the information required in subsections F and G of this section. (Ord. 2-1961 § 2, 1961)

3.12.030 Council considerations of engineer's report.
After the city engineer shall have filed his report with the City Recorder as above provided, the City Recorder shall present said report to the Council for its consideration. The Council shall, by resolution, approve the report as submitted, amend the report and approve as amended or direct the city engineer to furnish it with a further report or information, or, on the basis of said report, may by resolution, record its intention to abandon the proposed improvement; said resolution shall specify the improvement contemplated together with a description of the boundaries of the district or area proposed to be assessed. (Ord. 2-1961 § 3, 1961)

3.12.040 Public hearing on Council-approved report.
After the Council has given preliminary approval, as provided in Section 3.12.030, to the engineer's report as submitted or amended the Council shall:
A. Direct the City Recorder to prepare a notice stating that such report is on file in his office and subject to examination by interested parties, giving the date when the same was filed and containing the following information:
    1. That the report is on file for examination as above provided;
    2. The date such report was filed;
    3. The estimated probable cost of such proposed improvement;
    4. A brief statement of the area proposed to be assessed therefor;
    5. The date of public hearing by the Council when any objections thereto shall be considered;
    6. That written remonstrance may be filed against the proposed improvement at the office of the City Recorder not later than the scheduled time for the Council hearing of objections to the proposed improvement;
    7. The method of assessment proposed to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the total cost of the improvement against the property specially benefited;
    8. The city engineer's estimated unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited property, clearly indicating that this is an estimate and not an assessment.
B. The Council shall specify in the resolution approving the city engineer's report, if such be the case, whether the notice as above provided shall be made by publication, posting or mail, or by a combination of such methods. If the Council shall declare notice be published, the City Recorder shall prepare notice of publication containing the information set forth above, together with the names of the record owners of the property and a description thereof, either by street number or other legal description and cause the said notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation, either daily or weekly, within the city; said publication if so ordered shall take place at least twice prior to the hearing provided for therein. If the Council shall determine to give notice by posting, the City Recorder shall prepare a notice containing the same information as provided by published notice, one copy thereof to be posted in the City Hall, and at least four copies thereof shall be posted within the confines of the area where the proposed improvement is to be carried out.
C. In addition to the publication or posting as above set forth, if the City Council shall decide to give notice to the property owners affected, the City Recorder shall cause to be mailed to the last known address of each record owner and, when readily known, to each owner as defined herein, of property to be specially benefited by the proposed improvement, a copy of said notice; if notice be mailed as set forth herein publication or posting need not take place.
D. Said notices, whether by publication, posting or mail, shall provide for the hearing before the Common Council, which may not be less than fourteen (14) days from the date of the mailing or posting, whichever is later, of the said notices. (Ord. 2-1961 § 4, 1961)

3.12.050 Hearing and written remonstrance.
At the hearing provided in Section 3.12.040, the Council shall hear oral objections to the proposed improvement and consider all pertinent points of inquiry concerning the proposed improvement. The Council shall also consider any written remonstrance filed with the City Recorder to said improvement. As provided by the City Charter of 1953, Section 42, remonstrance by the owners of two-thirds of the property to be specially assessed for the proposed improvement, owner to be as defined in this chapter, shall suspend action regarding the improvement for six months.
If the Common Council, after hearing objections and considering any remonstrance, finds that there is not sufficient remonstrance or the conditions as so provided by the City Charter and above set forth exist, then it may proceed with the improvement. (Ord. 2-1961 § 5, 1961)

3.12.060 Manner of doing work, contracts, bids, bonds.
The Council shall provide by resolution the time and manner of doing the work of such improvement, and may provide for the city to do the work, or it may award the work on contract. In the event the work is done under contract, bids shall be received after advertisement for such time as the Council may determine, on all such work, the estimated cost of which is more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) as provided in Section 44 of the City Charter, The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, provided the Council shall have the right to reject any or all bids when they are deemed unreasonable or unsatisfactory for any good reason. The Council shall provide for the taking of security by bond for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the provisions thereof, in case of default, and such shall be enforced in the name of the city.
In no instance may such a contract as above provided be let until the notice set forth in Section 3.12.040 be properly given, public hearing be held and the time for making or filing of remonstrance have expired and the Common Council determined by resolution to proceed with the proposed public improvement. (Ord. 2-1961 § 6, 1961)

3.12.070 Special hearing when low bid exceeds estimate.
If the Council finds, upon the opening of bids for a public improvement requiring the assessment of property specially benefited thereby, that the lowest responsible bid for such improvement substantially exceeds the engineer's estimate, it may, in its discretion, hold a special hearing of objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such bid and may direct the City Recorder to publish, post, or mail reasonable notice thereof in the manner set forth in Section 3.12.040. (Ord. 2-1961 § 7, 1961)

3.12.080 Proposed assessment.
After the Council has determined that a local improvement shall be made and when the estimated cost has been ascertained on the basis of contract awarded or city departmental costs, or after the work has been done and the cost thereof actually determined the Council shall, if it has not already done so, determine whether the property specially benefited shall bear all or a portion of said cost and thereafter the Council shall designate the City Recorder or other city official to prepare the proposed assessment to the respective lots or parcels of land specially benefited by said improvement and within the assessment district; said proposed assessment shall be filed in the office of the City Recorder. Thereafter notice of said proposed assessment shall be mailed or personally delivered to the owner of each lot or parcel of land proposed to be assessed, which notice shall state the amount of proposed assessment on said property, a date by which time objections thereto shall be filed with the Recorder and said notice shall indicate that any objections to said proposed assessment shall state the grounds thereof. (Ord. 2-1961 § 8, 1961)

3.12.090 Assessment ordinance.
The Council shall, after the expiration of the date by which time objections shall be filed with the Recorder to said proposed assessment, consider such objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the proposed assessments and shall thereafter determine the amount of actual assessment to be charged against the various lots, parcels and tracts of property specially benefited by said improvement with their apportioned share of the cost of said improvement; and the Council shall by ordinance spread the assessments upon the property in the manner and amounts so determined. The Council may delay the passage of such an assessment ordinance until the contract for the work is let or the improvement completed and the total cost thereof determined if the Council shall desire to avoid deficit assessments or rebates or for any other reason deemed sufficient. (Ord. 2-1961 § 9, 1961)

3.12.100 Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.
The Council in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the public improvement may:
A. Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;
B. Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefited;
C. Authorize payment by the City of all or any part of the cost of any such improvement when in the opinion of the Council, due to topographical or physical conditions or excessive public travel, or other character of the work involved, or when the Council otherwise believes the situation warrants it, provided the method selected creates a reasonable relation between the benefits derived by the property specially assessed and the benefits derived by the city as a whole.
Nothing herein contained shall preclude the Council from using other available means of financing public improvements, including federal or state grants-in-aid, sewer service or other types of service charges, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other legal means of finance. In the event any of such other means of finance are used, the Council may, in its discretion, levy special assessments hereunder according to benefits to cover any part of the costs of the improvement not covered by such means. (Ord. 2-1961 § 10, 1961)

3.12.110 Appeal.
Any person feeling aggrieved by assessments made as herein provided may, within twenty (20) days from the passage of the ordinance levying the assessment by the Council, appeal therefrom to the Circuit Court of the state of Oregon for the County of Multnomah. Such appeal and the requirements and formalities thereof shall be heard, governed and determined and the judgment thereon rendered and enforced so far as practicable in the manner provided for appeals from assessments contained in Section 223.397 Oregon Revised Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. The result of such appeal shall be a final and conclusive determination of the matter of such assessment, except with respect to the City's right of reassessment as provided herein. (Ord. 2-1961 § 11, 1961)

3.12.120 Lien recording, interest, foreclosure.
After the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the City Recorder shall enter in the docket of city liens, a statement of the respective amounts assessed upon each particular lot, tract or parcel of land with the names of the record owners thereof, and, so far as readily known, the names of the owners thereof as defined in this chapter. Upon such entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall be a lien and charged upon the respective lots, tracts or parcels of land against which the same are placed. Such liens shall be first and prior to all other liens or encumbrances thereon whatsoever insofar as the laws of the state of Oregon allow. Interest shall be charged at a percentage rate per annum fixed by resolution of the City Council on all amounts not so paid within thirty (30) days from the date of such entry, or entry corrected pursuant to Section 3.12.040. The city may proceed to foreclose or enforce any lien to which it shall be entitled pursuant to the provisions of this chapter at any time after thirty (30) days from the date on which the assessment or assessment corrected pursuant to Section 3.12.040 was entered in the lien docket, in the manner provided for the foreclosure and/or enforcement of liens by the general laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 2-1991 § 1 (part), 1991: Ord. 2-1961 § 12, 1961)

3.12.130 Notice of assessment, bonding.
Within ten days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the City Recorder shall send by mail, to his/her last known address, a notice of assessment to the record owner and, so far as is readily known, to the owner as defined in this chapter, of each lot, tract or parcel of land assessed. This notice shall state the time within which such assessments must be paid or bonded and that assessments which are not paid or bonded within the time stated in the notice shall bear interest at the percentage rate per annum fixed by the City Council in accordance with Section 3.12.120, and that the property so assessed is subject to foreclosure if such assessments are not paid or bonded within the time stated in the notice. Such record owner or other owner as defined in this chapter may make application to bond such assessment pursuant to the provisions of Sections 223.205 to 223.300, which is known as the “Bancroft Bonding Act” — Oregon Revised Statutes, together with amendments or future amendments thereof. (Ord. 2-1991 § 1 (part), 1991: Ord. 2-1961 § 13, 1961)

3.12.140 Errors in assessment calculations.
Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the City Recorder prior to any payment on
account thereof. Said City Recorder shall determine whether there is an error in fact and if he shall find that there is an error in fact, he shall recommend to the Council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. Upon the enactment of such an amendment by the Council, the City Recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send by mail to the last known address of the owner a corrected notice of the assessment. (Ord. 2-1961 § 14, 1961)

3.12.150 Deficit assessment.
If assessment is made before the total costs of the improvement are known and it be found that the amount assessed is insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the Council may by resolution declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. The Council shall set a time for a hearing of objections to such deficit assessment and shall direct the City Recorder to publish, post or mail reasonable notice thereof in the manner heretofore set forth for publishing, posting or mailing notice. The Council upon such hearing shall make a just and equitable deficiency assessment by ordinance. Such deficit assessment shall be consolidated with the assessment in the lien docket in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.12.120. Thereafter, the provisions of Sections 3.12.130 and 13.12.140 shall be applicable with regard to such deficit assessment. (Ord. 2-1961 § 15, 1961)

3.12.160 Rebate.
If, upon the completion of the project it is found that any sum theretofore assessed therefor upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the cost thereof, the Council must ascertain and declare the same by ordinance, and when so declared, it must be entered in the docket of city liens as a credit upon the appropriate assessment. If any such assessment has been paid, the person who paid the same or his legal representative, shall be entitled to the payment of any portion of the rebate credit which exceeds the assessment, by a warrant on the city treasury. (Ord. 2-1961 § 16, 1961)

3.12.170 Abandonment of proceedings.
The Council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings for improvements hereunder at any time prior to the final consummation of such proceedings, and if liens have been assessed upon any property under this procedure, they shall be cancelled, and any payments made thereon shall be refunded to the payor, his assigns, or legal representative. (Ord. 2-1961 § 17, 1961)

3.12.180 Curative provisions.
No improvement assessment shall be held invalid by reason of a failure to give, in any report, in the proposed assessment, in the assessment ordinance or ordinances, in the lien docket or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land or part thereof or the name of any person having a lien upon or interest in such property, or by reason of any error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps hereinabove specified, unless it appears that the assessment as made, insofar as it effects the person complaining, is unfair and unjust, and the Council shall have power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 2-1961 § 18 (part), 1961)

3.12.190 Reassessment.
Whenever an assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment for any improvement which has been or may be hereafter made by the city has been or shall be hereafter set aside annulled, declared or rendered void or its enforcement refuted by any court of this state or any federal court having jurisdiction thereof, whether directly or by virtue of any decision of such court, or when the Council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment or any part thereof, the Council may make a new assessment or reassessment. Such reassessment shall be made in the manner provided by Sections 223.405 — 223.485, Oregon Revised Laws, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2-1961 § 19, 1961)

Chapter 3.16 ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE AND PROGRAM

Sections:
3.16.010     Definitions.
3.16.020     System Development Charge Established.
3.16.030     Methodology.
3.16.040     Compliance with State Law.
3.16.050     Collection of Charges.
3.16.060     Credits.
3.16.070     Appeal Procedures Administrative Review.
3.16.080     Prohibited Connections.
3.16.090     Administrative Rules and Procedures.
3.16.100     Exemptions.
3.16.110     Expenditure Restrictions.

3.16.010 Definitions.
As used in this Ordinance and in WVMC 3.16 except when the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases shall have the following meaning:
A. Capital Improvement(s): Facilities or assets of the City used for Water supply, treatment and distribution; waste water collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal; drainage and flood control; parks and recreation; transportation.
B. Development: The act of conducting a building or mining operation or making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land which increases the usage of capital improvements or which creates the need for additional capital improvements, including appropriate partitions and subdivisions and related actions.
C. Improvement Fee: A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date this Ordinance becomes effective.
D. Land Area: Area of a parcel of land measured by projection of its boundaries upon a horizontal plane excepting those portions within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to public servitudes or scenic or preservation purpose.
E. Owner: The record title holder or purchaser under a recorded land sales agreement or any other person having an interest of record in the described real property.
F. Parcel of Land: A lot, parcel, block. or other tract of land occupied or which may be occupied by a structure or other use which includes yard areas or other open spaces required under zoning or other land development code or regulations of City .
G. Qualified Public Improvements: A capital improvement that is: (1) required as a condition of development approval; (2) identified in the capital improvement plan (Master Plan) of the City; (3) not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval (as used in this definition “contiguous” means: in a public way which abuts).
H. Reimbursement Fee: A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the effective date of this Ordinance.
I. System Development Charge: A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement or issuance of a development permit, building permit, or connection to the capital improvement

3.16.020 System Development Charge Established.
A. Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this ordinance, or other City Ordinance or State law, a systems development charge is hereby imposed on all new development within the City, outside City boundaries that connects to or uses the City's sanitary sewer facilities, storm sewer, water facilities, parks system, or transportation system.
B. The specific system development charges for each applicable usage as herein set forth, shall be established by Resolution of the City Council which shall set forth the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies, and if such charge applies to an area smaller than the city as a whole, and in such case, the area subject to the charge. A Resolution of the Council establishing system development charges, or any portion thereof, may be amended or modified from time to time by the Council as the City's need and directions dictate following public hearing upon the modifications or amendments proposed.

3.16.030 Methodology.
A. The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance City owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the City Council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.
B. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the City's concerned system to which the fee is related and a credit against the improvement fee for the construction of any qualified capital improvement of the City.
C. The specifics of the methodology set forth above shall be, if required, approved by the City Council and set forth in the Resolution adopting the specific system development charges.

3.16.040 Compliance with State Law.
A. Revenues received from the City's system development charges shall be deposited to the appropriate and designated fund and budgeted and expended as provided by State law. The Finance Director shall provide the City Council with an annual accounting based on the City's fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account.
B. The capital improvement plan required by State law as the basis for expending revenues from the improvement fee of the system development charge shall be the City of Wood Village designated Capital Improvement Plan.

3.16.050 Collection of Charges.
A. The system development charge is payable upon issuance of a building permit, a development permit, whether the issuance of a building permit is required or not, or a permit or approval to connect with the City's water system, sanitary sewer, storm sewer system, or a right-of-way access permit
B. If development is commenced or connection is made to the concerned City's system as herein defined without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
C. The City shall collect system development charges from the person responsible for or receiving the benefit of the development. The City Manager or his or her designee shall not issue any permit or allow connection described herein or in appropriate City administrative rule or regulation until the charges have been paid in full or until provision for appropriate phased development installment payments have been made within applicable time limits.
D. Any unpaid system development charge and interest thereon at legal rate shall constitute a lien against the concerned parcel of land with the same priority as a local improvement lien and subject to collection and foreclosure as such or as otherwise provided by appropriate State statute.

3.16.060 Credits.
A. When a development occurs that must pay a system development charge, the SDC for the existing use shall be calculated, and if it is less than the SDC for the proposed use, the difference between the SDC for the existing use and the SDC charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge required. If the change in use results in the SDC for the proposed use being less than the SDC for the existing use, no SDC charge shall be required, however, no refund or credit shall be given.
B. The limitations on the use of credits contained in this subsection shall not apply when a-edits are given under subsection (C) of this section. A credit shall be given for the cost of a qualified public improvement associated with a development. If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to build a larger facility or a facility with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related, then the City Council may grant a credit only for the cost of that portion of sum improvement that exceeds the City's minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this subsection.
C. In establishing the methodology for each charge, the City Council may provide a greater credit, or establish a system providing for the transferability of credits from one phase of development to another phase of a development. or provide a credit for a capital improvement not identified in the plan adopted pursuant to ORS 223.309, or provide a share of the cost of such improvement by other means.
D. Credits as herein set forth shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to another.

3.16.070 Appeal Procedures Administrative Review.
A. A person aggrieved by a decision made by the City Manager or his or her designee under Sections 6 through 10 hereof or a person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenues, may appeal the decision or the expenditure by filing a written request with the City Recorder for consideration by the City Council. Such appeal shall describe with particularity the decision or the expenditures from which the person appeals and shall comply with subsection (C) of this section.
B. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure. Appeals of any other decision must be filed within fifteen days of the date of the decision.
C. The appeal shall state: (1) the name and address of the appellant; (2) the nature of the determination being appealed; (3) the reason the determination is incorrect; (4) what the correct determination of the appeal should be. Any appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives his/her objections and his/her appeal shall be dismissed.
D. Unless the appellant and the City agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard within thirty days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the City shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant
E. The City Council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant's written Statement and any additional evidence the City Administrator or his or her designee deems appropriate. At the hearing the appellant may present testimony and oral arguments personally or by legal counsel.
F. The appellant shall carry the burden of proving that the determination being appealed is incorrect and what the correct determination should be.
G. The City Council shall make its determination of the appeal in accordance with this Ordinance and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the City official's decision. City Council shall issue its written decision upon the appeal within twenty days following the close of the hearing, and that decision shall be final.
H. If the Council determines there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within a specified period of time not exceeding one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. The decision of the Council in all matters herein set forth shall be reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100.
I. Legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council pursuant hereto and this section, shall be filed not later than sixty days after the adoption. A person contesting the methodology used for calculating a system development charge shall proceed only as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

3.16.080 Prohibited Connections.
A. No person may connect to the City's water or sewer systems unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid or unless otherwise authorized by specific resolution of the City Council.
B. In conformance with City rules and regulations, any connection to the City's supply lines, pipes or systems, if wrongfully made and/or maintained, may be removed by the City upon specific direction of the City Council. In addition, the City shall have all rights provided for or reserved to it under the laws of the State of Oregon to enforce this provision including the right to seek injunctive relief from the Oregon Circuit Court.

3.16.090 Administrative Rules and Procedures.
A. Consistent with ORS 223.297-314 and this Ordinance, the City shall by appropriate Resolution adopt pertinent administrative rules and regulations to promote a uniform and equitable application and operation of the system development ordinance charges and programs, which Resolution may be amended from time to time as required. These administrative rules and procedures may be included in the City's Resolutions establishing specific system development charges hereunder.

3.16.100 Exemptions.
Additions to single family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit as defined by the Uniform Building Code are exempt from system development charges; and alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase a parcel's or structure's use of public improvement facilities otherwise subject to SDC charges, are exempt from all portions thereof.

3.16.110 Expenditure Restrictions.
System development charge revenues may be expended on direct costs of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance, including the cost of developing system development charge methodologies and providing annual accounting of system development charge expenditures. SDC charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities nor for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 7-1998, 1998)

Chapter 3.18 PRIVILEGE TAX UPON ELECTRIC PUBLIC UTILITIES

Sections:
3.18.010     Privilege tax imposed.
3.18.020     Definition of “gross revenue.”
3.18.030     Payment dates.
3.18.040     Interest on late payments.

3.18.010 Privilege tax imposed.
A privilege tax is imposed on the gross revenues of any electric public utility providing electricity to customers or users within the Wood Village city limits in the amount of one and one-half percent of those revenues. As used herein, “electric public utility” means a “public utility” as defined by ORS 757.005(1) that provides electricity directly or indirectly to or for the public. Any privilege tax shall be in addition to any franchise fee imposed by a franchise ordinance.

3.18.020 Definition of “gross revenue.”
As used in this chapter, “gross revenue” means revenues received by an electric public utility from the sale of electric energy within the city. “Gross revenues” includes revenues from the use, rental or lease of operating facilities of an electric public utility other than residential-type space and water heating equipment. Gross revenues do not include proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgage or other evidence of indebtedness, securities or stock, or sales at wholesale prices by one public utility to another when the utility purchasing the service is not the ultimate consumer, and revenue from joint pole use.

3.18.030 Payment dates.
The tax owed for calendar or part of a calendar year shall be paid on or before April 1st based on the revenues received the previous calendar year. The first payment under this Ordinance will therefore be due April 1, 2005, based upon gross revenues earned in calendar year 2004.

3.18.040 Interest on late payments.
In the event the privilege tax is not paid on or before the due date, interest shall be owed on the tax in the amount of nine percent from the date due to the date on which payment is received by the city, compounded daily. (Ord. 2-2004, 2004)

Chapter 3.20 REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:
3.20.010     Definitions.
3.20.020     Purpose and Scope.
3.20.030     Initiation of Proceedings.
3.20.040     City Manager's Report.
3.20.050     Formation of Reimbursement District.
3.20.060     Certificate of Payment and Right to Reimbursement.
3.20.070     Obligation to Pay District Connection Charge, Penalty.
3.20.080     District Term, Extension.

3.20.010 Definitions.
A. “District Connection Charge” means the charge imposed pursuant to WVC Chapter 3.20 designed to reimburse a person for the costs of financing a sewer, street, surface water management or water improvement. The District Connection Charge is not intended to limit or replace, and is in addition to, any other existing fees or charges collected by the City.
B. “Person” means an individual or any legal entity, including the City of Wood Village.
C. “Reimbursement District” means the area benefited by the construction of sewer, water, surface water management or street improvements financed in whole or in part by a person without the formation of a local improvement district. A Reimbursement District may be formed in conjunction with a local improvement district where a person finances a share of the cost of the improvement that is larger than the share that would result from a uniform application of the district assessment formula to property located in the district and owned by the person.
D. “Sewer Improvement” means a sewer system or sewer line improvement conforming to City standards including but not limited to:
    1. Extension of a sewer line to property other than that owned by the person financing the improvement so that sewer service can be provided to that property without further extension of the line;
    2. Construction of a sewer line larger, deeper, or of greater capacity than necessary to serve the property of the person financing the improvement in order to provide future service to other properties without the need to reconstruct the line, or constructing additional, deeper or parallel lines; and
    3. Construction of capacity-increasing off-site improvements that benefit development of properties in addition to the person financing the improvements.
E. “Street Improvement” means a street or street improvement conforming to City standards and including but not limited to streets, surface water drainage facilities in conjunction with streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike and pedestrian pathways, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs and public right-of-way or easement acquisition.
F. “Surface Water Management Improvement” means a surface water quality or quantity facility conforming with City standards including but not limited to:
    1. Extension of a surface water management line to property other than that owned by the person financing the improvement so that surface water management service can be provided to that property without further extension of the line;
    2. Construction of a surface water management line larger, deeper, or of greater capacity than necessary to serve the property of the person financing the improvement in order to provide future service to other properties without the need to reconstruct the line;
    3. A detention facility with the capacity to serve upstream properties; and
    4. A water quality facility with capacity to serve upstream properties.
G. “Water Improvement” means a water system or water line improvement conforming with City standards including but not limited to:
    1. Extension of a water line to property other than that owned by the person financing the improvement so that water service can be provided to that property without further extension of the line;
    2. Construction of a water line larger, deeper, or of greater capacity than necessary to serve the property of the person financing the improvement in order to provide future service to other properties without the need to reconstruct the line, or constructing addition, deeper, or parallel lines; and
    3. Construction of capacity-increasing off-site improvements to the water system, including wells and water lines, that benefit development of properties in addition to the person financing the improvements.

3.20.020 Purpose and Scope.
WVC Article 3.20 provides a method to reimburse a person or the City who finances the construction of a sewer, water, surface water management or street improvement in whole or in a disproportionately large part. It is intended to be used to mitigate the cost of financing such public improvements by distributing those costs to other benefited property owners at the time those benefited property owners connect to or make use of the improvement.

3.20.030 Initiation of Proceedings.
A. Any person may apply to the City to form a Reimbursement District where the person chooses or is required as a condition of permit approval to construct a street, sewer, surface water management or water improvement that includes additional or oversized improvements that would or could provide service to property other than property owned by the applicant. Examples include but are not limited to:
    1. Full street improvements instead of half street improvements;
    2. Construction of off-site sidewalks or pathways;
    3. Connection or extension of street sections for continuity;
    4. Extension of water, surface water management or sewer lines to upstream properties.
    5. Oversizing or other capacity increasing improvements to water, surface water management or sewer lines or systems or surface water quality or detention facilities if the over sizing costs are not fully reimbursed by the City directly or through System Development Charge ("SDC") credits.
B. The application shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a processing fee established by resolution of the City Council sufficient to cover the administrative and notice costs of processing an application pursuant to this ordinance. The application shall include the following:
    1. A description of the location, type, size, and cost of the public improvement.
    2. A narrative explaining why the applicant believes all or part of the cost of the improvement is eligible for reimbursement pursuant to this ordinance.
    3. A map showing the properties to be included in the proposed district, including the City Zoning designation, the square footage or frontage of the property or properties and identification of the properties owned by the applicant, if any.
    4. The cost of the improvements to be reimbursed. If the application is filed after construction, the application shall include the actual costs of construction as evidenced by a contract, receipts, bids or other similar documents. If the application is filed prior to construction, the application shall include the estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projections of the cost of labor and materials or other similar evidence satisfactory to the City Manager.
    5. The date that the City accepted the public improvements or the date that the improvements are estimated to be complete.
C. An application to form a Reimbursement District may be made no later than three months after completion and acceptance of the street, sewer, surface water management or water improvements. The City Manager may waive this deadline if the applicant demonstrates that the delay was not created by the applicant and was created by unanticipated or unforeseen circumstances.

3.20.040 City Manager's Report.
A. The City Manager shall review a request for the establishment of a Reimbursement District and determine whether a district should be established. The City Manager may request the submittal of any other relevant information from the applicant in order to assist in this evaluation. If the Manager determines that formation of a Reimbursement District is appropriate, the Manager shall prepare a written report that:
    1. Explains why the applicant is qualified for reimbursement pursuant to WVC Article 3.20.
    2. Establishes the area of the Reimbursement District, the district formation date and the date when the right of reimbursement ends.
    3. Sets forth the actual or estimated cost of the street, water, surface water management or sewer improvements and the portion of the cost for which the applicant should be reimbursed.
    4. Establishes a methodology for spreading the cost among the properties within the Reimbursement District and, where appropriate, defining a "unit" for applying the reimbursement charge to property that may, with City approval, be partitioned, adjusted or subdivided at some future date. The methodology should consider the cost of the improvements, prior contributions by property owners, the value of the unused capacity, rate making principles employed to finance public improvements, and other factors deemed relevant by the City Manager. Prior contributions by property owners shall only be considered if the contribution was for the same type of improvement and at the same location.
    5. Establish the reimbursement charge for the district.
    6. Direct that a certificate of payment and right of reimbursement be issued to the district applicant.
B. Determining Reasonable Actual Costs. The applicant shall not be entitled to reimbursement for any costs in excess of reasonable actual costs. If the Reimbursement District is formed before actual costs are known, the City Manager's report may be based on estimated costs. If estimated costs are used, the methodology or the certificate of payment or both shall provide for a recalculation of the cost no later than three months after completion and acceptance of the improvement by the City. An applicant shall demonstrate actual costs by submitting contracts, invoices or such other documentation as the City Manager deems sufficient. Actual costs shall not be deemed reasonable if the City Manager determines that such costs significantly exceed prevailing market rates for similar projects. In such a case, the City Manager may reduce the reimbursable costs to the prevailing market rate for similar projects. In addition, the following costs shall not be subject to reimbursement:
    1. Costs for that portion of the improvement that benefits the applicant's own property.
    2. Costs for improvements that are not dedicated to and accepted by the City as a public improvement.
    3. Costs for a public improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, except in cases where the nature and degree of the public improvement is disproportionate to the impacts of the development or where the City desires an oversized or additional improvement beyond that which is roughly proportional to the impacts of the development.
    4. Costs other than the costs of construction, including the acquisition and condemnation costs of acquiring additional right-of-way and/or easements, the actual cost of permits, engineering and legal services as demonstrated by invoice, and the estimated annual percentage increase in such costs over the ten (10) years that the Reimbursement District will be in effect.
    5. Costs for relocation of electrical, telephone, cable television or natural gas utility relocation benefiting an applicant's property.
    6. Costs for extra work or materials required to correct deficiencies in construction to bring the improvement to City Standards.
    7. Costs for sanitary sewer, surface water management facilities, water or street improvements that are the minimum size necessary to meet City standards and serve an applicant's property.
    8. Costs for a minor street realignment, except for the cost of right-of-way acquisition beyond the limits of the applicant's frontage along the improved street.
    9. Costs that are fully or partially reimbursed by the City either directly or through SDC credits. If SDC credits are available for the project, such credits must first be sought. If SDC credits are insufficient to reimburse the applicant for the cost of such improvements, the applicant may elect to spread the remaining costs via a Reimbursement District or by transferable SDC credits, but may not do both.
C. If the City Manager determines that a Reimbursement District should not be formed, the Manager shall prepare a written report explaining why the City Manager believes that formation of the Reimbursement District would be inappropriate or does not qualify pursuant to WVC Article 3.20. The report shall be mailed to the applicant along with a written notice that the City Manager's determination may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal within fourteen days of the date of mailing the report and notice. The notice of appeal shall be in writing, shall explain why the City Council should reverse or modify the decision of the City Manager, and shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable appeal fee, if any is established by resolution of the City Council. If a notice of appeal is filed in compliance with all of these requirements, a hearing shall be held and a decision rendered by the City Council as provided in WVC 3.20.050(4).

3.20.050 Formation of Reimbursement District.
A. Notice of Proposed Formation. Following completion of the City Manager's Report, notice of formation of the proposed Reimbursement District shall be mailed by regular mail to the applicant and to all property owners within the proposed District of the benefit as shown on the most recent assessment roll in the possession of the county assessor’s office. Notice shall be deemed effective on date of mailing. Failure to receive notice by the applicant or any affected property owner shall not invalidate or otherwise affect formation of the Reimbursement District.
The notice shall:
    1. State that a Reimbursement District has been proposed that includes the property of the person receiving notice.
    2. Briefly describe the Reimbursement District, the street, water, sewer or surface water management improvement to be reimbursed, the amount of the District Connection Charge, and the circumstances under which the Charge must be paid.
    3. Include a statement that the City Manager's report is available for public inspection, including how a member of the public may review or obtain a copy of the report.
    4. State that any property owner within the Reimbursement District may file a written request for a hearing on the proposed formation before the City Council by filing a written request for a hearing as provided in subsection 2 of this section with the City Recorder within fourteen (14) days of the date of notice.
    5. State that unless a written request for hearing is filed within the required time period, the Reimbursement District shall be deemed approved on the 15th day following the date of notice.
B. Filing a Request for Hearing. Any property owner within a proposed Reimbursement District may request that a hearing on the proposed formation be held before the City Council by filing a written request for hearing within fourteen (14) days of the date that notice is provided pursuant to subsection 1 of this section. No fee shall be charged for filing a request for hearing. The written notice shall contain the name and address of the person requesting the hearing and a brief statement explaining why the person believes that the proposed Reimbursement District should be modified or not be formed.
C. Modification. Upon receipt of a written request for hearing, the City Manager may either reconsider and/or modify the Reimbursement District as proposed in the City Manager's Report or may schedule the request for a public hearing before the City Council. If the City Manager decides to modify the proposed district, notice of the modification shall be mailed as provided in subsection A of this section, which modification is subject to a request for hearing as provided in subsection B of this section.
D. Hearing. The City shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed Reimbursement District within a reasonable time following the request. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed by regular mail to the applicant and all property owners who received notice of the proposed Reimbursement District as provided in subsection 1 of this section. Notice shall be mailed at least fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing. The Notice shall set forth the time, date and place of the public hearing and shall include the information required by subsection A(1) through A(3) of this section. The notice shall also state that any person may appear and be heard. At the scheduled time, the Mayor shall open the public hearing and shall take testimony generally on the proposed Reimbursement District. The Mayor may impose reasonable time limits on testimony. Following the close of the public testimony, the Mayor shall bring the matter back to the table for deliberation and decision. The Council shall make a preliminary decision to approve, reject or modify the proposed Reimbursement District as set forth in the City Manager's report. The preliminary decision shall be followed up by adoption of a formal written Order. An order approving formation of the Reimbursement District shall incorporate the City Manager's Report including any modifications, if any, made by the City Council. An order reversing a decision of the City Manager not to form a Reimbursement District pursuant to WVC 3.20.040(C) shall set forth the information required in WVC 3.20.040(A)(1) through (6).
E. Formation. The Reimbursement District shall be deemed to be formed on the fifteenth day following the notice provided in subsection A of this section if no request for hearing is filed, on the fifteenth day following the second notice if the Reimbursement District is modified pursuant to subsection C of this section, or on the date of adoption of the City Council's written order if a hearing is requested and held. Notice of formation shall be mailed by regular mail to the applicant and to all property owners within the proposed district. The notice shall include the date of formation, shall state that a copy of the final City Manager's report or Council Order is available, shall include a telephone number of the City Recorder through whom a copy can be requested, and shall include a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the District Connection Charge and the amount of the Charge.
F. Recordation. The City Recorder shall cause notice of the formation and nature of the Reimbursement District to be filed in the office of the county recorder so as to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district. The recording shall not create a lien. Failure to make such a recording shall not affect the legality of the formation or the obligation to pay the District Connection Charge.
G. Challenge to Formation. No legal action intended to challenge or contest the formation of the Reimbursement District or the methodology or amount of the District Connection Charge shall be filed after sixty (60) days following formation of the Reimbursement District pursuant to subsection E of this section. No legal action may be filed unless the party first exhausted their administrative remedies by requesting and participating in a hearing before the City Council, or by participating in a hearing before the City Council requested by a third party, pursuant to subsections (B) and (D) of this section.

3.20.060 Certificate of Payment and Right to Reimbursement.
The certificate of payment and right to reimbursement is a contract right between the City and the applicant. The certificate shall at a minimum identify the person receiving the right of reimbursement, the reimbursed amount per unit, the area of the Reimbursement District, the date of district formation and the date upon which the right to reimbursement ends. The requestor's right to reimbursement is assignable and transferable after written notice is delivered to the City advising the City to whom future payments are to be made. The certificate shall also provide that the applicant shall defend and indemnify the City from and against any and all challenges to the formation of the reimbursement district or the collection of the District Connection Charge.

3.20.070 Obligation to Pay District Connection Charge, Penalty.
A. An owner of property within any Reimbursement District shall pay to the City, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the District Connection Charge established in the City Manager's written report when any of the following events occur:
    1. The property owner receives final approval for a development permit to subdivide or partition property located within the district, or
    2. A use of property is expanded to create additional "units", as that term is defined in the Manager's report for the particular district. The term "unit" is not limited to residential uses.
    3. A property owner connects to the sewer line or water line or makes use of the surface water management or street improvement. As used in this subsection, "makes use of the surface water management improved" means installation of an improvement that substantially increases impervious surface on the property at the time of or following construction of the surface water management improvement for which the Reimbursement District has been formed. As used in this subsection, "makes use of the street improvement" means installation of an improvement or changing the use of the property at the time of or following construction of the street improvement that increases traffic or congestion on the road improvement for which the Reimbursement District was formed.
B. The charge is due and payable as a precondition of receiving the first City permit applicable to the development activity undertaken, or, in the case of a connection to a line, as a precondition of receiving the connection permit.
C. The connection charge may be paid in installments in the same manner as a systems development charge.
D. A person who becomes obligated for payment of the District Connection Charge as the result of connection to a line constructed through the local improvement district process and who owns property within the district upon which an assessment is levied may be assessed for the District Connection Charge as an added portion of the assessment levied through the improvement district.
E. The failure to pay the District Connection Charge when due is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code (Ord. 4-2006 § 3, 2006)

3.20.080 District Term, Extension.
The initial term of the District shall be ten years from the date of formation. The applicant or its successor in interest may apply for up to two addition five-year extensions of the District by filing a written request for an extension with the City Public Works Director prior to the expiration of the preceding term. The City Council may establish by resolution a processing fee sufficient to cover its actual costs of processing the request for an extension. The City Council shall grant such extensions if development of un- or underdeveloped property within the District would continue to benefit from the improvement for which the District was formed.

Chapter 3.22 MARIJUANA RETAIL TAX

Sections:
3.22.010     Definitions.
3.22.020     Tax Imposed.
3.22.030     Collection.
3.22.040     Interest and Penalty.

3.22.010 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:
A. "Marijuana items" has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.015.
B. "Marijuana retailer" means a person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state.
C. "Retail sale price" means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.

3.22.020 Tax Imposed.
Pursuant to ORS 475B.345, the City of Wood Village hereby imposes a tax of three percent (3%) on the retail sale price of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the city.

3.22.030 Collection.
The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items.

3.22.040 Interest and Penalty.
A. Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.
B. If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.
C. Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.
D. Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to Wood Village by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the City’s General Fund.
E. If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the City of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and Wood Village under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. (Ord. 1-2017, 2017; Ord. 4-2016, 2016)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS*

Chapters:
5.04         Business Licenses Generally
5.08         Business License Taxes
5.10         Regulation of Payday Lending
5.16         Amusement Devices
5.20         Rental License Fee
5.24         Secondhand Dealers
5.26         Telecommunications Infrastructure
5.28         Cable Television Franchises Customer Service Standards
*For regulations on motel tax, see Chapter 3.08.

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY

Sections:
5.04.011     Definitions.
5.04.021     Licenses Required.
5.04.031     License Fee.
5.04.041     Exclusions and Applicability.
5.04.051     Applications.
5.04.061     Transfer or Assignment of License.
5.04.071     Expiration of License.
5.04.081     Late Payment Charge.
5.04.091     Failure to Obtain License.

5.04.011 Definitions.
For purposes of Chapter 5.04:
"Business" means any activity, trade, occupation, profession, or pursuit conducted for the purpose of generating revenue, whether for profit or non-profit.
"Employee" means any person employed by a Business who works or will work more than 1040 hours in any twelve-month period and who works at or operates from a Business location within the City of Wood Village. "Employee" does not include independent contractors.
"License Year" means the calendar year.
“Manager” means the City Manager or his/her designee.

5.04.021 Licenses Required.
No person may engage in any business within the City, or transact any business specified in this chapter, without first obtaining a license and paying the license fee prescribed.
The provisions of Article 5.04 shall be in addition to any other license requirements or license fees contained in this code, unless otherwise specified.
Each business location of every business within the City of Wood Village is required to obtain a business license.
A non-profit business is required to obtain a business license. A business with an IRS 501(c)(3) classification can file proof with the City and obtain a waiver of the business license fee.

5.04.031 License Fee.
Except as provided in Section 5.04.041, the license fee for each business shall be established by Council resolution.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest any right in a license as a contract obligation on the part of the City as to the amount of the fee or the character of the license issued. The license fee may be changed at any time by the City, and all license fees required shall be payable in advance. The license fee is not refundable.
For any business that has obtained a temporary use permit under the Wood Village Zoning Code, the base business license fee shall be one half the established fee.

5.04.041 Exclusions and Applicability.
The license required by Section 5.04.021 shall not apply to a person whose income is based solely on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or annual wage or salary, or to a nonresident engaged exclusively in a wholesale business.
The agent of a nonresident proprietor engaged in a business on which a license is levied by Section 5.04.021 shall be liable for obtaining the license and paying the license fee. A person representing, or exhibiting by sign or advertisement, that he is engaged in a business in the City for which a license is required by Section 5.04.021 shall be considered to be engaged in that business and shall be liable for the payment of the license fee.
Section 5.04.021 shall not apply to businesses subject to the license required by Chapter 5.20 (rental license fee), businesses subject to the transient occupancy tax imposed pursuant to Chapter 3.08, telecommunications carriers operating under a franchise issued pursuant to Chapter 5.26, or utilities operating under a franchise approved by the City Council.
Any business whose sole operation is in a special event with a duration of three days or less shall not be required to apply for or pay a business license fee. A special event is a temporary community or public event.
The license required by Section 5.04.021 shall apply to a person whose primary business is the receipt and delivery of packages from and to third parties. The license is not required of a person whose only business in the City is the delivery of materials or products that were purchased at the person's place of business in another jurisdiction.
Except for a person whose principal place of business is in the City, the license required by Section 5.04.021 shall not apply to a person who is engaged in construction activity and has obtained a regional construction license issued by Metro.
Any garage sales, tool sales, or bazaars with a duration of fourteen days or less within a calendar year shall not be required to apply for or pay a business license fee.

5.04.051 Applications.
The license fee required by Section 5.04.021 shall be due on January 1 of each License Year. The license fee for a new business shall be due 30 days from the date a person opens for business. The license fee for a new business shall be prorated based upon the number of months that remain in the License Year. Application shall be made to the City on forms prescribed by the manager.
The manager shall issue a license when application has been approved and payment of the required fee has been received. Each business shall post the license on the premises or it shall be kept on the person licensed, and it shall be exhibited to a police or other officer of the City upon demand.
The application for the license shall include:
    a. The business for which the application is made.
    b. The name of the applicant or his agent.
    c. The commercial location with the site address, or address used for income tax purposes.
    d. The amount of fee to be paid.
    e. A statement describing the type of business or service provided or manufactured.
    f. Business owner's name of an individual or partnership or business name if a business entity.
    g. Business owner's home address if an individual or address of business entity.
    h. Number of employees of business.
    i. Building and/or site information.
    j. A notice that the application is a public record and that the City shall exempt from disclosure information of a personal nature to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records and other applicable laws.
The license shall specify:
    a. Name of the business for which the license is issued.
    b. Registered business site address.
    c. Owner name.
    d. Type of licenses held.
    e. Amount of license fees paid.
    f. License account number.
    g. Expiration date of license.
    h. Business mailing address.
The manager may revoke or refuse to issue or renew a business license if the business does not comply with other City code provisions.

5.04.061 Transfer or Assignment of License.
If a person sells or transfers a business for which a license has been paid, the license is transferable to the new owner after receipt of the handling fee established by Council resolution. The handling fee shall be accompanied by a new license application. The new owner will retain the old license number, transferred to the new business name (if applicable). Issuance of the transferred license will occur after all department approvals.

5.04.071 Expiration of License.
Licenses issued under Section 5.04.051 shall be valid for one license year.

5.04.081 Late Payment Charge.
A late payment fee shall be charged to all accounts for each 30 days in which the license fees are not paid after the original bill is mailed. The amount of the fee shall be established by Council resolution. The unpaid license fee, including late payment charges, constitutes a debt to the City which the manager may initiate legal action to collect.

5.04.091 Failure to Obtain License.
Failure to obtain a license required by Chapter 5.04 is a violation of this Chapter. Any violation of this Chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 4, 2006; Ord. 9-2003, 2003)

Chapter 5.08 BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES

Sections:
5.08.010     Contract with Multnomah County to share in business income tax revenue.
5.08.020     Ordinance 1-1975 non-operative while agreement with County is in effect.
5.08.030     Agreement with county not to affect other city ordinances.

5.08.010 Contract with Multnomah County to share in business income tax revenue.
The City of Wood Village ordains as follows, and the Wood Village City Council meeting in duly and regularly constituted session, does express its intent to contract with Multnomah County, Oregon, to share in business income tax revenue collected by the county under the terms and provisions of Section 11 of Multnomah County Ordinance No. 121, as amended, and does authorize the Mayor and City Recorder to execute such agreement or understanding as may be required to accomplish this purpose. (Ord. 5-1977 § 4, 1977)

5.08.020 Ordinance 1-1975 non-operative while agreement with County is in effect.
The City of Wood Village does further ordain that Ordinance 1-1975 of this city, which is an ordinance relating to the imposition of business licenses for revenue; providing for the procedures, issuance, administration and collection thereof and related matters as adopted by the city on February 12, 1975, be and it is amended to provide that to the extent said ordinance is in conflict with the intent and understanding of the revenue sharing program between Multnomah County and this City, as set forth in Exhibit “A,” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the City Recorder's office, and accepted by this ordinance; that said Ordinance 1-1975 shall be non-operative and the provisions thereof shall not be in force or effect or administered so long as the revenue sharing agreement or understanding between Multnomah County and this City, as hereinabove set forth, or similar and successive or amendatory agreement shall be in effect. (Ord. 5-1977 § 5, 1977)

5.08.030 Agreement with county not to affect other city ordinances.
That the understanding and agreement between this City and Multnomah County concerning a sharing of revenue derived from the Multnomah County business income tax shall in no way, limit, abridge or otherwise modify or amend any of the provisions of Wood Village Ordinance 9-1975 (hotel/motel regulatory ordinance), Ordinance 4-1959 (mobile home/trailer court regulatory ordinance), Ordinance 1-1977 (apartment, multiple dwelling regulatory ordinance), or any other ordinance of this city now in effect. (Ord. 5-1977 § 6, 1977)

Chapter 5.10 REGULATION OF PAYDAY LENDING

Sections:
5.10.010     Purpose.
5.10.015     Interpretation.
5.10.020     Definitions.
5.10.030     Permits.
5.10.040     Administrative Authority.
5.10.050     Payment of Principal Prior to Payday Loan Renewal.
5.10.060     Cancellation of Payday Loan.
5.10.070     Payment Plan for a Payday Loan.
5.10.080     Remedies.
5.10.090     Appeals.
5.10.100     Complaints.
5.10.110     Severability.

5.10.010 Purpose.
The City finds that, in order to minimize the detrimental effects that certain payday lending practices have on individuals and families, payday lenders should require payment of a portion of the original loan amount prior to the renewal of a payday loan, borrowers should be able to cancel a payday loan, and borrowers should be able to convert a payday loan into a payment plan.

5.10.015 Interpretation.
This Chapter shall be interpreted in conformity with the laws and regulations of the State of Oregon.

5.10.020 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter unless the context requires otherwise:
A. “Borrower” means a natural person who receives a payday loan.
B. “Cancel” means to annul the payday loan agreement and, with respect to the payday loan agreement returning the borrower and the payday lender to their financial condition prior to the origination date of the payday loan.
C. “Manager” means the Wood Village City Manager or the Manager’s designee.
D. “Payday Lender” means a “lender” in the business of making payday loans as defined in ORS 725.600.
E. “Payday Loan” means a payday loan as defined by state law.
F. “Principal” means the original loan proceeds advanced for the benefit of the borrower in a payday loan excluding any fee or interest charge.

5.10.030 Permits.
Within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance enacting this Chapter, any Payday Lender operating in the City of Wood Village shall apply for and obtain a permit to operate as a Payday Lender. Permits shall be required for each location a lender operates in the City of Wood Village and shall be renewed annually. The application shall be in a form to be determined by the Manager. The Manager shall require the Payday Lender to report its fee schedule in the Payday Lenders permit application. No person shall operate a Payday lending business or loan any funds as a Payday Loan without a current permit to do business issued by the City of Wood Village. The annual cost for the permit shall be as set forth in Council resolution.

5.10.040 Administrative Authority.
A. The Manager is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this Chapter. The Manager shall have the power to investigate any and all complaints regarding alleged violations of this Chapter. The Manager may delegate any or all authority granted under this Section to any City officer employee or agent.
B. The Manager is authorized to adopt and enforce administrative rules interpreting and applying this Chapter. The Manager or designee shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law to support decisions.
C. Prior to adoption of a new administrative rule, the Manager shall give notice to any interested parties of the terms of the proposed rule, and shall conduct a public hearing to consider public comment. Public notice shall be given when administrative rules have been adopted.
    1. At the public hearing, the Manager or designee shall hear oral and written testimony concerning the proposed rule. The Manager shall have the power to establish and limit the matters to be considered at the hearing, to prescribe procedures for the conduct of the hearing, to hear evidence, and to preserve order.
    2. The Manager shall adopt, modify or reject the proposed rule after considering testimony received during the public hearing.
    3. Unless otherwise stated, all rules shall be effective upon adoption by the Manager. All rules adopted by the Manager shall be filed with the City Recorder. Copies of all current rules shall be available to the public upon request.
    4. Notwithstanding subsections 1 and 2 of this Section, the Manager may adopt an interim rule without prior public notice upon a finding that failure to act promptly may result in serious prejudice to the public interest or the interest of the affected parties. Such interim rules shall detail the specific reasons for such prejudice. Any interim rule adopted pursuant to the paragraph shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days.
D. Inspection of Record. The City of Wood Village reserved the right to review and/or copy the records of any Payday Lender for purposes of auditing or complain resolution. Such records shall be made available for inspection during normal business hours within 24 hours of written notice by the Manager or its designee.

5.10.050 Payment of Principal Prior to Payday Loan Renewal.
A Payday Lender may not renew a Payday Loan unless the Borrower has paid an amount to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal of the original Payday Loan, plus interest on the remaining balance of the Payday Loan. The Payday Lender shall disclose this requirement to the Borrower in a minimum of bold 12 point type.

5.10.060 Cancellation of Payday Loan.
A. A Payday Lender shall cancel a Payday Loan without any charge to the Borrower if prior to the close of the business day following the day on which the Payday Loan originated, the Borrower:
    1. Informs the Payday Lender in writing that the Borrower wishes to cancel the Payday Loan and any future payment obligations; and
    2. Returns to the Payday Lender the un-cashed check or proceeds given the Borrower by the Payday Lender or cash in amount equal to the principal amount of the Payday Loan.
B. A Payday Lender shall disclose to each Borrower that the right to cancel a Payday Loan as described in this section is available to the Borrower. The Payday Lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12 point type.

5.10.070 Payment Plan for a Payday Loan.
A. A Payday Lender and a Borrower may agree to a payment plan for a Payday Loan at any time.
B. A Payday Lender shall disclose to each Borrower that a payment plan described in this section is available to the Borrower after the maximum amount of renewals allowed by state law. The Payday Lender shall disclose this requirement to the Borrower in a minimum of bold 12 point type.
C. After a Payday Loan has been renewed to the maximum amount allowed by state law, and prior to default on the Payday Loan, a payday Lender shall allow a borrower to convert the Borrower’s Payday Loan into a payment plan. Each payment plan shall be in writing and acknowledged by both the Payday Lender and the Borrower.
D. The Payday Lender shall not assess any fee, interest charge or other charge to the Borrower as a result of converting the payday loan into a payment plan.
E. The payment plan shall provide for the payment of the total of payments due on the Payday Loan over a period of no fewer than 60 days in three or more payments. The Borrower may pay the total of payments due on the payment plan at any time. The Payday Lender may not assess any penalty, fee or other charge to the Borrower for early payment on the payment plan.
F. A Payday Lender’s violation of the terms of a payment plan entered into with a Borrower under this section constitutes a violation of the Chapter. If a Payday Lender enters into a payment plan with a Borrower through a third party that is representing the Borrower, the Payday Lender’s failure to comply with the terms of the payment plan constitutes a violation of this Chapter.

5.10.080 Remedies.
A. Failure to comply with any part of this Chapter or the administrative rules may be punishable by civil penalties. The Manager may impose a civil penalty of up to $1500.00 for a substantial violation of this Chapter or the administrative rules. A substantial violation is a violation having an impact on the public that informal compliance methods fail to resolve. Each substantial violation may be assessed a separate civil penalty.
B. Civil penalties shall be payable to the City of Wood Village
C. Civil remedies. Nothing in the Section is intended to prevent any person from pursuing any available legal remedies
D. No civil penalties shall be assessed within 60 days of the effective date of this ordinance.

5.10.090 Appeals.
Any person upon whom a civil penalty has been imposed, or who has been directed by the Manager to resolve a complaint, may appeal the Manager’s decision for review by the Wood Village City Council.

5.10.100 Complaints.
The Manager shall have the authority to investigate any and all complaints alleging violation of this Chapter or administrative rules.
A. The Manager may receive complaints from Borrowers by telephone or in writing. Within a reasonable time, the Manager shall forward the complaint by telephone or in writing to the Payday Lender it concerns for investigation.
B. The Payday Lender shall investigate the allegations of the complaint and report the results of the investigation and the proposed resolution of the complaint to the Manager by telephone or in writing within two (2) business days from initial contact by the Manager.
C. If the proposed resolution is not satisfactory to the Manager, the Payday Lender shall proceed to resolve the complaint directly with the Borrower according to the resolution proposed to the Manager.
D. If the proposed resolution is not satisfactory to the Manager, the Manager shall conduct an independent investigation of the alleged complaint and propose an alternative resolution of the complaint. If the Payday Lender accepts the proposed alternative resolution and offers it to the Borrower, the complaint shall be final. If the Payday Lender refuses to accept and implement the proposed alternative resolution it shall be subject to remedies as provided by Section 5.10.080. In the event of imposition of remedies, the Payday Lender may appeal as provided in Section 5.10.090.

5.10.110 Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter, or its application or any person or circumstance is declared invalid or unenforceable the remainder of the Chapter and its application to other person and circumstances, other than that which has been held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected, and the affected provision of the Chapter shall be severed. (Ord. 3-2006, 2006)

Chapter 5.16 AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Sections:
5.16.010     Person defined.
5.16.020     Operator's license or permit required.
5.16.030     Operator license and/or permit fees.
5.16.040     License or permit fee to be waived when.
5.16.050     License or permit application.
5.16.060     License or permit issuance.
5.16.070     Contents of application.
5.16.080     Payment and pro-rating schedule.
5.16.090     Contents of license—Display of license required.
5.16.100     License or permit not transferable.
5.16.110     License or permit does not waive any law.
5.16.120     Refund when—Revocation of license—Appeal.
5.16.130     Seizure of amusement device when—Disposal—Hearing.
5.16.140     Fees to be deposited in general fund.
5.16.150     Violation—Penalty.

5.16.010 Person defined.
The term “person” as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean and include any person, co-partnership, association or corporation. (Ord. 3-1981 § 1, 1981)

5.16.020 Operator's license or permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession and to operate for gain, electronic and “amusement type” vending machines and games, including pinball machines and shuffleboards, within the city, without first securing from the City, an operator's license or permit therefor. (Ord. 3-1981 § 2, 1981)

5.16.030 Operator license and/or permit fees.
The operator license and/or permit fee for each class of amusement device or machine to be licensed and regulated shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 8-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 13-2004 § 1, 2004)

5.16.040 License or permit fee to be waived when.
In the discretion of the City Council, the license or permit fee set forth in Section 5.16.030 may, upon written application of the operator of the particular machine or machines concerned, be waived, provided that all proceeds from the machine(s) operation can be shown to be donated to a recognized charitable or nonprofit organization recognized as such by the State of Oregon or the federal government. Such exemption from payment of the license or permit fee(s) as herein set forth, shall be granted only upon appropriate resolution of the City Council following hearing therebefore and upon receipt from the concerned charitable or nonprofit organization's written confirmation of its willingness and intent to receive and apply such revenue to its authorized pursuits. Such fee exemption must be requested and renewed yearly, and the concerned machine operator must submit to the city yearly, an itemization of funds received and remitted to the participating charitable and/or not for profit organization from the operation of such machine(s). The fee exemption here granted shall be continued only during such period that the conditions hereinabove set forth are met and may be terminated for cause by the City Council at any time. It is incumbent upon the machine operator concerned to advise the City of any circumstances which could cause such permit to become inappropriate. All other conditions and requirements of this chapter shall remain applicable and the concerned operator must comply therewith. A charge shall be set by Council resolution to meet the administrative costs of such fee waiver program. (Ord. 8-2005 § 2, 2005; Ord. 5-1983 § 1, 1983)

5.16.050 License or permit application.
Application for a Wood Village operator license or permit shall be made by those affected by this chapter to the City Recorder, upon suitable blanks furnished by the City; said application shall be made prior to such person engaging in the operation of the aforesaid devices or machines, provided, however, that those persons presently having in their possession and/or operating such a device or machine within the city limits at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which device or machine is being operated under a current license or permit, shall be permitted to continue such possession and operation until the expiration thereof. (Ord. 3-1981 § 4, 1981)

5.16.060 License or permit issuance.
All operator licenses and/or permits as herein defined, shall be issued for the calendar year. No license shall be issued for more than a year or for less than a year unless otherwise provided herein. Application for renewal of license or permit previously issued by the City for the possession and/or operation of any amusement device or machine or amusement vending device or machine covered by this or other applicable ordinance of the City, shall be made to the City Recorder prior to the expiration date stated on said license, and shall be accompanied by the annual license and/or permit fee. (Ord. 13-2004 § 1, 2004; Ord. 3-1981 § 5, 1981)

5.16.070 Contents of application.
Every person required to secure a license and/or permit under the terms herein set forth, shall designate in his application the particular place in which the particular amusement device or machine herein regulated and licensed shall be possessed or operated; said application shall also set forth the trade or business in which the applicant is engaged, the applicant's full name and home address, and a statement as to whether said device or machine is owned, leased or rented or on loan, and if so leased, rented or on loan, the name and address of the person so leasing, renting or lending said device or machine to applicant. (Ord. 3-1981 § 6, 1981)

5.16.080 Payment and pro-rating schedule.
The full annual fee for each license or permit, new or renewal, shall be paid at the time of making application therefore, provided further, that should application for a new license be made and license issued between April 1st and June 30th, three-fourths of the annual fee shall be charged; if between July 1st and September 30th, one-half the annual fee shall be charged; and if between October 1st and December 31st, one-fourth of the annual fee shall be charged. The date upon which the license is issued shall be controlling and such pro-rating shall refer only to the calendar year for which the license is issued and not apply when application is made for a license and/or permit renewal. (Ord. 8-2005 § 3, 2005; Ord. 13-2004 § 1, 2004)

5.16.090 Contents of license—Display of license required.
Each license issued as herein provided, shall contain the name, residence and place of business of the licensee or permittee; the particular machine or device for which the permit is issued and the amount paid for said permit or license. Each license or permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business of said licensee or upon the particular device or machine. No license or permit shall be considered valid unless signed by the Wood Village City Recorder and have the expiration date noted thereon. (Ord. 3-1981 § 8, 1981)

5.16.100 License or permit not transferable.
No license or permit granted or issued under any other provisions of this chapter shall be in any manner or way assignable or transferable, or authorize any person other than is therein mentioned or named to operate said particular device or machine. (Ord. 3-1981 § 9, 1981)

5.16.110 License or permit does not waive any law.
Payment of the license fee or permit fee as herein set forth and the issuance of license or permit hereunder shall not be deemed to permit or authorize the person to whom such license or permit is granted to engage in any activity prohibited by the City, nor to waive any provision of law or ordinance now or hereafter enacted regulating or prohibiting conduct of any nature within the city or the possession or operation of any amusement device or machine to which this chapter applies. (Ord. 3-1981 § 10, 1981)

5.16.120 Refund when—Revocation of license—Appeal.
No rebate, refund or other return to the licensee or permittee hereunder shall be made at any time for any reason of any portion of the license or permit fee paid; provided, however, the City shall have the right to revoke any and all licenses issued hereunder, for good reason, at its discretion, upon notice duly given to the licensee or permittee, and in such case the unused portion of the permit or license fee heretofore paid to the City shall be returned. Any licensee or permittee whose license is revoked under the provisions of this section shall have the right to hearing before the City Council upon application therefore within ten days of revocation of license. (Ord. 3-1981 § 11, 1981)

5.16.130 Seizure of amusement device when—Disposal—Hearing.
Any person allowing a machine or device as herein set forth to be set up or located in his place of business or on his controlled premises without proper license or permit being displayed therefore, shall be liable for the license or permit fee notwithstanding the contention that such machine is owned or operated by some other person. Pinball, shuffleboard or other amusement device or machine or any amusement vending device or machine not so licensed as herein provided shall be subject to seizure by any police officer or agent of the City, and if so seized shall be held by the City Recorder, together with the contents thereof until such license fee or permit be paid. At the time of such seizure, the owner or operator of the machine or device shall, if known, be notified. Anytime thereafter within thirty (30) days of such seizure, any person claiming such machine or device shall be given a hearing by the City Recorder with reference to license or permit fee liability hereunder. Unless hearing is applied for within thirty (30) days, the City Recorder is authorized to dispose of such machine or device, applying the proceeds thereof and the contents of the machine to the payment of the license or permit fee provided for herein. If application be made to the City Recorder for a determination of license or permit fee liability, a hearing shall be arranged within ten days of said application and determination made thereof by the City Recorder. Appeal from the decision of the City Recorder may be made to the City Council if written application is made within ten days of said decision. The machine or device concerned shall not be released until such determination is final and the decision of the City Recorder shall be considered final if no appeal be made within the time hereinabove set forth therefore or written waiver of appeal is delivered to the City Recorder. (Ord. 3-1981 § 12, 1981)

5.16.140 Fees to be deposited in general fund.
All license and/or permit fees and moneys collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be deposited and placed in the general fund of the City. (Ord. 3-1981 § 13, 1981)

5.16.150 Violation—Penalty.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, including the failure to obtain license and/or permit as herein required, or the falsification of information required in the application therefore or the possession or operating of such a device or machine as herein set forth, or any person who shall in any other manner fail to comply with any other requirements or provisions herein set forth commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code (Ord. 4-2006 § 4, 2006; Ord. 3-1981 § 14, 1981)

Chapter 5.20 RENTAL LICENSE FEE

Sections:
5.20.010     Definitions.
5.20.015     Rental License Form and Application.
5.20.020     Rental license fee.
5.20.025     Inspection.
5.20.030     License term.
5.20.035     Transfer of License.
5.20.040     Exemptions.
5.20.050     Due date, returns and payments.
5.20.060     Failure to Obtain License.

5.20.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
“Apartment” means the building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other; a three-plex shall be considered an apartment except in the instance where one unit is occupied by the owner thereof.
“License Year” The license year defined by this chapter shall be a calendar year commencing on the first day of January in each year and ending the thirty-first day of December of that same year.
“Manager” means the City Manager or his/her designee.
“Owner” means the current owner of real property as shown in the property records of Multnomah County, Oregon.
“Person” means any natural person or any partnership, corporation, company, trust or other legal entity.
“Property Management Company” means any person that manages real property on behalf of the owner.
“Residential rental unit” means a dwelling containing one or more separate living quarters, one or more of which is used for a rental unit, but not including a hotel, motel, mobile home or trailer park or similar structure or space or portions thereof wherein occupancy is for less than a thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 10-2003, 2003; Ord. 1-1977 § 1, 1977)

5.20.015 Rental License Form and Application.
A. In order to obtain or renew a residential rental property license, the owner or property management company must submit an application to the City containing the following information concerning each residential rental property that they own in the City:
    1. (a) The owner(s) name, address, telephone number(s), fax number and email address, if applicable; (b) The name, address, telephone number(s), fax number and email address of the property management company, if applicable; (c) Address of the residential rental property and the number of rental units in it; (d) Whether the owner resides in the residential rental property; and (e) The number and specific unit identification of Section 8 rental units administered by the Housing Authority of Portland in the residential rental property, if any.
    2. The owner or property management company must certify the truthfulness and accuracy of the information that is provided in the residential rental property license application. The owner or property management company must certify that all tenants in the property have received information provided by the City for tenant evaluation of their property. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

5.20.020 Rental license fee.
There shall be imposed an annual fee upon the business of renting residential units as that term is herein defined. The annual fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Residential rental property shall be deemed to be operated/rented and subject to the provisions of this Chapter if any unit within the property has been occupied by the tenant within the prior twelve (12) months. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 10-2003, 2003; Ord. 1-1977 § 2, 1977)

5.20.025 Inspection.
If tenants identify issues or provide to the City a request, an inspection of property may be conducted. The requirements and procedures for a residential rental inspection shall comply with Chapter 8.22, Residential Rental Property Inspections. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

5.20.030 License term.
The annual license fee here imposed shall be for a calendar year as herein defined under license year unless suspended or revoked for noncompliance. The license may be renewed annually following payment of the requisite license fees and compliance with any inspection requirements.
A full license fee shall be required for each residential rental unit which is maintained and held for such purpose for more than a one hundred eighty (180) day period during said license year; a residential rental unit which is held and made available for such purpose for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or less during said license year shall be subject to a pro-rated license fee equal to one-half of the charge indicated herein for each residential rental unit. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 1-1977 § 3, 1977)

5.20.035 Transfer of License.
A Rental License issued by the City is transferable to a new owner. The new owner will retain the old license number, transferred to the new owner’s name, if applicable. The Council may establish a Transfer of License fee set by resolution. The receipt of a Transfer of License fee shall be accompanied by a new rental property license application. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

5.20.040 Exemptions.
Those businesses subject to the payment of the Wood Village hotel/motel tax as set forth and defined under Ordinance 9-1975, codified in Chapter 3.08, shall be exempt from the payment of the fees provided herein. (Ord. 10-2003 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1-1977 § 1, 1977)

5.20.050 Due date, returns and payments.
The fee imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the person, firm, association, corporation or beneficial owner maintaining residential rental units as herein defined. Such payments as set forth herein shall be payable to the City on or before the first day of January of each year in which the license fee herein imposed shall be applicable, or within twenty-nine (29) days following the applicability hereof which shall be defined to mean twenty-nine (29) days following the first day such residential rental units are offered for occupancy for a fee. Forms shall be provided by the manager for the computation of the license fee here required. The manager shall issue receipt evidencing payment of said license fee. (Ord. 10-2003 § 5, 2003; Ord. 1-1977 § 1, 1977)

5.20.060 Failure to Obtain License.
Failure to obtain a license required by Chapter 5.20 is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. Any Rental License may be revoked by the City for noncompliance with Chapters 5.20 or 8.22 of the Code. Continuing to operate residential rental units without obtaining a valid Rental License after revocation is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 4-2006 § 5, 2006; Ord. 10-2003, 2003)

Chapter 5.24 SECONDHAND DEALERS

Sections:
5.24.010     County authorized to enforce County Ordinance 647 Section 3 in the city.
5.24.020     City departments authorized to furnish information to county.

5.24.010 County authorized to enforce County Ordinance 647 Section 3 in the city.
In accordance with ORS 190.010 and ORS 206.345 and the intergovernmental agreement between the City of Wood Village and Multnomah County Sheriff's office for law enforcement services as approved annually, the City of Wood Village does authorize Multnomah County, its agents and representatives, to enforce within the city limits of Wood Village, Multnomah County Ordinance No. 647 Section 3, dated March 22, 1990. (Ord. 6-1995 (part), 1995)

5.24.020 City departments authorized to furnish information to county.
The appropriate departments of the City are authorized to furnish to Multnomah County such information as may be pertinent to the application and enforcement of Multnomah County Occasional Secondhand Dealers and Secondhand Dealers Ordinance (MCC 6.81) within Wood Village to assure that optimum control and regulation of the conduct of secondhand dealers is accomplished. (Ord. 6-1995 (part), 1995)

Chapter 5.26 TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE

Sections:
5.26.010     Purpose.
5.26.020     Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights-of-way.
5.26.030     Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.
5.26.040     Definitions.
5.26.050     Registration of Telecommunications Carriers.
5.26.060     Construction Permit Required.
5.26.070     Construction Pursuant to Permit.
5.26.080     Restoration of Public Rights-of-Way and City Property.
5.26.090     Performance and Completion Bond.
5.26.100     Location of Telecommunications Facilities.
5.26.110     Telecommunications Franchise.
5.26.120     Franchise Renewal.
5.26.130     Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise.
5.26.140     Revocation.
5.26.150     General Franchise Terms.
5.26.160     General Provisions.
5.26.170     Privilege Tax.

5.26.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to Comply with the provisions of the 1996 Tele-communications Act as they apply to local governments, tele-communications carriers and the services those carriers offer;
B. Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision of telecommunications services;
C. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to business institutions and residents of the City;
D. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of the City for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis and conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights-of-way held in trust by the City;
E. Assure that the City's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and the use of the public rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
F. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and its residents for permitting private use of the public rights-of-way;
G. Assure that all tele-communications carriers providing facilities and/or services within the City, or passing through the City, register and comply with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City; and
H. Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens;
I. Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development.

5.26.020 Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights-of-way.
A. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all public rights-of-way within the City under authority of the City charter and state law.
B. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.
C. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each public right-of-way whether the City has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The City has jurisdiction and regulatory management of each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure, or other means.
D. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the City. The City grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.
E. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a public right-of-way by the City is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the City to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.
F. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to a public health or safety emergency.

5.26.030 Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.
A. The fees and costs provided for in this Ordinance, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this Ordinance, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local, and City charges as may be levied, imposed, or due from a telecommunications carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of telecommunications services.
B. The City has determined that any fee provided for by this Ordinance is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI Sections II and IIb of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners, and these fees are not new or increased fees.
C. The fees and costs provided for in this Ordinance are subject to applicable federal and state laws.

5.26.040 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
Aboveground Facilities - see "Overhead Facilities."
Affiliated Interest - shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.
Cable Act - shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
Cable Service - is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.
City - means the City of Wood Village, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the City's behalf.
City Council - means the elected governing body of the City of Wood Village, Oregon.
Control or Controlling Interest - means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
City Property - means and includes all real property owned by the City, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the City, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this Ordinance.
Conduit - means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.
Construction - means any activity in the public rights-of-way resulting in physical change thereto, including excavation or placement of structures, but excluding routine maintenance or repair of existing facilities.
Days - means calendar days unless otherwise specified.
Duct - means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.
Emergency - has the meaning provided for in ORS 401.025.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC - means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services, and providers on a national level.
Franchise - means an agreement between the City and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public rights-of-way and utility easements within the City for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.
Grantee - means the person to which a franchise is granted by the City.
Oregon Public Utilities Commission or OPUC - means the statutorily created state agency in the State of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation, and administration of certain telecommunications carriers as set forth in Oregon Law, or its lawful successor.
Overhead or Aboveground Facilities - means utility poles, utility facilities, and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
Person - means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.
Private Telecommunications - Network means a system, including the construction, maintenance, or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not for resale, directly or indirectly. "Private telecommunications network" includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.
Public Rights-of-Way - include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas. This definition applies only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest, or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas for telecommunications facilities. "Public rights-of-way" shall also include utility easements as defined below.
State - means the State of Oregon.
Telecommunications – means the transmission between and among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
Telecommunications Act - means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq.) and as hereafter amended.
Telecommunications Carrier - means any provider of telecommunications services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities within the City.
Telecommunications Facilities - means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier.
Telecommunications Service - means two way switched access and transport of voice communications but does not include: (a) services provided by radio common carrier; (b) one way transmission of television signals; (c) surveying; (d) private telecommunications networks; or e) communications of the customer which take place on the customer side of on premises equipment.
Telecommunications System - see "Telecommunications Facilities" above.
Telecommunications Utility - has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(l).
Underground Facilities - means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for "Overhead Facilities."
Usable Space means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.
Utility Easement - means any easement granted to or owned by the City and acquired, established, dedicated, or devoted for public utility purposes.
Utility Facilities - means the plant, equipment, and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant, and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the City and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services.

5.26.050 Registration of Telecommunications Carriers.
A. Purpose: The purpose of registration is:
    1. To assure that all telecommunications carriers who have facilities and/or provide services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City.
    2. To provide the City with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers who offer to provide telecommunications services within the City, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the City.
    3. To assist the City in the enforcement of this Ordinance and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the City.
B. Registration Required: Except as provided in Section D hereof, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the City, and all telecommunications carriers that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within the City, shall register. The appropriate application and license from: (a) the Oregon Public Utility Commission (PUC); or (b) the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) qualify as necessary registration information. Applicants also have the option of providing the following information:
    1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the name, address, and telephone number of the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration information.
    2. The name, address, and telephone number for the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee to be contacted in case of an emergency.
    3. A description of the registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the City, a description of the telecommunications facilities that the registrant intends to construct, and a description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide to persons, firms, businesses, or institutions within the City.
    4. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination, or receipt of the telecommunications services provided, or to be provided, by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business license requirements. A copy of the business license or the license number must be provided.
C. Registration Fee: Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. The fee should be no higher than necessary to cover the City’s costs in processing the registration.
D. Exceptions to Registration: The following telecommunications carriers are excepted from registration:
    1. Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated exclusively for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state.
    2. A private telecommunications network, provided that such network does not occupy any public rights-of-way of the City.

5.26.060 Construction Permit Required.
A. General: No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation, or operation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in Chapter 5.26, and with all applicable codes, rules, and regulations.
B. Construction-Codes: Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules, and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code.
C. Construction Permits: No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in 5.26.060(G) of this Ordinance. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way:
    1. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first filed a registration statement with the City pursuant to 5.26.050 of this Ordinance; and if applicable,
    2. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to 5.26.110 through 5.26.150 of this Ordinance.
D. Permit Applications: Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the City and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans, and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
    1. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.
    2. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.
    3. The location and route of all facilities to be installed aboveground or on existing utility poles.
    4. The location and route of all new facilities on or in the public rights-of-way to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.
    5. The location of all of applicant's existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk, or right-of-way.
    6. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way, and description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.
E. Applicant's Verification: All permit applications shall be accompanied by the verification of a registered professional engineer, or other qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant, that the drawings, plans, and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules, and regulations.
F. Construction Schedule: All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the City.
G. Construction Permit Fee: Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. Such fees shall be designed to defray the costs of City administration of the requirements of this Ordinance.
H. Issuance of Permit: If satisfied that the applications, plans, and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this Ordinance and the franchise agreement, the City shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions, or regulations affecting the time, place, and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.

5.26.070 Construction Pursuant to Permit.
A. Notice of Construction: Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the City not less than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or construction in the public rights-of-way.
B. Compliance with Permit: All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The City and their representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.
C. Non-complying Work: Subject to the notice requirements in 5.26.100(D), all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Ordinance, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee. The City is authorized to stop work in order to assure compliance with the provision of this Ordinance.
D. Completion of Construction: The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the City rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within City rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been approved by the appropriate City official as contemplated by 5.26.060(F). The City should allow reasonable extensions due to delays caused by inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstances not within the control of the permittee.
E. As Built Drawings: If requested by the City for a necessary public purpose, the permittee shall furnish the City with up to two (2) complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the City as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. These plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer or designee within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, in a format mutually acceptable to the permittee and the City.

5.26.080 Restoration of Public Rights-of-Way and City Property.
A. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or City property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to the condition in which the property existed prior to construction as determined by the City Engineer or designee.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee's sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule may be subject to approval by the City.
C. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to good order and condition, the City shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the City shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.
D. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares, and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle, or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property.

5.26.090 Performance and Completion Bond.
Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond, letter of credit, or other form of surety acceptable to the City equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of constructing permittee's tele-communications facilities within the public rights-of-way of the City, shall be provided before construction is commenced.
A. The surety shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the City, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.
B. The surety shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City:
    1. Timely completion of construction;
    2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes, and standards;
    3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City;
    4. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction; and
    5. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands, or liens for labor, material, or services provided in connection with the work.

5.26.100 Location of Telecommunications Facilities.
A. Location of Facilities: All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed, and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:
    1. Whenever all existing electric utilities, cable facilities, or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the City, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way must also locate its telecommunications facilities under-ground.
    2. Whenever all new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities, or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the City, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the City and consistent with applicable state and federal law.
B. Interference with the Public Rights-of-way: No grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the City, by the general public, or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with City codes, ordinances, and regulations.
C. Relocation or Removal of Facilities: Except in the case of an emergency, within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City, a grantee shall, at no expense to the City, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the City shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
    1. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.
    2. The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.
    3. The public interest.
D. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized tele-communications system, facility, or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the City shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities and/or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the City. Both parties are required to participate in good faith negotiations on such issues. A tele-communications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
    1. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications franchise.
    2. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the City. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of ninety (90) days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced. The City shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the telecommunications carrier before concluding that a facility is abandoned. A facility may be abandoned in place and not removed if there is no apparent risk to the public safety, health, or welfare.
    3. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the appropriate prior authority at the time of installation.
    4. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications franchise or other legally sufficient permit.
E. Coordination of Construction Activities: All grantees are required to make a good faith effort to cooperate with the City.
    1. By January 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the City with a schedule of their known proposed construction activities in, around, or that may affect the public rights-of-way.
    2. If requested by the City, each grantee shall meet with the City annually or as determined by the City, to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way. At that time, City will provide available information on plans for local, state, and/or federal construction projects.
    3. All construction locations, activities, and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the City Engineer or designee, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption, or damages.

5.26.110 Telecommunications Franchise.
A. Telecommunications Franchise: A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the City.
B. Application: Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise must register as a telecommunications carrier and shall file an application with the City which includes the following information:
    1. The identity of the applicant.
    2. A description of the telecommunications services that are to be offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities.
    3. Engineering plans, specifications, and a network map in a form customarily used by the applicant of the facilities located or to be located within the public rights-of-way in the City, including the location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
    4. The area or areas of the City the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build out to the entire franchise area.
    5. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services proposed.
    6. An accurate map showing the location of any existing tele-communications facilities in the City that applicant intends to use or lease.
C. Application and Review Fee:
    1. Subject to applicable state law, applicant shall reimburse the City for such reasonable costs as the City incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.
    2. An application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited with the City as part of the application filed pursuant to 5.26.110(B) above. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise.
D. Determination by the City: The City shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
E. Rights Granted: No franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall convey any right, title, or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term, and upon the conditions stated in the franchise agreement.
F. Term of Grant: Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.
G. Franchise Territory: Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the City to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas, and may include the entire city.
H. Franchise Fee: Each franchise granted by the City is subject to the City's right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the City and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement and applicable state and federal laws.
I. Amendment of Grant: Conditions for amending a franchises:
    1. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way of the City which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this Ordinance.
    2. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the City shall grant an amendment without further application.
    3. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this Ordinance.

5.26.120 Franchise Renewal.
A. Renewal Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this Ordinance shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the City for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
    1. The information required pursuant to 5.26.110(B) of this Ordinance.
    2. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the City and the grantee.
B. Renewal Determinations: Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under Section A hereof, the City shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for non renewal.
    1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
    2. The legal ability of the applicant.
    3. The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's existing and proposed facilities.
    4. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the franchise agreement.
    5. Applicable federal, state, and local telecommunications laws, rules, and policies.
    6. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest.
C. Obligation to Cure As a Condition of Renewal: No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this Ordinance, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the City.

5.26.130 Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise.
Ownership or control of a majority interest in a telecommunications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned, or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation, or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.
1. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the franchise.
2. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial, and other requisite qualifications to own, hold, and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this Ordinance.
3. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the City for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the City in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications franchise.
4. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise, system, or integral part of a system without prior approval of the City under this Section or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise.

5.26.140 Revocation.
A. Revocation or Termination of Franchise: A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the City may be revoked for the following reasons:
    1. Construction or operation in the City or in the public rights-of-way of the City without a construction permit.
    2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
    3. Failure to comply with 5.26.130 herein with respect to sale, transfer, or assignment of a telecommunications system or franchise.
    4. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the City.
    5. Abandonment of tele-communications facilities in the public rights-of-way.
    6. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Ordinance.
    7. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees, or costs when and as due the City under this Ordinance.
    8. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
    9. Violation of material provisions of this Ordinance.
    10. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.
B. Notice and Duty to Cure: In the event that the City believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the City shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to furnish evidence that:
    1. Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
    2. Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
    3. It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.
C. Public Hearing: In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the City as provided in Section B hereof, the City Manager may refer the apparent violation or non compliance to the City Council. The City Council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
D. Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions: If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this Ordinance, or of a franchise agreement, the City Council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors. Whether:
    1. The misconduct was egregious.
    2. Substantial harm resulted.
    3. The violation was intentional.
    4. There is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
    5. There is a history of overall compliance.
    6. The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted, or cured.
E. Other City Costs: All grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefore, reimburse the City for all reasonable direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal, or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement consistent with applicable state and federal laws.

5.26.150 General Franchise Terms.
A. Facilities: Upon request and unless already provided by grantee, each grantee shall provide the City with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way.
B. Damage to Grantee's Facilities: Unless directly and proximately caused by negligent, careless, wrongful, willful, intentional, or malicious acts by the City, and consistent with Oregon law, the City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public rights-of-way of the City as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the City, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom.
C. Duty to Provide Information: Except in emergencies, within sixty (60) days of a written request from the City, each grantee shall furnish the City with the following:
    1. Information sufficient to demonstrate that grantee has complied with all requirements of this Ordinance.
    2. All books, records, maps, and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and intervals.
D. Service to the City: The City may request the grantee to provide telecommunications services to the City. Upon such request, the grantee will make available to the City the price lists and tariffs for its service offerings and will thereafter provide any ordered service to the City on the same basis as for any other person for a like and contemporaneous service under substantially similar circumstances.
E. Compensation for City Property: If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy City property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the City.
F. Cable Franchise:
Telecommunication carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the cable franchise requirements of the Mt. Hood Cable Regulatory Commission, of which the City is a member.
G. Leased Capacity: A grantee shall have the right, without prior City approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided that the grantee shall notify the City that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee.
H. Grantee Insurance: Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as coinsured:
    1. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than
        a. Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
        b. Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,
        c. Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for all other types of liability.
    2. Automobile liability for owned, non owned, and hired vehicles with a limit of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for each person and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for each accident.
    3. Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000).
    4. Comprehensive form premises operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard, and products completed hazard with limits of not less than Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000).
    5. The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
    "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City of such intent to cancel or not to renew."
    6. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence that the grantee meets the requirements of this Section.
    7. As an alternative to the insurance requirements contained herein, a grantee may provide evidence of self insurance subject to review and acceptance by the City.
I. General Indemnification: Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify, and hold the City and its officers, employees, agents, and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses, and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless, or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act, or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this Ordinance or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this Ordinance.
J. Performance Surety: Before a franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the City, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this Ordinance, including any costs, expenses, damages, or loss the City pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits of the City. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required by 5.26.090 for construction of facilities.

5.26.160 General Provisions.
A. Governing Law: Any franchise granted under this Ordinance is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States and the State of Oregon, and the Ordinances and Charter of the City.
B. Written Agreement: No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing.
C. Nonexclusive Grant: No franchise granted under this Ordinance shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
D. Severability and Preemption: If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant, or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations, or decision, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant, and portion of this Ordinance shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules, or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this Ordinance, then the provision shall be read to be preempted only to the extent required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect. and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the City.
E. Penalties: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs.
F. Other Remedies: Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the City may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this Ordinance.
G. Captions: The captions to sections throughout this Ordinance are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Ordinance.
H. Compliance with Laws: Any grantee under this Ordinance shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of any franchise granted under this Ordinance, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance, and operation of a telecommunications system.
I. Consent: Wherever the consent of either the City or of the grantee is specifically required by this Ordinance or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld.
J. Application to Existing Ordinance and Agreements: To the extent that this Ordinance is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing ordinance and franchise agreements, this Ordinance shall apply to all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right-of-way for telecommunications.
K. Confidentiality: The City agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 8-2000, 2000)

5.26.170 Privilege Tax.
A. Privilege Tax Imposed: A privilege tax of seven percent (7%) is hereby imposed on the Gross Revenues of any telecommunications carrier using the City's streets, alleys, or highways that is not operating under a franchise granted pursuant to WVC 5.26.110 to 5.26.160.
B. Definition of Gross Revenue: As used in this section, "gross revenue" means those revenues derived from exchange access services, as defined in ORS 403.105, less net uncollectibles from such revenues.
C. Payment Dates: Tax payments shall be made quarterly on or before 45 days after the end of the preceding quarter.
D. Audit: The City shall have the right to conduct or cause to be conducted an audit of gross revenues as defined herein for the purpose of ascertaining whether the telecommunications carrier's tax payments have met the requirements of this Section. Any undisputed differences of payment due either the City or the telecommunications carrier following audit shall be payable within thirty (30) days after written notice to the affected party.
E. Interest on Late Payments: In the event the privilege tax is not paid on or before the due date, interest shall be owed on the tax in the amount of nine percent (9%) from the date due to the date on which payment is received by the City, compounded daily.
F. Franchise Required: Nothing in this section is intended to excuse a telecommunications carrier from the obligation to obtain a franchise as provided in this Chapter or from compliance with any other requirement of Chapter 5.26. Acceptance of privilege tax payments pursuant to this Section is not to be construed as a waiver by the City of such requirements. At any time, the City may demand a telecommunications carrier to obtain the required franchise requirement or remove its facilities from the City's streets, alleys and highways, as provided in Chapter 5.26. (Ord. 12-2004 section, 2004)

Chapter 5.28 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS

Sections:
5.28.010     Definitions.
5.28.020     Local Office and Office Hours.
5.28.030     Telephone Answering Standards.
5.28.040     Installations, Disconnections, Outages and Service Calls.
5.28.050     Notice Requirements.
5.28.060     Billing.
5.28.070     Reporting.

5.28.010 Definitions.
A. "Normal Business Hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, Normal Business Hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and some weekend hours.
B. "Normal Operating Conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
The listed examples are not meant to be all-inclusive, and operators must adjust their staffing and operations to maintain compliance with the service standards in anticipation of events and conditions within their control.
C. "Service Interruption" means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels.

5.28.020 Local Office and Office Hours.
A. Customer service center and bill payment locations shall be open at least during Normal Business Hours and shall be conveniently located.
B. Cable operator customer service centers must be adequately staffed and able to respond to subscribers and the public not less than 50 hours per week, with a minimum of nine hours per day on weekdays and five hours on weekends excluding legal holidays.
C. As used herein, "adequately staffed" means customer service representatives are available to respond to customers who come to the service center in at least the following ways:
    1. To accept payments;
    2. To exchange or accept returned converters or other company equipment;
    3. To respond to inquiries; and
    4. To schedule and conduct service or repair calls.

5.28.030 Telephone Answering Standards.
A. Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
    1. The cable operator shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which shall be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Cable operators shall provide, in at least one prominent location, an easily identifiable telephone number for local customer service on all bills, account statements or statements of service to its subscribers.
    2. Toll-free telephone lines, either staffed or with answering capability, providing at least emergency referral information, must be operational 24 hours a day, including weekends and holidays.
    3. Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during Normal Business Hours.
    4. After Normal Business Hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after Normal Business Hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day.
B. Telephone Answering Time. Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time under Normal Operating Conditions, measured on a calendar quarterly basis.
C. Busy Phones. Under Normal Operating Conditions, the customer shall receive a busy signal less than three (3) percent of the time.

5.28.040 Installations, Disconnections, Outages and Service Calls.
Under Normal Operating Conditions, each of the following standards shall be met no less than ninety five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
A. Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed.
B. The cable operator shall begin work on Service Interruptions promptly and no later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin working on other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. Working on Service Interruptions must be more than merely acknowledging it.
C. The appointment alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities shall be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during Normal Business Hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of Normal Business Hours for the express convenience of the customer.
D. The cable operator shall be deemed to have honored a scheduled appointment under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives within the agreed upon time and, if the subscriber is absent when the technician arrives, the technician leaves written notification of arrival and return time, and a copy of that notification is kept by the cable operator.
E. A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. Rescheduling an appointment is an independent obligation and does not necessarily excuse the missed appointment.
F. If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted. The appointment shall be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.

5.28.050 Notice Requirements.
A. Notice of Services, Procedures. The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of service installation, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
    1. Products and services offered;
    2. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;
    3. Installation and service maintenance policies;
    4. Instructions on how to use the cable service;
    5. Channel positions programming carried on the system; and,
    6. Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office.
B. Notice of Change in Service. Customers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the cable operator shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by this Section V. Notwithstanding any other provision of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations, a cable operator shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee, or any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any Federal agency, State, or franchising authority on the transaction between the operator and the subscriber.

5.28.060 Billing.
A. Bill Format. Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
B. Response to Complaint. In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within seven (7) calendar days.
C. Refunds. Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but no later than either the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier. The cable operator may withhold a refund pending the customer returning the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated.
D. Credits. Credits for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.

5.28.070 Reporting.
Cable operators shall file reports to the Mt. Hood Cable Regulatory Commission on a quarterly basis showing the performance of their customer service standard obligations under this section. The quarterly reports shall cover the periods January 1 through March 31; April 1 through June 31; July 1 through September 31; and October 1 through December 31. The reports shall be due no later than 30 days following the end of a quarter. The reports shall include, at a minimum, figures and narrative indicating performance of the standards for:
A. Local office hours;
B. Telephone call center hours;
C. Telephone answering;
D. Busy signal statistics;
E. Standard installations;
F. Service interruptions;
G. Appointment windows: made, cancelled, and rescheduled;
H. Notice requirements;
I. Billing (refunds and credits); (Ord. 6-2001 § 1 new, 2001)

Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:
6.04         Animal Control Code
6.06         Keeping of Chickens

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL CODE

Sections:
6.04.010     County authorized to enforce County Ordinance No. 909 as amended in the city.
6.04.020     Conflicting city regulations suspended.
6.04.030     City departments authorized to furnish information to county.

6.04.010 County authorized to enforce County Ordinance No. 909 as amended in the city.
In accordance with the provisions of ORS 190.010 and ORS 203.040, the City of Wood Village does authorize Multnomah County, its agents and representatives, to enforce within the city limits of Wood Village, Multnomah County Ordinance No. 909, as amended (Multnomah County Code 8.10). (Ord. 4-1998 § 1, 1998)

6.04.020 Conflicting city regulations suspended.
The City Council does further direct that during such time as the application and enforcement of said Multnomah County Animal Control Ordinance (Ordinance 909 as amended to date) is authorized within the city limits of Wood Village, that the provisions of Wood Village Ordinance No. 20 and other City ordinances and regulations dealing with the licensing, regulation and/or control of dogs, exotic, wild or dangerous animals or livestock, which may be in conflict with the said Multnomah County Animal Control Ordinance, are hereby suspended and shall not be in force unless and until such time as this City shall terminate its agreement and understanding with Multnomah County as hereinabove set forth. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1, 1998)

6.04.030 City departments authorized to furnish information to county.
The appropriate departments of the City are authorized to furnish to Multnomah County such information as may be pertinent to the application and enforcement of Multnomah County Animal Control Ordinance MCC 8.10 within Wood Village to assure that optimum control and regulation of the various animals concerned therein is maintained so as to promote the maintenance of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the city and the protection of properties located therein. (Ord. 4-1998 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 6.06 KEEPING OF CHICKENS

Sections:
6.06.010     Definitions.
6.06.020     Keeping of Chickens.
6.06.030     Enclosures.
6.06.040     Permit Required.
6.06.050     Inspection.
6.06.060     Penalty.

6.06.010 Definitions.
A. “Chicken” means the common domestic fowl (Species: gallus gallus domesticus).
B. “Coop” means a small enclosure for housing chickens.
C. “Rear Yard” means a space extending the full width of the lot or parcel between the primary residence building and the rear lot or parcel line.
D. “Run” means a fully enclosed and secure area where chickens may feed or exercise.
E. “Single Family Dwelling” means a detached building on a single lot or parcel designed for occupancy by one family.

6.06.020 Keeping of Chickens.
1. A person may keep three or fewer chickens on any one lot or parcel zoned LR 7.5. On the lot or parcel where the three or fewer chickens are kept the person must have a single family dwelling in which the person resides.
2. No person shall keep roosters.

6.06.030 Enclosures.
1. Chickens shall be kept in an enclosed coop or run at all times. The coop and run shall be located in the rear yard of the lot or parcel.
2. The coop and run shall be kept in good repair, capable of being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of vermin, and obnoxious smells and substances.
3. The coop shall have at least two (2) square feet of floor space per chicken.
4. The run shall be constructed of quality material and fully enclosed including the top and sides, and properly secured to prevent unauthorized access.
5. The coop, run and chickens therein shall not violate the nuisance code chapter 8.16 or disturb neighboring residents due to noise, odor, damage, or threats to public health.
6. The coop and run shall not violate the City’s Zoning and Development code Title 16.
7. The coop and run shall be located at least 25 feet from residences on a different lot or parcel, and at least 10 feet from all property lines.

6.06.040 Permit Required.
1. No person shall keep chickens under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a permit to keep chickens on their lot or parcel, and paying the permit fee prescribed.
2. The permit fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

6.06.050 Inspection.
The City Manager or designee is authorized to make inspections pursuant to Wood Village Municipal Code 8.16 Public Nuisances, or Title 16 Zoning and Development.

6.06.060 Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this article may enforced pursuant to Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 1.06 Code Enforcement with a maximum penalty of $1,000 per day per offence. (Ord. 8-2011, 2011)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:
8.04         Adult Care Homes
8.08         Alarm Systems
8.12         Illegal Dumping and Littering
8.16         Public Nuisances
8.18         Property Maintenance
8.20         Graffiti Nuisance Abatement
8.22         Residential Rental Property Inspections
8.24         Solid Waste Management
8.28         Fire and Life Safety Code

Chapter 8.04 ADULT CARE HOMES

Sections:
8.04.010     County authorized to enforce County Ordinance No. 503 in the city.
8.04.020     City departments authorized to furnish information to county.
8.04.030     Amendment to intergovernmental agreement with county authorized.

8.04.010 County authorized to enforce County Ordinance No. 503 in the city.
In accordance with the provisions of ORS 190.010 and ORS 203.040, the City of Wood Village does authorize Multnomah County, its agents and representatives, to enforce within the city limits of Wood Village, Multnomah County Ordinance No. 503, dated February 27, 1986, amending Ordinance No. 392 (MCC 8.90.005—8.90.260) entitled “The Multnomah County Adult Care Home Licensure Ordinance,” which is an ordinance providing for the licensure and inspection of adult care homes, the establishment of fees for licenses, requiring the posting of the resident's bill of rights, and establishing penalties and authorizing appropriate civil action, which adult care home licensure ordinance is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, marked Exhibit “A,” on file in the City Recorder's office and by this reference made a part hereof at this point. (Ord. 4-1986 § 1, 1986)

8.04.020 City departments authorized to furnish information to county.
The appropriate departments of the City are authorized to furnish Multnomah County such information as may be pertinent to the application and enforcement of the Multnomah County Adult Care Home Licensure Ordinance within the City of Wood Village to assure that optimum application thereof is obtained so as to promote the maintenance of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the residents and inhabitants of the city, and in particular the protection of those individuals to which such adult home care program may be applicable. (Ord. 4-1986 § 2, 1986)

8.04.030 Amendment to intergovernmental agreement with county authorized.
The Mayor and City Recorder of Wood Village are authorized to execute an amendment to the intergovernmental agreement with Multnomah County authorized by City Ordinance No. 6-1983, this amendment to be substantially similar to the amendment, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “B,” on file in the City Recorder's office, for Multnomah County administration and enforcement within the City of Wood Village of all of the provisions of the Multnomah County Adult Care Home Licensure Ordinance No. 503. (Ord. 4-1986 § 3, 1986)

Chapter 8.08 ALARM SYSTEMS

Sections:
8.08.010     Title.
8.08.020     Purpose and scope.
8.08.030     Definitions.
8.08.040     Alarm permits required; Payments of Permit Fees and Other Fees.
8.08.050     Excessive False Alarms; Fees.
8.08.060     No response; Reinstatement Fee.
8.08.070     Special permits.
8.08.080     Alarm Business Responsibilities.
8.08.090     Automatic Dialing Device; Certain Interconnections Prohibited.
8.08.100     Hearing.
8.08.110     Statistics.
8.08.120     Enforcement and penalties.

8.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the burglary and robbery alarm ordinance. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010; Ord. 5-1989 § 1, 1989)

8.08.020 Purpose and scope.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the mechanical reliability and the proper use of alarm systems to prevent unnecessary police emergency responses to false alarms and thereby to protect the emergency response capability of the county from misuse.
B. This chapter governs burglary and robbery alarm systems, requires permits, provides for fines for excessive false alarms, no response to alarms, provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of administration.

8.08.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Alarm business” means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, monitoring, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, monitored, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.
“Alarm system” means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which law enforcement officers are alerted.
“Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind which owns, controls or occupies any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
“Automatic dialing device” means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to elect a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. Such a device is an alarm system.
“Bureau of Emergency Communications” means the City/County facility used to receive emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the appropriate police departments utilizing the bureau.
“Burglary or Robbery alarm system” An automated or manual alarm signaling a robbery, an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
“Commercial Alarm System” An alarm system maintained in a building, structure or facility that is not primarily used as the alarm system user’s residence.
“Economically disadvantaged person” means a person receiving public assistance and/or food stamps.
“False alarm” means an alarm signal, eliciting a response by police when a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist. An alarm is not considered false if the alarm signal is caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user, including but not limited to, evidence of a crime or an attempted crime: notice from the alarm business that the system is faulty before the officers arrives on the scene or notice from alarm business operator that the system or the user erred before an officer arrives on the scene.
“Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
“No response” means law enforcement officers will not be dispatched to investigate a report of an alarm signal.
“Residential Alarm System” An alarm system maintained in a building, structure or facility that is primarily used as the alarm system user’s residence.
“Sheriff” means the Sheriff of Multnomah County or designee.
“System becomes operative” means when the alarm system is capable of eliciting a response by police. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010; Ord. 5-1989 § 3, 1989)

8.08.040 Alarm permits required; Payments of Permit Fees and Other Fees.
A. Every alarm user, including but not limited to users of any non-monitored alarm systems, must obtain an alarm user's permit for each system from the Sheriff within thirty (30) days of the time when the system becomes operative. Users of commercial alarm systems having both manual and automated alarm capabilities must obtain separate permits for each function.
B. Permits issued under this subchapter expire annually on March 31. Application for an alarm user’s permit fees as set by City Council resolution must be filed with the Sheriff each year. The permit fees must be postmarked to the Sheriff on or before midnight March 31 of the preceding permit year.
C. If a residential alarm user is over the age of sixty-five (65) and/or is an economically disadvantaged person and is a resident of the residence and if no business is conducted in the residence, a user's permit may be obtained from the Sheriff according to subsections (A) and (B) of this section for a reduced fee as set by City Council resolution.
D. Each permit will bear the signature of the Sheriff and must be physically upon the premises where the alarm system is used and available for inspection by the Sheriff. If a law enforcement officer is dispatched to investigate a report of an alarm signal and a valid permit is not available for inspection, the alarm user must pay a fee set by City Council resolution and obtain a permit within thirty (30) days of the date of dispatch.
E. A late fee in an amount set by City Council resolution will be charged in addition to the fees provided in this subsection to an alarm user who fails to obtain a permit within thirty (30) days after the system becomes operative, or who is more than 30 days delinquent in renewing a permit.
F. If an alarm user fails to renew a permit within thirty (30) days after the permit expires, the Sheriff will notify that alarm user that, unless the permit is renewed and all the fees are paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice, the Sheriff will initiate the no response process. If the permit is not renewed and all fees paid, the Sheriff will initiate the no response process and make notifications as provided in section 060 of this chapter. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010; Ord. 8-2004, 2004; Ord. 5-1991 § 1(A), 1991)

8.08.050 Excessive False Alarms; Fees.
A. After the fourth alarm within the permit year there may be no law enforcement response to subsequent alarms without approval of the Sheriff.
B. After a false alarm, the Sheriff will also notify the alarm user that:
    1. After the fourth false alarm within the permit year, there may be no response to subsequent alarms without the approval of the Sheriff; and
    2. Approval of the Sheriff may only be obtained by applying in writing for reinstatement. The Sheriff may reinstate the alarm user upon finding that reasonable effort has been made to correct the false alarms.
C. Fees for excessive false alarms will be assessed by the Sheriff as set by City Council resolution.
D. The Sheriff will notify the alarm user of a false alarm, the fees for excessive false alarms, if any, and the consequences of the failure to pay the fees. The Sheriff will also inform the alarm user of his or her right to appeal the validity of the false alarm to the Sheriff, as provided in section 100 of this chapter.
E. A late fee in an amount set by City Council resolution will be charged in addition to the fee provided in subsection (C) to an alarm user who fails to pay the excessive false alarm fees within 30 days after receipt of the notice.
F. If a residential alarm system user fails to pay the excessive false alarm fee within thirty (30) days after the date of the initial notice and no appeal hearing is pending, the Sheriff will notify the alarm user that unless all fees are paid within seven (7) days of the date of notice, the Sheriff will initiate the no response process. If payment is not received within seven (7) days of the date of the notice, the Sheriff will initiate the no response process, make notifications as provided in section 060 of this chapter and may initiate the enforcement of penalties.
G. If a commercial alarm system user fails to pay the excessive false alarm fee within thirty (30) days after the date of the initial notice and no appeal hearing is pending, the Sheriff will notify the alarm user that unless all fees are paid within seven (7) days of the date of notice, the Sheriff may initial the no response process. If payment is not received within seven (7) days of the date of notice, the Sheriff may initial the no response process, make notifications as provided in section 060 of this chapter and may initial the enforcement of penalties. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010)

8.08.060 No response; Reinstatement Fee.
A. When the no response process is initiated, the Sheriff shall notify:
    1. The Bureau of Emergency Communications
    2. The alarm system user; and
    3. Any alarm business employed by the alarm user if known.
B. No response to an alarm will begin seven (7) days after the date of the notices provided above unless a written request for a false alarm validity hearing has been made in the time period required under section 100 of this chapter.
C. If a no response order is issues by the Sheriff, a reinstatement fee as set by City Council resolution will be charged in addition to any outstanding fees, fines and penalties. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010)

8.08.070 Special permits.
A. The following alarm users will be issued a special permit:
    1. An alarm user required by federal, state, county or municipal law to install, maintain and operate an alarm system; or
    2. A federal, state or local government unit.
B. Special permit holders must pay the regular permit fee, but are not subject to the no response procedure under this subchapter.
C. Any alarm user that is a federal government agency is not liable for false alarm fees. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010)

8.08.080 Alarm Business Responsibilities.
Every alarm business must:
A. Furnish the user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm properly and to obtain service for the alarm at any time.
B. Notify the user of the requirement to get a permit and give the user a copy of the application necessary to obtain a permit.
C. Give the user a copy of the county notice that outlines the consequences of generating false alarms, including possible fees, penalties and fines, and such other forms and notices as required by the county.
D. Maintain a list of all active alarm customers and provide this list to the Multnomah County Sheriff’s Office upon request. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010)

8.08.090 Automatic Dialing Device; Certain Interconnections Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any telephone line assigned to a government agency related to emergency response, and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice from the Sheriff that an automatic dialing device is so programmed. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010; Ord. 5-1989 § 10, 1989)

8.08.100 Hearing.
A. An alarm user who wants to appeal validity of a false alarm determination may appeal to the Sheriff for a hearing. The appeal must be in writing and must be received by the Sheriff within fourteen (14) days from the date of notice. Failure to contest the determination in the required time period results in a conclusive presumption for all purposes that the alarm was false.
B. If a hearing is requested, the Sheriff will notify the alarm user of the time and place of the hearing no later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date, which date will not be more than twenty-one (21) nor less than ten (10) days after the request for hearing is received unless agreed upon by both parties.
C. The hearing shall be before a hearings officer. The alarm user has the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross-examination. If the Sheriff determines that the alleged false alarms occurred in a permit year, the Sheriff will issue written findings waiving, expunging or entering a false alarm designation on an alarm user's record at the Sheriff’s discretion. The decision of the Sheriff’s or hearings officer is final. If false alarm designations are entered on the alarm user's record, the Sheriff may find that the alarm user is liable for hearing costs including costs of the hearings officer and witnesses and will pursue fee collection as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010)

8.08.110 Statistics.
Subject to the requirements of confidentiality, the Sheriff will develop and maintain statistics within reason for the purpose of evaluating member service for the municipalities and alarm companies. (Ord. 8-2010, 2010; Ord. 5-1989 § 13, 1989)

8.08.120 Enforcement and penalties.
Violation of this Chapter is a civil infraction pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code (Ord. 8-2010, 2010; Ord. 4-2006 § 6, 2006; Ord. 5-1989 § 16, 1989)

Chapter 8.12 ILLEGAL DUMPING AND LITTERING

Sections:
8.12.010     Title and area of application.
8.12.020     Refuse hauling regulations—Penalty.
8.12.030     Dumping and littering prohibited—Penalty.
8.12.040     Departmental enforcement.
8.12.050     Hearings officer.
8.12.060     Complaint.
8.12.070     Notice of hearing.
8.12.080     Answer—Default.
8.12.090     Hearing.
8.12.100     Review.
8.12.110     Enforcement of fines and costs.

8.12.010 Title and area of application.
This chapter shall be known as the Wood Village illegal dumping ordinance, and may be so pleaded and referred to as such and shall apply to all areas within the city. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(A), 1993)

8.12.020 Refuse hauling regulations—Penalty.
A. No person, firm, association or corporation shall transport, carry, direct or hire another party to transport or carry, any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse, or recyclable material, in or on a motor vehicle or trailer, upon a public road in the city, unless contained in such a way as not to cause any part thereof to be deposited upon a public roadway or private property in the city other than that of the concerned party.
B. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating subsection A of this section commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 7, 2006; Ord. 8-1993 § 1(B), (C), 1993)

8.12.030 Dumping and littering prohibited—Penalty.
A. No person, firm, association or corporation shall throw, place, or direct another person, firm, association or corporation to throw or place upon the private land or waters of another person, firm or corporation, or upon public lands or waters, or upon any public place, any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse or material for recycling, other than in receptacles provided therefor, without such party's permission.
B. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating subsection A of this section shall be subject to:
    1. A civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code.; and
    2. An award of costs to reimburse the City for the actual expenses including: the administrative costs of investigation, adjudication and collection; and cleanup and disposal. (Ord. 4-2006 § 8, 2006; Ord. 8-1993 § 1(D), (E), 1993)

8.12.040 Departmental enforcement.
A. Enforcement of the regulatory enactments and policies set forth in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the department of public works.
B. The department shall:
    1. Investigate refuse hauling, dumping and littering violations;
    2. Issue complaints;
    3. Reach settlements:
    4. Represent the city before the hearings officer or court except where legal counsel is necessary; and
    5. Collect fines and costs. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(F), 1993)

8.12.050 Hearings officer.
A. The Wood Village City Council may appoint a hearings officer who shall serve at the will of the City Council. The city may enter into an intergovernmental agreement to share an officer with other jurisdictions.
B. The hearings officer may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, concerning the conduct of complaint hearings, which shall be subject to Council review for good cause upon written request. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(G), 1993)

8.12.060 Complaint.
A. A proceeding before the hearings officer or District Court may be initiated only as specifically authorized in this chapter.
B. A proceeding shall be initiated only by the Department filing a complaint with the hearings officer or District Court in substantially the following form:COMPLAINT REGARDING
CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE
ORDINANCE (8-1993) VIOLATION
City of Wood Village, Petitioner,
v.
_________________________________
Respondent(s)
1. Address of respondent(s):
___________________________
2. Address or location of the alleged violation:
___________________________
3. Nature of violation including Ordinance section violated:
___________________________
4. Relief sought:
___________________________
_______________
Dated
_____________________
Signed
_____________________ Title & Department
(Ord. 8-1993 § 1(H), 1993)

8.12.070 Notice of hearing.
The hearings officer or District Court shall cause notice of the hearing to be given to the respondent(s) either personally or by certified or registered United States mail. The notice shall contain a statement of the time, date and place of the hearing. A copy of the complaint shall be attached to the notice. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(I), 1993)

8.12.080 Answer—Default.
A. A respondent who is served with a complaint and notice of hearing for a violation specified herein shall answer such complaint and notice of hearing by either:
    1. Personally appearing to answer at the time and place specified therein; or
    2. Mailing or otherwise delivering to the place specified on or before the assigned appearance date, a signed copy of the complaint and notice of hearing, together with a check or money order in the amount of the scheduled fine listed therein. If the violation is denied, a hearing will be held on the date assigned in the notice of hearing.
B. If the respondent alleged to have committed the violation fails to answer the complaint and notice of hearing by the appearance date indicated thereon, which shall be no sooner than seven days from the date of the notice of hearing, or appear at a hearing as provided herein, the hearings officer or court shall consider the city's case as presented and shall issue its final order either declaring a default and levying an appropriate fine and costs or declaring the complaint insufficient and dismissing the case. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(J), 1993)

8.12.090 Hearing.
A. Unless precluded by law, informal disposition of any proceeding may be made, with or without a hearing, by stipulation, consent order, agreed settlement, or default.
B. The City shall not be represented before the hearings officer by the city attorney or other counsel except as provided below. A respondent charged with a violation may be represented by legal counsel provided that five working days' written notice of such representation is received by the City. The City may have legal counsel represent it when respondent is represented by counsel. The hearings officer or court may for good cause waive this notice requirement in individual cases or reset the hearing for a later date.
C. The City must prove the violation occurred by a preponderance of the admissible evidence.
D. A name of a person, firm or corporation found on rubbish, trash, garbage, debris or other refuse, or recyclable material, in such a way that it denotes ownership of the items, constitutes rebuttable evidence that the person, firm or corporation has violated the refuse hauling, dumping and/or littering regulations.
E. The hearings officer or District Court shall place on the record a statement of the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications made to the hearings officer or court on a fact in issue during the pendency of the proceedings. The hearings officer or court shall notify the parties of the communication and of their right to rebut such communications.
F. The hearings officer or court shall have the authority to administer oaths and take testimony of witnesses. Upon the request of the respondent, or upon his or her own motion, the hearings officer or court may issue subpoenas in accordance with the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure, which shall apply to procedural questions not otherwise addressed by this chapter.
    1. If the respondent desires that witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena, respondent shall so request in writing at any time five days prior to the scheduled hearing. A fifteen-dollar ($15.00) deposit for each subpoena issued shall accompany each request.
    2. Subject to the same five-day limitation, the City may also request that certain witnesses be ordered to appear by subpoena.
    3. The hearings officer or court may waive the five-day limitation for good cause.
    4. Witnesses ordered to appear by subpoena shall be allowed the same fees and mileage as allowed in civil cases and payment of such allowance shall be the responsibility of respondent and the city in accordance with the party who requested the witnesses' appearance.
    5. If a fine is declared in the final order, the order may provide that the respondent shall reimburse the City for any witness fees incurred attributable to the hearing.
G. Each party shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit evidence on his, her or its own behalf.
H. After due consideration of the evidence and arguments, the hearings officer or court shall determine whether the violation alleged in the complaint has been established.
    1. When the determination is that the violation has not been established, an order dismissing the complaint shall be entered.
    2. When the determination is that the violation has been established, or if an answer admitting the infraction has been received, an appropriate order shall be entered.
    3. The final order issued by the hearings officer or court shall set forth both findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall contain the amount of the fine and costs imposed and instructions regarding payment.
    4. A true copy of the order shall be delivered to each party or to their attorneys of record, personally or by mail.
I. A tape recording shall be made of the hearing. The tape shall be retained for at least ninety (90) days following the hearing or final judgment on appeal. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(K), 1993)

8.12.100 Review.
A. Any motion to reconsider the order of the hearings officer or court must be filed within ten days of the original order or it may not be heard.
B. Any aggrieved party, including the City, may appeal a final adverse ruling to the Circuit Court as provided by ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(L), 1993)

8.12.110 Enforcement of fines and costs.
A. Fines and costs are payable upon receipt of the written settlement or final order declaring the fines and costs. Fines and costs under this chapter are a debt owing to the city and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt allowed by the law.
B. The City may institute appropriate suit or legal action, in law or equity, in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of any written settlement of the department or final order of the hearings officer or District Court including, but not limited to, its suit or action to obtain judgment for any civil penalty imposed by an order of the hearings officer or court pursuant to Section 8.12.020B and/or Section 8.12.030(B)(1) and/or any assessment for costs imposed pursuant to Section 8.12.030(B)(2).
C. Fines and costs collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the general fund. (Ord. 8-1993 § 1(M), 1993)

Chapter 8.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:
8.16.140     Title.
8.16.150     Definitions.
8.16.160     Purpose.
8.16.170     Administration-Enforcement.
8.16.180     Administration - Rules and regulations.
8.16.200     Specific nuisances prohibited.
8.16.210     Chronic Nuisance Declared.
8.16.220     Abatement.
8.16.230     General Nuisance Abatement Procedure.
8.16.240     Imminent Nuisance Abatement Procedure.
8.16.250     Chronic Nuisance Abatement Procedure.
8.16.260     Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action.
8.16.270     Notice to Abate.
8.16.280     Hearings Procedure.
8.16.290     Costs and Fees.
8.16.300     Collection of Costs and Fees.
8.16.310     Classification of Offenses.
8.16.320     Violations and other Remedies.

8.16.140 Title.
This chapter shall be known as “The City of Wood Village Nuisance Control Ordinance,” and may be so pleaded.

8.16.150 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
A. “Abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle which reasonably appeared to be inoperative, wrecked, discarded, abandoned, or totally or partially dismantled.
B. “Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Wood Village or the Manager's designee.
C. “Costs of abatement” means the total expenses incurred by the City to abate the violation(s) to include but are not limited to the following: the costs for any and all contractors, materials, disposal costs, and staff time to abate a violation; title search charges; court or hearing costs; lien recording and release fees; and administrative overhead charges related to the abatement.
D. “Council” means the City Council of the City of Wood Village.
E. “Garbage” means all animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food.
F. “Liquid waste” means waste oil, septic tank pumping, liquid industrial wastes, or other similar material.
G. “Nuisance” means any annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious condition or practice causing or capable of causing an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, and welfare in the circumstances, but does not include noise. Anything defined as a nuisance in Section 8.16.200 shall be a nuisance.
H. “Owner” the current owner of real property as shown in the property records of Multnomah County, Oregon.
I. “Person” means any natural person, or any partnership, corporation, company, trust or other legal entity.
J. “Property Management Company” means any person that manages real property on behalf of the owner.
K. “Rodent” means a mouse or rat.
L. “Rubbish” means glass, metal, paper, wood, plastics, or other non-putrescible solid waste.
M. “Sewage sludge” means residual waste of sewage treatment plants, consisting of digested organic waste and indigestible solids.
N. "Sheriff" means the Multnomah County Sheriff's office or such other law enforcement agency that provides police services to the City via an intergovernmental agreement or otherwise pursuant to the authority of the City Council.
O. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a public right of way, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings, or other delineation for pedestrian travel.
P. “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, whether in solid or liquid form, except wastes produced by the human body, liquid-carried industrial waste or sewage, or sewage hauled as an incidental part of septic tank or cesspool cleaning service, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, fill dirt, sewage sludge, street refuse, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and used construction materials, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home or industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semisolid waste, dead animals, and other discarded solid materials.
Q. “Tenant” means any person who controls or possesses real property under a lease, a month-to-month tenancy, by permission by the owner, or otherwise.
R. “Vector” means any insect organism, including but not limited to flies, fleas, lice, ticks, fly maggots, and mosquito larvae, capable of bearing or carrying a disease transmittable to human beings.
S. “Vehicle” means any device which is designed or used for transporting people, goods, or property upon a public street or roadway, including but not limited to a body, engine, transmission, frame, or other major parts, motorized or non-motorized items such as trailers and boats, but does not include a device propelled by human power, such as a bicycle, or a device operated exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.160 Purpose.
The Council has determined it necessary to establish and maintain a program for the effective control and abatement of nuisances which constitute a hazard or menace to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the City and this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate that purpose.

8.16.170 Administration-Enforcement.
The Manager or Sheriff shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

8.16.180 Administration - Rules and regulations.
The Manager may adopt rules necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

8.16.200 Specific nuisances prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person, owner, occupant, and/or property management company to allow, to exist, or to permit any tenant to maintain, the following things, practices, or conditions on any property or within public rights-of-way adjacent to that property, which shall be nuisances:
    1. Junk, debris, garbage or other waste that creates a health hazard by harboring vectors or rodents or visual nuisance including but not limited to:
        a. Accumulation, collection, or storage of solid waste without prior approval of the Manager, unless the owner is licensed by lawful authority to operate a business specifically for those purposes.
        b. An abandoned, discarded or unattended icebox, refrigerator or other container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside.
    2. Vehicle parking and storage; abandoned vehicles
        a. Any vehicles not parked on an approved surface of asphalt, concrete, or ¾ minus gravel designed and constructed in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards will be considered a nuisance an subject to abatement;
        b. Any abandoned vehicle upon private or public property, unless the owner of the property is lawfully authorized to operate a business specifically for that purpose; non-recreational vehicles on any public street in excess of 48 hours will be considered abandoned and subject to abatement procedure outlined in Chapter 10.24
        c. A commercial vehicle which exceeds eight thousand pounds gross weight, twenty-one feet in length, or eight feet in height parked in the driveway or parking area in a residential zone unless it is a vehicle that is routinely on standby and necessary to use under emergency circumstances.
        d. Any vehicle or other personal property such as a trailer, boat, recreation vehicle, or pleasure craft, parked or stored in such a way as to obstruct the public sidewalk.
        e. Unlawfully parking or placing any recreational vehicle (RV) in use for but not limited to sleeping or living purposes within the city for any period of time exceeding eight hours, except in an RV park, and no cooking shall be done in an RV outside an RV park. An RV used for sleeping or living purposes may be parked in the city on private property with owner’s permission, for a period of time not to exceed ten days in a calendar year.
        f. Vehicle storage and repair in residential neighborhoods unless lawfully permitted pursuant to the Wood Village Zoning Code.
        g. Storage of a discarded vehicle upon any private property within the City unless the vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in connection with a lawfully conducted business dealing in junked or stored vehicles. For the purposes of this chapter, "discarded vehicle" includes any vehicle that does not have an affixed and unexpired license plate and is inoperative, wrecked, fully or partially dismantled, abandoned, or junked. "Discarded vehicle" also includes major parts of such vehicles, including but not limited to bodies, engines, transmissions, and rear-ends.
    3. Standing water, excess or obtrusive organic material that creates a health hazard by harboring vectors or rodents or visual nuisance including but not limited to:
        a. A pond or pool of stagnant water which emits an obnoxious odor or is a source of vector breeding or otherwise presents a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
        b. Dead or decaying trees and tree limbs that present a safety hazard to the public or to abutting property owners.
        c. Signs, hedges, shrubbery, natural growth, or other obstructions at or near intersections which hinder the view necessary for the safe operation of vehicles.
        d. Obstruction to public sidewalks or roadways by trees, bushes, roots, other natural growth, soil, or solid waste.
        e. Uncontrolled or uncultivated growth of weeds, brush, poison oak, poison ivy, tansy ragwort, or grasses over ten (10) inches in height which have the potential to offer harborage to vectors and rodents, contribute noxious pollens to the atmosphere, constitute a fire hazard, or unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of abutting public or private property.
        f. An animal carcass not buried or destroyed within twenty-four hours after death.
    4. Inorganic material, attractive nuisances, fencing, and unsecured buildings including but not limited to:
        a. Any property, whether vacant or improved buildings, residential structure, or accumulation of any materials, which is infested by vectors or rodents.
        b. Any vacant building left unsecured and unattended and accessible to the public.
        c. Any building or structure as defined in the Wood Village Building Code (Section 15.04.020) which is structurally unsafe, not provided with adequate egress, which constitutes a fire hazard, is unsanitary, or is otherwise dangerous or constitutes a health hazard to humans. This includes any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary, and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in the Building Code are hereby declared unsafe building appendages.
        d. Any premises maintaining an attractive nuisance which may prove harmful to inquisitive minors, including unsecured machinery, unsecured building materials, solid waste, insufficiently secured buildings, excavations, abandoned motor vehicles, unsecured and structurally unsound structures, or similar conditions on property.
        e. An open pit, well, quarry, cistern, excavation or other hole of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more without reasonable safeguards or barriers to prevent them from being accessible to children.
        f. Any excavation which endangers the lateral support or causes cracking, settling, or other damage to streets, sidewalks, or other public property.
        g. A fence, barrier, partition or obstruction located in a residential zone and which is partially or totally constructed with barbed wire or is electrically charged in such a manner as to transmit an electrical shock or charge upon contact.
        h. Connection of any electric, water, sewer, gas, or telephone line from any source to a motor home, travel trailer, camper, or utility trailer if any portion of such line between the connection at the termination and the point of connection at the source extends over, across, or under any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or portion thereof.
        i. Any explosive or radioactive substance unless the possession is authorized by law.
    5. Other nuisances that threaten public health or welfare
        a. Maintenance of poultry, livestock, or non-domesticated animals except for Chickens as stated in Chapter 6.06.
        b. Unlawful camping prohibited
            i. No person shall camp in any public place, public street, or right-of-way other than that designated for camping.
            ii. Camping on private residential property will not be permitted unless written permission is provided by owner and not longer for 72 hours in a 30 day period. This section does not apply to recreational vehicle use; for guidelines regarding recreational vehicles see Section 8.16.200(A)2d
        c. Any activity or behavior that requires a law enforcement response including but not limited to the following: harassment; intimidation; disorderly conduct; public indecency; prostitution; alcohol violations; offensive littering; possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances; illegal gambling; criminal mischief; curfew violations; unlawful use of a weapon; and criminal trespass.
        d. Noise. By definition noise is not considered a nuisance, however, excessive noise is addressed in Section 9.12.
        .
B. The enumeration of nuisances in subsection 8.16.200(A) of this section shall not limit the power of the Manager or Sheriff to investigate or declare any other condition a nuisance which is within the scope of Sections 8.16.150(G) of this chapter. (Ord. 6-2010, 2010; Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.210 Chronic Nuisance Declared.
When the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee receives a report or reports documenting the occurrence of three or more nuisance activities, defined in Section 8.16.200, on or within three hundred (300) feet of the property during any one hundred eighty (180) consecutive day period, the property may be declared a chronic nuisance and abated pursuant to Section 8.16.250. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.220 Abatement.
In addition to any fines, imprisonment, costs, permit revocation or other penalty that might be imposed by a court, the City may initiate abatement of the offense. Abatements are classified as follows:
General Nuisance Abatement Procedure
Imminent Nuisance Abatement Procedure
Chronic Nuisance Abatement Procedure

8.16.230 General Nuisance Abatement Procedure.
A public nuisance as defined in Chapter 8.16 shall be abated as provided in this section unless it qualifies for imminent abatement as described in section 8.16.240 or Chronic Nuisance Abatement as described in section 8.16.250.
A. See 8.16.270 for notice to abate procedures
B. See 8.16.280 for appealing violation procedures

8.16.240 Imminent Nuisance Abatement Procedure.
A condition, substance, act or nuisance that is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, may be summarily abated as provided in this section if it creates an imminent danger to life, health, or safety to people, property, wildlife, or the environment.
A. A notice to the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company is not required.
B. Costs of the abatement may be assessed as provided in Section 8.16.290.
C. A stop work order from the City to address an imminent public nuisance is a means of summary abatement. The stop work order, which is effective as of the date and time issued, shall state the nature of the violation including the citation to the applicable provisions being violated, and may contain the steps that can be taken to correct the violation. If there is a protest of a stop work order issued under this section, the stop work order shall continue in effect during the pendency of any protest. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.250 Chronic Nuisance Abatement Procedure.
A chronic nuisance as defined in Section 8.16.210 shall be abated as provided in this section. Prior to the filing of an action to abate a chronic nuisance property, the Manager or Sheriff shall provide an opportunity to the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company as defined in Section 8.16.150 to abate the chronic nuisance property voluntarily by the following procedures:
A. The Manager, Sheriff, or their designee may notify the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company in writing that the property is in danger of becoming chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain:
    1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property;
    2. A statement that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist or have occurred;
    3. A demand that the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company respond to the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee within ten (10) calendar days to discuss the nuisance activities. The Manager, Sheriff, or their designee shall offer the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company an opportunity to propose a course of action that will abate the chronic nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
B. After the notification procedure in Subsection 8.16.250(A) has been completed, if the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee receives a report documenting an additional nuisance activity on or within 300 feet of a property and determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance property, the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee shall notify the property owner, occupant, or property management company in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property.
    1. The notice of chronic nuisance shall contain:
        a. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property; for a property consisting of more than one unit, such as a duplex or apartment complex, one or more units may be specifically designated as chronic nuisance properties;
        b. A statement that the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to the finding;
        c. A demand that the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company respond to the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee within ten (10) calendar days and propose a course of action that the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee agrees will abate the chronic nuisance activities giving rise to the violation; and
        d. The disposition of any personal property that is abated under the notice, which shall be determined at the discretion of the City.
    2. Service of the notice shall be made either personally or by regular mail, addressed to the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company at such place where the notice is likely to be received. A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner of the property at the address shown on the tax rolls of Multnomah County, and/or on the occupant at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company.
    3. If the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company does not contact the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee within ten (10) calendar days of service or mailing of the notice, a copy of the notice shall be posted at the property.
C. If the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company responds as required by Subsection 8.16.250(B)(3) and stipulates with the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee that the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company will pursue a course of action that the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee may postpone referring the matter to the City Attorney. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement is reached within sixty (60) calendar days, the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee, after independently reviewing the evidence, may refer the matter to the City Attorney for consideration and presentation to the City Council.
D. When a property owner, occupant, and/or property management company responds to the Manager, Sheriff, or their designee as required by Subsections 8.16.250(A) or (B)(3), statements made in connection with that response shall not constitute an admission of any nuisance activities, but exclusion of any evidence is not required that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.260 Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action.
A. The Manager shall establish criteria, and the procedures to grant a temporary waiver of enforcement action, which will give a period of time, but no longer than six (6) months, to correct the violation(s) cited. The criteria shall include factors such as the extent and cost of the repairs, seriousness of the conditions, financial capacity of the owner, and the time of year. Requests for Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action shall be considered under the following conditions:
    1. The owner submits to the Manager a request in writing;
    2. The request includes the property address, case number, applicant’s contact information, and specifies each and every reason for the request; and
    3. The Manager may revoke the waiver if any of the conditions that allowed the owner to qualify for a waiver change. Because the waiver is granted to a specific property owner, the waiver automatically terminates upon change in ownership. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.16.270 Notice to Abate.
Unless stated otherwise the following section is to apply to the issuing of notices upon determination a nuisance exists:
A. Initial contact may be made verbally, regular mail at the last known address as listed in the County Tax Assessor’s Office, and/or posting on premises where violation has occurred or is occurring. Notice may also be sent to a security interest or lien holder having an interest in the property. The notice shall direct the owner, occupant, and/or property management company to abate the violation(s) within a period designated in the notice, but in no event more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the notice of violation and direction to abate.
    1. Imminent nuisances posing a safety hazard may be abated without notice.
    2. If the notice by mail is returned as undeliverable or delivery is refused, notice of violation shall be posted on the premises before administrative enforcement fees are imposed and/or abatement action is taken.
    3. An error in the name or address of the owner, occupant, and/or property management company or the use of a name other than that of the owner, occupant, and/or property management company shall not make the notice void, and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient. Inadvertent failure to mail a copy of the written notice of violation and direction to abate to a security interest or lien holder having interest in the property to be abated shall not make the notice void, and in such case, the posted notice shall be sufficient.
    4. Within thirty (30) calendar days after the posting and mailing of the notice or time period indicated in the notice, the owner, occupant, and/or property management company shall take all steps necessary to abate the violation(s), eliminate the condition(s) or defect(s), or show that the nuisance does not exist.
B. At or about the time of posting the premises upon which the violation exists, the Manager shall send a copy of the notice to the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company by certified or registered mail at the last known address as listed in the County Tax Assessor’s Office. Notice may also be sent to a security interest or lien holder having an interest in the property; If mailed, notice shall be sent postpaid, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the addressee’s last known address. A mailed notice shall be presumed to have been received on the second mail delivery day after mailing.
C. The notice of violation and direction to correct or abate the violation to the owner, occupant, and/or property management company shall include:
    1. The location of the property that is the subject of the complaint by commonly used street address or otherwise;
    2. Citation of the specific code sections giving rise to the alleged violation(s) and a description of the violation(s) which must be corrected;
    3. A direction to take all steps necessary to correct the violation(s) or show that the violation does not exist by the date(s) specified in the notice of violation;
    4. A statement of the time allowed to correct the violations (not more than thirty calendar days);
    5. A statement that in addition to any other enforcement action, if a violation is not corrected by the correction date specified in the notice, penalties, fines, costs, and administrative enforcement fees may be imposed on the owner, occupant, and/or property management company;
    6. A statement that the costs of abatement and administrative enforcement fees will be assessed to and become a lien on the property;
    7. A statement that unless the violation(s) are corrected by the date specified in the notice, in addition to any other enforcement action, the City may abate the violation(s) and the costs of abatement will be charged to the owner, occupant, and/or property management company;
    8. A statement of the way to contact the Manager with any questions regarding the notice;
    9. The disposition of any personal property that is abated under the notice, which shall be determined at the discretion of the City;
    10. A statement that any person who has a reasonable basis upon which to contest the violation(s) identified in the notice or the abatement action may protest the City’s notice of violation and the possible imposition of costs of abatement and administrative enforcement fees and request a hearing, by delivering written notice to the City within ten calendar days from the date the notice was mailed; and
    11. The notice of complaint and violation may also be sent by the Manager to the person, occupant, and/or property management company, if it appears to be someone other than the owner, and to the holder of any recorded or other known interest in the property, including mortgage or lien holders and insurance companies.

8.16.280 Hearings Procedure.
A. Any person who has a reasonable basis upon which to contest the violation(s) identified in the notice or the abatement action may protest the City’s notice of violation and the possible imposition of costs of abatement and administrative enforcement fees and request a hearing, by delivering written notice to the City within 10 days from the date the notice was mailed
    a. The statement of protest shall be referred to a neutral and independent hearings officer designated by the City Attorney. The hearings officer shall conduct the hearing and make all decisions concerning the protest. The hearings officer shall set a date and time for the hearing at the earliest possible opportunity and the person requesting the hearing shall be promptly notified of the time and place for hearing. Notice may be by any means of giving actual notice. Notice may also be given to any person the hearings officer determines to be an interested party in the matter. An untimely protest shall be summarily dismissed. The hearings officer or City shall have the right to reschedule a hearing at any time. The person filing the statement of protest may make a single request to reschedule the hearing. The request shall be granted if it is in writing, states the reason for the request, and is received by the City at least three (3) business days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Upon receipt of a valid hearing reschedule request, the hearings officer shall set a new hearing date and the City shall notify the person requesting the hearing.
    b. The person requesting the hearing and a representative of the City may make argument, submit testimony, cross-examine witnesses and submit rebuttal evidence on the pertinent issues, or may choose to be represented by an attorney at their own expense
    c. If requested by either party, the hearing shall be recorded in a manner that allows for written transcription to be made; in such cases the City shall retain all materials submitted at the hearing as required by state law.
    d. Failure of the person(s) requesting the hearing to appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.
    e. Within seven (7) days after the hearing, the hearings officer shall mail a copy of the order stating the hearings officer’s decision to the person requesting the hearing and to the Manager. If the hearings officer determines that the basis for protest was unreasonable or designed only to delay enforcement action, the person requesting the hearing may be made to pay the costs of the hearing, including the cost of the hearings officer. Any such costs imposed by the hearings officer shall constitute a cost of abatement and collectable under Section 8.16.290. The decision of the hearings officer is final.
    f. If the hearings officer determines that a violation does exist, the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company shall be ordered to abate the violation(s) within ten (10) calendar days after the hearings officer issues the order, unless otherwise specified in the order. The hearings officer may also order that a residential rental unit(s) may not be occupied unless and until the conditions and/or defects forming the basis of the violation(s) have been corrected as determined by reinspection.
    g. If the violation has not been fully abated within the time allowed, the Manager may cause it to be abated, and all costs of abatement may be assessed to and become a lien on the property. The Manager’s decision to proceed with abatement is entirely discretionary.
    h. A person shall not have an additional opportunity to protest and request a hearing, if the person fails to correct the violation pursuant to the hearings officer’s decision and the City issues a subsequent stop work order, notice of violation, or notice of civil penalty. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.290 Costs and Fees.
A. The City shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the City for nuisance violation abatements.
B. After violations to be corrected have been determined by the City, the City shall mail a Costs and Fees Notice to the owner, occupant, and/or property management company. The Costs and Fees Notice shall include:
    1. The total cost of abatement and any accrued enforcement fees;
    2. Notification that the costs of abatement will become a lien against the property from the date of the notice; and
    3. Notification that if the owner objects to the Costs and Fees Notice, a written protest and request for hearing may be submitted to the Manager if it is received by the City within ten (10) calendar days from the date the Costs and Fees Notice was mailed.
C. A person may object to the Costs and Fees Notice by submitting a written protest and request for hearing pursuant to Section 8.16.280.
D. A property owner shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as defined in ORS 90.100 if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after the owner or property management company was sent notice from the City or Sheriff, or their designee, of a code violation and said code violation requires the removal of the tenant in order to remedy the violation. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.300 Collection of Costs and Fees.
A. The costs and fees as listed in the Costs and Fees Notice shall be delinquent if not paid within thirty (30) days from:
    1. The date of the Costs and Fees Notice; or
    2. If a protest was timely filed, from the date on which the hearings officer makes a determination of the costs.
B. The Costs and Fees notice shall be entered in the docket of City liens pursuant to Chapter 1.06, Code Enforcement and/or recorded with Multnomah County. When entered in the City lien docket, the assessment shall constitute a lien upon the property in violation of the code. If the costs and fees are delinquent, a late payment charge shall begin to accrue from the date of the delinquency. The late payment charge shall be added to the lien.
C. Failure to pay may result in foreclosure in any manner provided by ORS 223.505 to 223.650 or otherwise provided by law.
D. An error in the name of the owner shall not void the lien, nor shall a failure to receive the Costs and Fees Notice render the lien void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011; Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.310 Classification of Offenses.
Unless otherwise provided, violations of the provisions of the Wood Village Municipal Code are classified as civil infractions pursuant to Chapter 1.06, Code Enforcement. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

8.16.320 Violations and other Remedies.
A. Violation of any section of Chapter 8.16, Public Nuisances, is a civil infraction and a penalty may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 1.06, Code Enforcement. A violation applies to the owner, occupant, and/or property management company of each property in violation. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation for which a separate fine or penalty may be assessed.
B. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person determined to be responsible for violation of any section of the Chapter 8.16 may be ordered by the court to correct the violation.
C. In addition to the procedures described in this Chapter, the City may also file in Circuit Court a citation alleging a nuisance violation under this Code, or a civil action for injunctive or other relief, as the Manager may deem to be appropriate. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

Chapter 8.18 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE

Sections:
8.18.010     Title.
8.18.020     Definitions.
8.18.030     Purpose.
8.18.035     Exterior Conditions and Derelict Structures.
8.18.040     Administration – Enforcement.
8.18.050     Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
8.18.060     Notice procedure.
8.18.070     Residential Structure Maintenance Requirements.
8.18.080     Outdoor Maintenance Requirements for All Properties.
8.18.090     Right-of-Way Obstructions.
8.18.100     Public Right-of-Way Parking.
8.18.110     Emergency Repair.
8.18.120     Weather Proofing and Screens.
8.18.130     Derelict Structures Prohibited.
8.18.140     Closing and Securing of Derelict Structures.
8.18.150     Derelict Structure Registration.
8.18.160     Residential Rental Property and Derelict Structure Complaint Process.
8.18.170     Abatement and Notice of Violation.
8.18.180     Failure to Respond to Notice of Violation.
8.18.190     Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action.
8.18.200     Requests for Adjustment of Enforcement Action Fees.
8.18.210     Violations and other Remedies.
8.18.220     Administrative Enforcement Fees.
8.18.230     Receivership Authority.
8.18.240     Coordination of Enforcement.

8.18.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The City of Wood Village Property Maintenance Code," or “PMC” and may be so pleaded.

8.18.020 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions set forth in the International Code Council Property Maintenance Code, as hereinafter amended or revised (“ICCPMC”) the following definitions shall apply to the PMC:
Where terms are not defined in the PMC or other Code section and are defined in the state building, plumbing or mechanical codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those state codes. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. Whenever the words “premises,” “building” or other similar words are stated in the PMC, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.” Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of the PMC, have the following meanings:
A. "Accessory structure" means any structure not intended for human occupancy which is located on residential property. Accessory structures may be attached to or detached from the residential structure. Examples of accessory structures include: garages, carports, sheds, and other non-dwelling buildings; decks, awnings, heat pumps, fences, trellises, flag poles, tanks, towers, exterior stairs and walkways, and other exterior structures on the property.
B. "Adjacent right-of-way" means the sidewalks and planting strips that border a specific property, as well as the near half of the streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way that border a specific property.
C. "Manager" means the Wood Village City Manager or the Manager’s designee.
“Attractive nuisance” means a condition that can attract children and be detrimental to the health or safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned buildings, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac that may prove hazardous for inquisitive minors.
D. “Boarded building” mean an unoccupied or derelict building that has been secured against entry by material such as plywood, boards or other similar material placed over openings that are designed for and/or are required for windows and doors, and which is visible off the premises and is not both lawful and customary to install on an occupied structure.
E. “Building” means any structure occupied or intended for any occupancy.
F. “Building code” means collectively, Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted and Chapter 8.28, Fire Code.
G. “Building official” means the building official of the City of Wood Village or the building official’s designee.
H. "Council" means the City Council of the City of Wood Village.
I. “Derelict Structure” means any structure left unoccupied and unsecured, partially constructed, abandoned, or maintained in a condition that is unfit for human habitation, or maintained in a condition that is an imminent threat to public health and safety.
J. “Deterioration” means a lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of a building, structure or parts thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay, neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance.
K. "Garbage" means all animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
L. "Nuisance" means any annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious condition or practice capable of causing a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare in the circumstances.
M. "Owner" means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, including the current owner of real property as shown on the latest assessment records in the Multnomah County Tax Assessor’s office, a contract vendee, or a receiver or trustee in bankruptcy.
N. “Partially constructed” means an occupied or vacant structure, or portion thereof, that has been left in a state of partial construction for more than six months or after the expiration of any building permit, or that has not had a required permit inspection within any six month period.
O. "Person" means any natural person or any partnership, corporation, company, trust or other legal entity.
“Property Management Company” means any person that manages real property on behalf of the owner.
P. "Public right-of-way" means any sidewalk, planting strip, alley, street or pathway, improved or unimproved, that is dedicated to public use.
Q. "Public vehicle parking business" means the business of offering off-street vehicle parking or storage for a fee.
R. "Residential structure" means real property and all improvements or structures on real property used or intended to be used for residential purposes.
S. "Rubbish" means glass, metal, paper, wood, plastics or other nonputrescible solid waste.
T. "Sheriff" means the Multnomah County Sheriff's office or such other law enforcement agency that provides police services to the city via an intergovernmental agreement or otherwise pursuant to the authority of the City Council.
U. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a public right-of-way, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.
V. "Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
W. “Tenant” means any person who controls or possesses real property under a lease, a month-to-month tenancy, by permission by the owner, or otherwise.
X. “Unoccupied” means vacant or not being used for a lawful occupancy.
Y. "Vehicle" means any device which is designed or used for transporting people, goods or property upon a public street or roadway, including but not limited to a body, engine, transmission, frame or other major parts, motorized or non-motorized items such as trailers and boats, but does not include a device propelled by human power, such as a bicycle or a device operated exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks.
Z. "Vehicle sales, repair or servicing business" means the business of offering new or used vehicles for sale, lease or rent, or of offering vehicle repairs or servicing. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.030 Purpose.
The City Council finds and declares that conditions that promote blight and deterioration or that create a hazard to the public health and safety, are injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public, and that the provisions of the PMC are necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The purpose of this Chapter is to:
A. Establish the property maintenance requirements applicable to all residential rental property as defined in Chapter 8.22;
B. Establish property maintenance requirements applicable to derelict structures as defined in this Chapter; and
C. Establish property maintenance requirements applicable to exterior conditions of all properties in the City. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.035 Exterior Conditions and Derelict Structures.
A. The following provisions relating to exterior conditions and derelict structures apply to all property in the City:
    1. Administrative provisions of the PMC are the following Sections: 8.18.020; 8.18.030; 8.18.040; 8.18.120; 8.18.160; 8.18.170; 8.18.180; 8.18.190; 8.18.200; 8.18.210; 8.18.220; 8.18.230; 8.18.240; 8.18.250; 8.18.260; 8.18.270; and 8.18.280.
    2. Emergency repair provision of Section 8.18.110.
    3. Weatherproofing and Screens provision of 8.18.120.
    4. Derelict Structures Provisions of Sections 8.18.130, 8.18.140, and 8.18.150.
    5. Exterior surfaces provision of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, prepared by the International Code Council, as hereinafter amended or revised (“ICCPMC”), section 304.
    6. Foundation walls provision of the ICCPMC, section 304.5.
    7. Exterior walls provision of the ICCPMC, section 304.6.
    8. Roofs and drainage provision of the ICCPMC, section 304.7.
    9. Decorative features provision of the ICCPMC, section 304.8.
    10. Windows and doors provision of the ICCPMC, section 304.13.
    11. Glazing provision of the ICCPMC, section 304.13.1
    12. Accessory structures provision of the ICCPMC, section 302.7. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.040 Administration – Enforcement.
A. Unless otherwise provided for, the City Manager shall be responsible for the ultimate enforcement of all of the provisions of the PMC. The Manager may appoint such enforcement officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as may be necessary for the administration of the PMC. For the purpose of the PMC, any person so appointed will be deemed a “code official” as defined in the ICCPMC. The Manager is authorized to designate an employee who shall exercise all the powers of the Manager during the temporary absence or disability of the Manager.
B. Where work is required to be done to correct violations under the PMC any and all permits required for such work by the Building Code shall be obtained.
C. In the event of extreme hardships involved in carrying out provisions of the PMC relating to external conditions and derelict structures, the Manager shall have the right to vary or modify the provisions of the PMC upon application by an owner provided that the spirit and intent of the law is observed and that the public health and safety is assured. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.050 Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
A. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, prepared by the International Code Council, as thereinafter amended or revised (“ICCPMC”), except as repealed or amended below, is hereby adopted as part of the PMC.
B. The following sections of the ICCPMC are repealed:
    1. Section 102.6 of the ICCPMC.
    2. Sections 103.1, 103.2 and 103.3 of the ICCPMC.
    3. Section 106 of the ICCPMC.
    4. Section 108.2 of the ICCPMC. The Derelict Structures provisions of Sections 8.18.130, 8.18.140, and 8.18.150 are adopted in its place.
    5. Section 111 of the ICCPMC.
    6. Section 304.14 of the ICCPMC.
C. The following sections of the ICCPMC are amended to read as follows:
    1. Section 101.1 Title. These Regulations shall be known as the City of Wood Village Property Maintenance Code, hereinafter referred to the “PMC.”
    2. Section 102.3 Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy and all other work required under the PMC shall be done in accordance with the following adopted procedures and provisions of the Code: Chapter, 8.28, Fire Prevention Code; Title 15, Buildings and Construction; and Title 16, Zoning and Development Code.
    3. Section 103.4 Liability. The provisions and protections of the Oregon Tort Claims Act, ORS 30.265 et. seq. shall apply to all City officials, agents and employees charged with the enforcement of the PMC. The PMC shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any non-city agent or employee, including but not limited to any owner, occupant, property management company, owner’s agent, builder, contractor, agent or employee of any builder or contractor, or any person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure or premises, for any damages to persons or property caused by defects or violations of this Code, nor shall the code enforcement agency or the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Code or any permits or certificates issued under this Code.
    4. Section 103.5 Fees. Fees charged under the PMC shall be adopted by council resolution.
    5. Section 201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in the PMC and are defined in the Codes and provisions adopted in Chapter, 8.28, Title 15, and Title 16, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those Codes.
    6. Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from invasive or noxious weeds in accordance with Chapters 8.16, Public Nuisances, and 8.18, Property Maintenance, and any action taken thereunder.
    7. Section 302.9 Defacement of Property. The owner, occupant, and/or property management company shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 8.20, Graffiti Nuisance Abatement.
    8. Section 304.3 Street Numbers. Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way as required by the Oregon Fire Code. This section shall apply if, due to deterioration or loss, the numbers must be otherwise repaired, placed or replaced.
    9. Section 304.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Glazing with holes, cracks, or that is partially or wholly missing shall be replaced within thirty (30) calendar days of the incident that caused the defect.
    10. Section 304.13 Window Sill Height. Windows in sleeping rooms that are provided to meet emergency escape or rescue requirements shall have a sill height of no more than 44 inches above the floor or above an approved, permanently installed step. The step must not exceed 12 inches in height and must extend the full width of the window. The top surface of the step must be a minimum of six feet from the ceiling above the step. Exception: Window sill heights constructed in accordance with code requirements in place at the time of construction.
    11. Section 304.13.4 Minimum Dimensions. Windows in sleeping rooms that are provided to meet emergency escape or rescue requirements shall have a minimum net clear opening at least 20 inches wide, at least 22 inches high, and, if constructed after July 1, 1974, at least five square feet in area. Exception: Window dimensions constructed in accordance with code requirements in place at the time of construction.
    12. Section 304.13.5 Ability to Open. Every window required for ventilation or emergency escape shall be capable of being easily opened and held open by window hardware. Any installed storm windows on windows required for emergency escape must be easily operable from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
    13. Section 305.3.1 Interior Dampness. Every residential rental unit, including basements, and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay, mold growth, or deterioration of the structure.
    14. Section 307 Rubbish and Garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Approved containers for rubbish and garbage shall be provided.
    15. Section 401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation prescribed in sections 402 and 403 of this code, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted, shall be permitted.
    16. Section 403.4 Process Ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts, or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. Exception: Range hoods constructed in accordance with code requirements in place at the time of construction.
    17. Section 404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants. For purposes of this section, the square footage of a single-family residential building will be based on the county assessor’s office square footage for that building. For multifamily residential buildings, the square footage shall be as shown on the property owner’s documents or the City’s records. To determine a dwelling unit’s occupancy load, the Building Official may use the following guide: divide the square footage by 225 and round any fraction to the next highest number. For example, seven occupants would be allowed in a 1,500 square foot residence.
    18. Section 505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted.
    19. Section 505.4 Water Heating Facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 120°F (49°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom, or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
    20. Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a year-round room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. Portable heating devices may not be used to meet the dwelling heat requirements of this Code. No inverted or open flame fuel-burning heater shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.
    21. Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner, occupant, and/or property management company and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a year-round temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms.
    22. Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a year-round temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
    23. Section 603.1 Mechanical Appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. Mechanical ventilation systems for range hoods and bathrooms shall be maintained in sound working order meeting manufacturer specifications for operation and function.
    24. Section 604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with Chapter 8.28, Fire Prevention Code, and Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, and single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
    25. Section 702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with Chapter 8.28, Fire Prevention Code, and Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted.
    26. Section 702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with Chapter 8.28, Fire Prevention Code, and Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted, shall be unobstructed.
    27. Section 702.3 Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily operable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by Chapter 15.04, State Building Codes Adopted.
    28. Section 704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with Chapter 8.28, Fire Prevention Code.
    29. Section 704.2 Smoke Alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
        a. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
        b. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
        c. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or a dwelling unit with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. Single or multiple–station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with Section 8.18.050. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.060 Notice procedure.
All notices shall be in writing, and may be served in person or by mail. If mailed, notice shall be sent postpaid, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the addressee's last known address. A mailed notice shall be presumed to have been received on the second mail delivery day after mailing.

8.18.070 Residential Structure Maintenance Requirements.
A. No owner shall maintain or permit to be maintained any residential structure that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. All residential structures shall be maintained to the building code requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration or repair, and shall additionally meet the minimum requirements set forth below:
    1. Maintenance of Required Facilities. All required facilities in every dwelling shall be constructed and maintained to properly and safely perform their intended function.
    2. Maintenance of Non-Required Facilities and Equipment. All non-required facilities or equipment present in a dwelling shall be maintained to prevent structural damage to the building or hazards of health, sanitation or fire.
    3. Stairs and Porches. Every stair, porch, and attachment to stairs or porches shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, including replacement as necessary of flooring, treads, risers, and stringers that evidence excessive wear and are broken, warped, or loose.
    4. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to channel rain water into approved receivers.
    5. Accessory Structures. All accessory structures on residential property shall be maintained in a structurally safe and sound manner and in good repair. Exterior steps and walkways shall be maintained free of unsafe obstructions or hazardous conditions.

8.18.080 Outdoor Maintenance Requirements for All Properties.
A. In addition to any other requirements in this code, it is the responsibility of the owner of any property, improved or unimproved, to maintain the outdoor areas of the property and adjacent rights-of-way in a manner that complies with the following requirements:
    1. Emergency access routes. Remove and keep removed all brush, vines, overgrowth and other vegetation located within 10 feet of a structure or within 10 feet of a property line which is likely to obstruct or impede the necessary passage of fire or other emergency personnel.
    2. Thickets that conceal hazards. Cut and remove and keep cut and removed all blackberry vines and other thickets when such growth is found to be:
        a. Concealing trash and debris; or
        b. Creating rat harborage; or
        c. Creating harborage for people involved in criminal activity or for products used for criminal activity.
    3. Overgrown lawn areas. Cut and remove and keep cut and removed all weeds and grass that are located in lawn areas and have a prevailing height of more than 10 inches.
    4. Storage of non-trash items. Remove, and keep removed, unless specifically authorized by ordinance to do otherwise:
        a. Accumulations of wood pallets.
        b. All firewood that is not stacked and useable. "Useable" firewood has more wood than rot and is cut to lengths of less than 36 inches.
        c. Accumulations of vehicle parts or tires.
        d. Any motor vehicle parked upon any unapproved surface.
        e. All construction materials, except those that are stored in a manner to protect their utility and prevent deterioration and are reasonably expected to be used at the site.
        f. All appliances or appliance parts except for temporary outdoor storage of appliances pending installation or pending reinstallation during remodeling when adequately protected from the elements by secure and waterproof coverings
        g. All indoor furniture except for temporary outdoor storage of such furniture pending installation or pending reinstallation during remodeling when adequately protected from the elements by secure and waterproof coverings
        h. All recycling materials except for reasonable accumulations (amounts consistent with a policy of regular removal) that are stored in a well-maintained manner.
        i. All other non-trash items which are of a type or quantity inconsistent with normal and usual use, or are likely to obstruct or impede the necessary passage of fire or other emergency personnel. (Ord. 9-2007, 2007)

8.18.090 Right-of-Way Obstructions.
A. In addition to any other requirements in this code, it is the responsibility of the owner of any property, improved or unimproved, to keep the adjacent rights-of-way free of anything that obstructs or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, unless specifically authorized by ordinance to do otherwise. This responsibility includes, but is not limited to, removal of earth, rock, and other debris, as well as projecting or overhanging bushes and limbs that may obstruct or render unsafe the passage of persons or vehicles. This responsibility also includes, but is not limited to, the obligation to maintain all rights-of-way referenced in this section to meet the following requirements:
    1. Sidewalks – Minimum clearance. All sidewalks must be clear of obstructions by earth, rock, or vegetation from edge to edge and to an elevation of 7-1/2 feet above sidewalk level. For example, bushes that encroach on or over any part of a sidewalk area must be cut back or removed and limbs of trees that project over the sidewalk area at an elevation of less than 7-1/2 feet above the sidewalk level must be removed.
    2. Improved streets – Minimum clearance. All improved streets must be clear of obstructions to vehicle movement and parking from edge to edge and to an elevation of 11 feet above street level. For example, bushes that encroach on or over any part of a street must be cut back or removed; limbs of trees that project over a street at an elevation of less than 11 feet above street level must be removed; and no wires or other things shall be maintained over the street level at any elevation less than 11 feet.
    3. Alleys and unimproved rights-of-way – Minimum clearance. All alleys, unimproved streets, and other public rights-of-way must be clear of obstructions that may hinder the normal flow of traffic or render the right of way unsafe for its current and necessary use.
    4. Waste material. No person may deposit upon a street, sidewalk or public place any leaves, dirt or waste material, or deposit on any street, sidewalk or public place glass, nails or any other object that may cause injury to persons or property damage.
    5. Earth from abutting property. If any earth, debris, or other material caves into or falls upon any street or sidewalk from abutting real property, it is unlawful for the owner or occupant of that property not to remove it immediately. Such earth, debris, or other material is a public nuisance and, if it obstructs vehicular or pedestrian travel, it may be summarily removed from the street or sidewalk by the City. The cost of such removal shall be assessed to the property from which the earth, debris, or other material caved in or fell, under the procedure in sections 8.18.140 and 8.18.150.
    6. Pedestrian access on sidewalks. No person shall block or attempt to block or interfere with any person(s) along the public sidewalks by any means, including but not limited to standing on that part of the sidewalk used for pedestrian travel or by placing any object or vehicle in such area.
    7. Access to property abutting sidewalks. No person shall block or attempt to interfere with or block pedestrian or vehicular entrances to public or private property not owned by such person abutting the public sidewalk.

8.18.100 Public Right-of-Way Parking.
A. No person shall use as a storage area any public right-of-way, as follows.
    1. Property storage on street. No person may store, or permit to be stored, personal property on public right-of-way or other public property in excess of 24 hours without permission of the City Manager. This section does not apply to:
        a. Licensed motor vehicles when parked on the street in compliance with applicable state or City regulations.
        b. Basketball stands when not impeding traffic or presenting a safety hazard as determined by the code or law enforcement officer
    2. Use of streets in lieu of off-street parking. No person engaged in the public vehicle parking business or in the vehicle sales, repair or servicing business may cause or permit a vehicle to be parked on a street, alley, lane or other public right-of-way while such vehicle is in the custody of the business for the purpose of being parked, offered for sale, repaired or serviced.

8.18.110 Emergency Repair.
The use of tarps or similar material for the purpose of an emergency repair, or temporarily in place of a customary building component such as a roof, siding or a door, shall not exceed ninety (90) days in any consecutive twelve (12) month period; provided, however, that this subsection is subject to, and does not supersede, the requirements of the Building Code and Fire Code. The use of tarps or similar material in place of a customary building component is not permitted under the Building Code. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.120 Weather Proofing and Screens.
Where windows and doors have been sealed by plastic or other materials for weather proofing, said materials shall be maintained in a workmanlike manner. Window and door screens, while not required by the PMC, shall be maintained in a sound working condition. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.130 Derelict Structures Prohibited.
No structure shall be left unoccupied and unsecured, partially constructed, abandoned, and maintained in a condition that is unfit for human habitation, or maintained in a condition that is an imminent danger. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.140 Closing and Securing of Derelict Structures.
A. The Manager may order appropriate measures to render a derelict structure secure from entry. The securing of the structure shall be by methods calculated to render entry very difficult, including, but not limited to, the use of lag bolts in the boarding of entry points, instead of nailing.
B. In order to perform the function or duty authorized or required under this section, City representative and their agents shall have the right at reasonable times to enter upon the property and render a derelict structure secure from entry. If consent to inspect or secure the property is refused, abatement and/or inspection warrants under Section 8.22.140 shall be utilized.
C. The costs incurred by the City in boarding or securing a derelict structure may be assessed to the property owner and/or property management company and collected as costs of abatement Sections 8.16.290 and 8.16.300. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.150 Derelict Structure Registration.
The owner and/or property management company of a derelict structure shall register the structure with the Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the Manager’s written direction to register. Registration under the terms of the PMC shall be completed on forms to be provided by the City, and shall include information relating to the location and ownership of the structure, the expected period of its vacancy, a plan for regular maintenance during the period of vacancy, a plan for its re-occupancy and use, or its demolition, and a provision whereby the owner of the structure shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City and its agents harmless from any and all claims asserted against the City by third parties stemming from injuries to persons or property as a result of the condition or accessibility of the structure. Any change in the information provided pursuant to this subsection shall be given to the Manager within thirty (30) calendar days of the change. The Manager shall maintain a list of derelict structures. When the owner and/or property management company believes the structure is no longer derelict, the owner and/or property management company shall contact the Manager and request an inspection to determine that the structure is no longer derelict. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.160 Residential Rental Property and Derelict Structure Complaint Process.
A. Complaints of a derelict structure or for violations of the PMC are to be directed to the Manager. The Manager shall take the necessary steps to determine the existence of any violations, including any not listed in the original complaint; take steps to require each property owner and/or property management company to remedy conditions and defects found to violate the PMC; initiate suspension or revocation of a residential rental property license or other remedies under Chapter 8.22, if applicable; initiate enforcement procedures under Chapter 8.18; or take other such action as may be appropriate to ensure compliance with the PMC.
B. The Manager may initiate an inspection of residential rental property, a specific residential rental unit, if necessary, or a derelict structure, to determine the validity of the complaint. Any such inspection may be in addition to residential property inspections contemplated under Chapter 8.22.
C. If the property owner, property management company and/or occupant refuses to allow an inspection of the premises or residential rental unit that is the subject of the complaint, the City may obtain an administrative inspection warrant as provided for in Section 8.22.140.
D. For residential rental units, following each inspection, the inspector will complete an inspection checklist for each residential rental unit inspected and provide a copy of the completed form to the owner or designated agent and the residential rental unit tenant. The occupier will receive a copy of the notice of inspection checklist.
E. If the Manager determines that the complaint is verified, a notice of the complaint and alleged violation will be sent to the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company as set forth in Section 8.18.170.
F. In the event any life threatening health and/or safety condition or defect is found to exist, the condition or defect may be summarily abated as provided in Chapter 8.16.
    1. In addition to summary abatement, the residential rental license may be denied, suspended or revoked.
    2. Residential rental units found to be directly affected by life threatening health and/or safety condition(s) or defect(s) shall not be occupied unless and until the designated condition and/or defect has been satisfactorily corrected as determined by subsequent inspection.
    3. All costs of abatement, including all tenant relocation costs incurred by the City in this Section, shall be the responsibility of the residential rental property owner and assessed as provided for in Chapter 8.16.
G. An existing license may be suspended, or a renewal license not issued, unless and until all conditions and/or defects concerning the licensed residential rental property subject to the complaint have been corrected.
H. Complaints under this section shall be considered confidential by the City and shall not be subject to public disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Act, unless disclosure is required by law. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.170 Abatement and Notice of Violation.
A. In addition to remedies provided in this Chapter, violations of the PMC may be abated according to the classification of abatement type and notice procedures provided in sections 8.16.220 to 8.16.250.
B. The Manager may initiate an inspection of residential rental property or a specific residential rental unit, if necessary, to determine the validity of the complaint. Any such inspection may be in addition to residential rental property inspections contemplated under Chapter 8.22. If the property owner, occupant, and/or property management company refuses to allow an inspection of the premises or residential rental unit that is the subject of the complaint, the City may obtain an administrative inspection warrant as provided for in Chapter 8.22, Residential Rental Property Inspections. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.180 Failure to Respond to Notice of Violation.
If the owner, occupant, and/or property management company takes no action to correct the violation to the satisfaction of the City within the time specified in the notice, enforcement action will be taken. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.190 Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action.
Property Maintenance Code violations may qualify for Temporary Waivers of Enforcement Action pursuant Section 8.16.260

8.18.200 Requests for Adjustment of Enforcement Action Fees.
A. The Manager shall establish criteria and procedures to grant a request for reduction of fees, charges, or other costs incurred due to enforcement action. Requests for reduction shall be reviewed under the following conditions:
    1. The violations are corrected;
    2. The property owner submits to the Manager a request in writing;
    3. The request includes the property address, case number, applicant’s contact information, and specifies each and every reason for the request; and
B. A separate application for a request of waiver or reduction of fees, charges, or other costs must be submitted for each notice of violation sent to the applicant. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.210 Violations and other Remedies.
A. Violation of any section of the PMC is a separate civil infraction and a penalty may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 1.06, Code Enforcement. A violation applies to each property or residential rental unit in violation of the PMC. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation for which a separate fine or penalty may be assessed.
B. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, a person determined to be responsible for violation of any section of the PMC may be ordered by the court to correct the violation.
C. In addition to subsections A and B of this Section, violation of any requirement of this Chapter shall also constitute a nuisance and may be abated under Chapter 8.16.
D. Where work is required to be done to correct violations under the PMC, any and all permits required for such work by the Building Code shall be obtained. All final inspections shall be approved for the associated permits prior to the violations being considered resolved.
E. The remedies available under Section 8.22.130 shall also be available to address violations of the PMC. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.220 Administrative Enforcement Fees.
The purpose of the administrative enforcement fee is to defray a portion of the actual cost of enforcing code regulations when the owner, occupant, and/or property management company fails to meet the routine obligations established by the Wood Village Municipal Code relating to that property. Administrative enforcement fees are not a tax.
A. If a violation is not abated by the owner, occupant, and/or property management company in a timely manner as provided for in the PMC, administrative enforcement fees will be imposed on the property and/or its owner, occupant, and/or property management company in accordance with the fees adopted by City Council resolution for such fees. The administrative enforcement fees are separate from and in addition to any charge, cost, or fee assessed elsewhere in this code. The imposition or payment of any administrative enforcement fee shall not relieve the owner, occupant, and/or property management company from correcting the violation.
B. A late payment charge may be added to any fees, charges, costs, and administrative enforcement fees that are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of imposition. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.230 Receivership Authority.
In addition to, and not in lieu of any other provisions of the PMC, when residential property is found to violate the PMC, the violation is a threat to the public health and safety, and the owner has not acted in a timely manner to correct the violation(s), the Manager may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver to perform an abatement pursuant to the Oregon Housing Receivership Act, provided by ORS 105.420 to 105.455 or as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

8.18.240 Coordination of Enforcement.
The Manager shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of enforcement efforts and any necessary inspections in an effort to minimize conflicts between the activities of affected City departments. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

Chapter 8.20 GRAFFITI NUISANCE ABATEMENT

Sections:
8.20.010     Purpose.
8.20.020     Graffiti Nuisance Property.
8.20.030     Definitions.
8.20.040     Graffiti Removal Required; Notice to Abate.
8.20.050     Appeal of Notice to Abate; Hearing; Decision.
8.20.060     Abatement.

8.20.010 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to provide for a procedure for removal of graffiti from buildings, walls and other structures in order to reduce social deterioration within the City and to promote public safety and health.
B. The City Manager may adopt procedures, forms, and written policies for administering and implementing the provisions of this Chapter.

8.20.020 Graffiti Nuisance Property.
A. Any property, building or structure within the City of Wood Village which becomes a graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this Chapter and is subject to its remedies.
B. Any person who permits property under their control to become a graffiti nuisance property shall be in violation of this Chapter and subject to its remedies.

8.20.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. "Graffiti" means any unauthorized markings of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance which is visible from premises open to the public, and that have been placed upon any real or personal property such as buildings, fences, structures, or the unauthorized etching or scratching of such described surfaces where the markings are visible from premises open to the public, such as public rights of way or other publicly owned property.
B. "City Manager" means the City Manager for the City of Wood Village, or his/her designated representative, who is responsible for the administration of the Graffiti Nuisance Abatement program under this Chapter. In accordance with adopted procedures, the City Manager may appoint such officers, employees and agents as shall be authorized and necessary to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
C. "Graffiti Nuisance Property" means property upon which graffiti has been placed and such graffiti has been permitted to remain for more than ten (10) days after the property owner of record has been issued written notification to abate pursuant to Section 8.20.040(B).
D. "Occupant" means any person or sub lessee, successor or assignee who has control over property.
E. "Owner" means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property and includes but is not limited to:
    1. A mortgagor in possession in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises; or
    2. An occupant who has control over the property/premises.
F. "Permit" means to knowingly suffer, allow, or acquiesce by any failure, refusal or neglect to abate.
G. "Property" means any real or personal property and that which is affixed incidental or appurtenant to real property but not limited to any premises, house, building, fence, structure or any separate part thereof, whether permanent or not.
H. "Unauthorized" means without the consent of the owner or the occupant.

8.20.040 Graffiti Removal Required; Notice to Abate.
A. Required Graffiti Removal. The owner or occupant of any property in the City shall remove any graffiti from such property within ten (10) days of the graffiti’s appearance.
B. Notice to Abate. 
    1. Whenever the City Manager determines that graffiti exists on any structure in the City of Wood Village, the City Manager may issue a notice to abate.
    2. The City Manager shall cause the notice to be served upon the property owner and any occupant. The owner or occupant shall have ten (10) days after the date of service of the notice in which to remove the graffiti. The City Manager shall have the sole discretion to grant the property owner the option of giving the City written permission to enter on the property and remove the graffiti.
    3. Service shall be accomplished by addressing the notice to the owner and occupant and sending it byregular mail.. Service on the occupant may also be accomplished by posting the notice in a clearly visible location on the subject property. Should owner or occupant fail to abate the City shall send final notice to abate before City performs abatements and liens property to recoup expenses.
    4. If graffiti is not removed or written permission is not given to the City to remove the graffiti, the costs of removal may be assessed to the owner and will become a lien on the affected property

8.20.050 Appeal of Notice to Abate; Hearing; Decision.
A. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice, the property owner or occupant may appeal the notice from the City Manager to the City Council or designated hearings officer of the City of Wood Village, by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager.
B. Upon receipt of the appeal request, the City Manager shall schedule the hearing at the next regular City Council Meeting. In lieu of hearing appeals under this Chapter, the City Council may designate a hearings officer to hear the appeals. If a hearings officer has been designated, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing within ten (10) business days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The appellant, the City Manager and any interested persons may appear and be heard orally or in writing. If, based on the evidence and testimony at the hearing, the City Council or Hearings Officer finds the property to be a Graffiti Nuisance Property within the meaning of this Chapter, and the owner or responsible party has been given notice in accordance with 8.20.040(B) above, the City Council or Hearings Officer shall specify when and under what conditions the graffiti shall be abated.

8.20.060 Abatement.
A. Public Property. The City Manager may summarily abate any graffiti on any utility poles and cabinets, on exterior walls and fences immediately abutting public streets or property, or on any public property, including but not limited to traffic signs and lights.
B. Private Property. Whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any building or structure any graffiti requiring abatement under this Chapter, the City Manager may enter upon the graffiti nuisance property at all reasonable times to perform any duty imposed on the City Manager under this Chapter, and to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Upon the failure to comply with the notice of abatement by the compliance date designated in the notice to abate issue pursuant to Section 8.20.040(B) or any order on appeal pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B), the following steps may be taken if the graffiti nuisance property is plainly enclosed to create privacy and prevent access by unauthorized persons:
    1. If the graffiti nuisance property is occupied, the City Manager shall first present proper credentials and demand entry to cause the graffiti to be abated. If entry is refused, the City Manager may attempt to secure entry by any legal means.
    2. If the graffiti nuisance property is unoccupied, the City Manager shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or occupant and demand entry. Such demand may be included in the initial notice sent to the owner or occupant under Section 8.20.040(B) above. If entry is refused, the City Manager may attempt to secure entry by any legal means.
D. Graffiti Abatement Consent Forms. 
    1. The City Manager shall develop consent forms allowing the City Manager to enter onto property to abate the graffiti without prior notice from the City Manager. The City Manager shall make these consent forms available to the public.
    2. Property owners and occupants may request and sign consent forms for allowing graffiti abatement. The Graffiti Abatement City Manager shall renew the consent forms at least biannually. (Ord. 5-2006, 2006)

Chapter 8.22 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTIONS

Sections:
8.22.010     Definitions.
8.22.020     Purpose.
8.22.030     Scope.
8.22.040     Rental License Required.
8.22.050     Inspection.
8.22.060     Inspection Standards.
8.22.070     Inspection Process.
8.22.080     Term of License.
8.22.090     Enforcement.
8.22.100     Consent to Inspections Relating to Permits and Licensure.
8.22.110     Authorization to Inspect.
8.22.120     Administrative Inspection Warrant; Right of Entry; Inspection Warrants.
8.22.130     Remedies for Violations.
8.22.140     Protest.

8.22.010 Definitions.
As used in Chapter 8.22, the following terms mean:
Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
Cellar. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having one-half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Common Areas. Those interior and exterior areas of the residential rental property as defined herein or which the occupants have access, including, but not limited to, entrances, exits, hallways, stairways, basements, cellars, laundry rooms, attics, porches and yards.
Dormitory. A building, or a space in a building, in which group sleeping accommodations are provided for more than 16 persons who are not members of the same family in one room or a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities.
Dwelling. Any building located in the City, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as defined below shall not be regarded as a dwelling. For purposes of Chapter 8.22, the term shall be synonymous with “residential rental property.”
Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.
Owner. The current owner of real property as shown in the property records of Multnomah County, Oregon.
Owner-Occupied. Any dwelling where the owner resides in one of the dwelling units.
Person. Any natural person or any partnership, corporation, company, trust or other legal entity.
Premises. Is the entire interior and exterior portions of a dwelling, including the common areas thereof; the facilities and appurtenances therein, and the grounds, areas and facilities held out for the use of occupants generally, or whose use is promised to the tenant/occupant.
Property. Includes all lands, including all structures, improvements and fixtures thereon, and property of any nature appurtenant thereto, or used in connection therewith.
Property Maintenance Code of Wood Village. Chapter 8.18 of the Wood Village Municipal Code, which may also be cited as the “PMC.”
Property Management Company. Any person that manages real property on behalf of the owner.
Residential Rental Property. A property with one or more residential rental units, regardless of whether anyone is currently residing in each unit.
Residential Rental Unit. A dwelling containing one or more separate living quarters (kitchen, bathroom and living room), one or more of which is rented, leased or let in exchange for monetary or other compensation.
Rooming House. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one or two-family dwelling.
Rooming Unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
Temporary Housing. A tent, trailer, or similar structure which is used as human shelter for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, or more than ninety (90) days, in any calendar year.
Tenant. Any person who controls or possesses real property under a lease, a month-to-month tenancy, by permission by the owner, or otherwise.

8.22.020 Purpose.
The Council finds and declares that in order to protect the public safety, health and welfare of the people of the City from hazards and injury, and in order to prevent blight, the licensing and inspection of certain residential rental property in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.22 of the Wood Village Municipal Code are necessary.

8.22.030 Scope.
Chapter 8.22, Residential Rental Property Inspections, is intended to:
A. Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating the interior and exterior of new and existing residential rental property by establishing minimum requirements and standards for interior and exterior conditions of structures and premises for protection from the elements, life safety, other hazards and for safe and sanitary maintenance as required by Wood Village Code Title 8, Health and Safety;
B. Establish the responsibility of residential rental property owners; and
C. Provide for administration, enforcement and penalties.

8.22.040 Rental License Required.
A. No person may maintain or operate a residential rental property within the City without first obtaining a license as required by Chapter 5.20. Failure to obtain a rental license required by Chapter 5.20 is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06.

8.22.050 Inspection.
A. In order to obtain or renew a residential rental property license, tenants must be provided a City supplied check list of property maintenance and condition.
B. A license will only be issued if the property identified has provided information to tenants as required by this code. Should a tenant identify potential issues with a property, an inspection may be conducted. The following residential rental property classifications are subject to inspection:
    1. Owner-occupied dwellings containing a unit inhabited by the owner and one or more residential rental units; and
    2. Non-owner occupied dwellings containing one or more residential rental units.
C. Any inspection of an owner-occupied dwelling containing one or more residential rental units shall not include inspection of the owner’s unit.
D. The provisions of Chapter 8.22 shall not be deemed to restrict the right of the City to inspect any property pursuant to any applicable federal, state or local law or regulation, including complaints filed under the PMC, Chapter 8.18.

8.22.060 Inspection Standards.
Residential rental properties shall meet the standards set forth in the PMC, Chapter 8.18 of the Code.

8.22.070 Inspection Process.
A. For a residential rental property for which the City receives a complaint or for which a voluntary inspection is requested, an inspection in accord with this chapter may be conducted.
B. At least twenty-one (21) calendar days notice will be given to the owner and/or property management company of the licensed residential rental property for which an inspection is to be conducted. An inspection may be conducted with less than twenty-one (21) day notice with the approval of the property owner and/or property management company.
C. The City will provide inspection only to those units for which a complaint has been filed, or for which identified maintenance issues are identified. Consent to inspect from the tenant is granted with the submission of the complaint or identification of deficiencies in maintenance of the rented unit.
D. A residential rental unit tenant shall have the option of being present at the initial inspection or any reinspection(s) of said residential rental unit.
E. An inspection checklist comprised of housing related criteria will be used to determine whether the minimum standards of the PMC, Chapter 8.18, have been met.
F. The owner or property management company must be on the premises and accessible at all times during scheduled property inspections. If such person is not on the premises and accessible by telephone on a scheduled date and time, the inspection will be rescheduled. The owner shall be charged a rescheduling fee per each rental unit which requires a rescheduled inspection.
G. Following each inspection, the inspector will complete an inspection checklist for each residential rental unit inspected and provide a copy of the completed form to the owner and/or property management company and the residential rental unit tenant.
H. The owner and/or property management company will be given written notice of violation should the premises or any residential rental unit(s) inspected fail to meet the standards set forth in the PMC, Chapter 8.18.
    1. In the event no imminent threat to public health and/or safety is found to exist, the owner and/or property management company shall be given a notice of violation pursuant to Section 8.18.170.
    2. In the event an imminent threat to public health and/or safety is found to exist, the condition or defect may be summarily abated as provided in Section 8.16.230.
        a. In addition to summary abatement, the residential rental license may be suspended or revoked.
        b. Residential rental units found to be directly affected by life threatening health or safety condition(s) or defect(s) shall not be occupied unless and until the designated condition and/or defect has been satisfactorily corrected as determined by subsequent inspection.
        c. All costs of abatement, including all tenant relocation costs incurred by the City, shall be the responsibility of the residential rental property owner and assessed and enforced as provided for in Sections 8.16.290 and 8.16.300.
I. A residential rental property license may be suspended, revoked, or a renewal license not issued, unless and until all conditions and/or defects concerning the residential rental property have been corrected.

8.22.080 Term of License.
Unless voided, revoked or otherwise suspended for conditions or defects under the PMC, Chapter 8.18, the residential rental property license term shall be for the remainder of the calendar year commencing from the license issuance date pursuant to Section 5.20.030 of the Code. Upon expiration of the license term, or following revocation or suspension of the residential rental property license, the license must be renewed or reinstated, as appropriate, in order to be effective.

8.22.090 Enforcement.
The City Manager is empowered to enforce the provisions of Chapter 8.22, Residential Rental Property Inspections.

8.22.100 Consent to Inspections Relating to Permits and Licensure.
A. The application and granting of any license or permit pursuant to the Wood Village Municipal Code, including the Wood Village Zoning and Development Code, shall be deemed to have been the consent of the owner or property management company for the Manager to enter onto the property for purposes of inspection to determine whether a permit or license can be issued and, after the license or permit has been issued, to ensure the requirements of the applicable Code have been met.
B. If the owner or property management company refuses to allow entry for purposes of inspection, the license or permit is subject to revocation without notice to the license or permit holder or the owner or property management company.
C. The refusal to allow entry pursuant to the consent granted in Section 8.22.120(A) is a civil infraction and a penalty may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 1.06, Code Enforcement.

8.22.110 Authorization to Inspect.
The Manager is authorized to make inspection of property for the purposes of enforcing Chapter 8.22, Residential Rental Property Inspections, and Chapter 8.18, the Wood Village Property Maintenance Code (PMC).

8.22.120 Administrative Inspection Warrant; Right of Entry; Inspection Warrants.
A. Right of Entry. The Manager may enter property, including the interior of structures, at all reasonable times whenever an inspection is necessary to enforce this Chapter or to require entry on to the premises of a derelict structure pursuant to Chapter 8.18. In the case of entry into areas of property that are plainly enclosed to create privacy and prevent access by unauthorized persons, the following steps shall be taken:
    1. Occupied Property. If any structure on the premises or property is occupied, the Manager shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, entry may be obtained by obtaining an inspection warrant;
    2. Unoccupied Property. If the premises, property, or structures on the property are unoccupied, the Manager shall first make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner or property management company, and request entry. If entry is refused, the Manager may obtain entry by obtaining an inspection warrant.
B. Issuance of Administrative Inspection Warrants; Affidavit. An inspection warrant may be issued upon application therefore, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant's status in applying for the warrant; the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the inspection or investigation; the property to be inspected or investigated; and the purpose for which the inspection or investigation is to be made. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement detailing information showing that a condition of nonconformity with any code provision is more likely than not to exist with respect to the designated property; or that an inspection or investigation is reasonably believed to be necessary in order to discover or verify the condition of the property for conformity with any provision of the relevant code.
C. Procedure for Issuance of Administrative Inspection Warrant. 
    1. Examination. Before issuing an inspection warrant, the judge may examine under oath the applicant and any other witness.
    2. Issuance. If the judge is satisfied the requirements for granting the application are met, the judge shall issue the warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered and the purpose of the inspection or investigation. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or where the judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.
    3. Law Enforcement Assistance. In issuing an inspection warrant the judge may authorize any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or obstacle and assist in any way necessary to complete the inspection.
D. Execution of Administrative Inspection Warrants. 
    1. Occupied Property. In executing an inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry into the occupied premises, make a reasonable effort to present the person's credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show the occupant or person in possession of the property the warrant or a copy thereof upon request. A copy of the warrant shall be left with the occupant or the person in possession.
    2. Unoccupied Property. In executing an inspection warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the person's authority and purpose, but may promptly enter the property if it is at the time unoccupied or at the time reasonably believed to be unoccupied. In such case a copy of the warrant shall be conspicuously posted on the property.
    3. Return. An inspection warrant must be executed within five (5) days of its issue and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within five (5) days from its date of execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed in this Section, the warrant unless executed is void.

8.22.130 Remedies for Violations.
A. Failure to secure and maintain a valid residential rental property license and/or any other violation of any section of Chapter 8.22 is a civil infraction pursuant to Chapter 1.06, Code Enforcement. A violation applies to each residential rental property, residential rental unit or rooming unit in violation of Chapter 8.22. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation for which a separate fine or penalty may be assessed.
B. Any property in violation of Chapter 8.22 is declared to be a public nuisance, for which abatement action under Chapter 8.16 may be taken and costs assessed, whether or not an owner has been convicted in court or otherwise of a violation of Chapter 8.22.
C. If a residential rental property license is denied, suspended or revoked, it shall be unlawful for the owner or property management company to permit new occupancy of any vacant unit(s) within the property until a valid residential rental property license has been issued. If a unit with violations, as determined by inspection, is or becomes vacant it shall be unlawful for the owner or property management company to permit re-occupancy of the unit(s) until all violations have been repaired and the unit is reinspected and found to be in compliance with the PMC, Chapter 8.18, or other applicable laws.
D. If, upon inspection, a condition or defect is found to exist that constitutes an imminent threat to public health and/or safety, City water and wastewater services may be discontinued; provided, however, that prior to the disconnection or discontinuance of any City utility service the City must (A) give notice to the owner or property management company and the tenant of the affected unit(s) of the proposed utility service discontinuance, the reasons for such action; and (B) make a specific finding after review of the inspection checklist and report that disconnection or discontinuance of City water and/or wastewater services is necessary to deter occupancy or habitation in the affected unit(s) in which the public health and/or safety is harmed or endangered by the continued occupancy of habitation of the unit(s).
E. All costs, charges, administrative enforcement fees, including all costs of abatement, reinspection fees, late payment charges, title search fees, lien recording fees, and related charges, may be assessed against the owner and property and shall constitute a lien against the property as provided in Sections 5.20.060, 8.16.290, 8.16.300, 8.18.220, and 8.22.075. Additional administrative enforcement fees will be added to the lien as they accrue, regardless of whether or not they are delinquent. The lien may be foreclosed in any manner provided by ORS 223.505 to 223.650 or as otherwise provided by law.
F. Nothing herein shall prevent the Manager from seeking any other means available at law or in equity in order to enforce the provisions of Chapter 8.22.

8.22.140 Protest.
Any residential rental property owner aggrieved by a denial, suspension, revocation or non-renewal of a residential rental property license, or the discontinuance of City utility services under Chapter 8.22, Residential Rental Property Inspections, may protest such action by providing a written statement to the Manager within fourteen (14) calendar days of the effective date of such action. The written statement must state why the action of the City was in error. The Manager will process the protest and make a final decision within twenty (20) calendar days after receiving a valid protest. (Ord. 5-2011, 2011)

Chapter 8.24 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT

Sections:
8.24.010     Short title.
8.24.020     Purpose, policy and scope.
8.24.030     Definitions.
8.24.040     Rules and regulations.
8.24.050     Collection of solid waste—License requirement.
8.24.060     Exemptions and exceptions to license requirements.
8.24.070     Licensing and service areas.
8.24.080     Licenses.
8.24.090     Duration of license.
8.24.100     General provisions relating to license grant.
8.24.110     Contract for service and transfer of licenses.
8.24.120     License fees.
8.24.130     Responsibilities of licensee.
8.24.140     Service standards.
8.24.150     Recycling.
8.24.160     Customer responsibilities.
8.24.170     Ownership of solid waste.
8.24.180     General offenses.
8.24.190     Suspension, modification or revocation of license.
8.24.200     Rates and service charges.
8.24.210     Restraining orders.
8.24.220     Miscellaneous provisions.
8.24.230     Penalties and remedies.

8.24.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the solid waste management ordinance of the City. (Ord. 4-1993 § 1, 1993)

8.24.020 Purpose, policy and scope.
Following due investigation and thorough review of the needs of this City with respect to a program of solid waste management for the City, which review and investigation included a review of present practices within the City and those of adjoining communities and the local metropolitan area, this Council does determine and declare it to be in the public interest of the City that a solid waste management program be established and maintained for the City to insure safe, economical and comprehensive solid waste collection and disposal services for the City; to insure that rates and charges for such services are just, fair, and adequate to provide this necessary public service on a uniform, and nondiscriminatory basis; to promote technologically and economically feasible resource recovery and recycling; and to provide administrative rules and regulations pertinent thereto to insure the development and maintenance of such programs to the optimum degree possible. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 2, 1993)

8.24.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
"Allowable expenses" means all reasonable costs incurred by licensees associated with the provision of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection services required herein and the cost of complying with all applicable laws, regulations or orders as now or hereafter amended. Allowable expenses as defined shall be presumed to be reasonable if, in the context of overall cost for a licensee, such expenses are: (1) comparable with the expenses incurred by a preponderance of similarly situated solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection companies in the Portland metropolitan area; and (2) are based on the percentage of expenses incurred for services provided to Gresham, and Wood Village customers. Allowable expenses shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
    1. Costs associated with the disposal and/or processing of all materials collected as required by this Chapter, including the costs of marketing materials to secondary markets, and all applicable fees;
    2. All labor costs, directly or indirectly associated with and necessary to the provision of services required by this Chapter, including all costs associated with all contracts and collective bargaining agreements, supervisory labor, workers' compensation and all benefits including, but not limited to health care, pension, and payroll taxes;
    3. All vehicle, equipment, container, and asset costs, including timely replacement, depreciation and interest expenses, lease costs no greater than those that would be charged by an independent third party to provide substantially equivalent equipment, vehicle registration fees, motor fuel, oil, tires and repairs and maintenance for such vehicles and equipment that are reasonably necessary to provide the services defined in this Chapter;
    4. Performance bonds and liability insurance premiums in the amounts of coverage required by the City;
    5. All administrative and management costs and expenses reasonably allocated to the services required under this Chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable compensation, management fees, and benefits for officers and employees, payroll taxes, administrative staff, data processing, billing, rent and supplies; provided that there shall be included in allowable expenses only that portion of management fees, compensation and benefits paid by a licensee that is at a level comparable with prevailing industry standards for similar services and positions provided to or at solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection companies in the metro region that are similar in size and operations to those of the licensees', and there shall be excluded from allowable expenses only that portion of management fees, compensation and benefits paid by the licensees that are in excess of such levels;
    6. Utilities;
    7. Training and worker safety;
    8. Marketing, promotion and public education costs approved by the City;
    9. Interest costs such as interest charges on the purchase of equipment or facilities, or on loans for working capital but not interest costs which are otherwise an unallowable expense as defined in this section;
    10. Property, equipment or facility rental or lease costs, provided that with respect to any lease entered by a licensee with a related party, the lease costs under such lease shall only be included in allowable expenses to the extent that such lease costs do not exceed those that would be charged by an independent third party to provide the substantially equivalent property, equipment or facilities;
    11. Costs for collecting and maintaining information directly and specifically required by this Chapter, costs of preparing, producing and printing all reports and information required under this Chapter (including without limitation, the fees and expenses of accountants and other outside advisors and consultants), and all costs and expenses of participating in, complying with or otherwise being subject to the accounting and regulatory processes associated with or required by this Chapter, or under other law;
    12. License fees, business fees, surcharges, or any other fees collected from licensees by the City.
    13. Any expense incurred in the collection, handling, processing, storing, transporting, marketing, or sale or other disposition of recyclable materials and any expense incurred in connection with education, promotion and notice of the opportunity to recycle; and
    14. Any other expense determined in advance by the City and the licensees to be reasonable and necessary to the provision of the services required under this Chapter, and agreed to in writing.
Allowable expenses as defined above may be provided by affiliates of, or related parties to, a licensee provided that they do not exceed the market rate charged by third parties for similar services. If an expense of a licensee is questioned by the City, that licensee must submit proof that the expense is reasonable.
“Business or Commercial” means stores; offices, including manufacturing and industrial offices; restaurants; warehouses; schools; colleges and universities; hospitals; and other industrial, manufacturing, and non-manufacturing entities, including public bodies; but does not include a business located in a residential dwelling unless the business subscribes to commercial collection services from a franchised hauler.
“Business Recycling Service Customer” means any person or business that enters into a service agreement with a waste hauler or recycler for commercial recycling purposes.
“City” means the City of Wood Village, a municipal corporation of the state of Oregon, which shall include all territory within its existing and future corporate limits.
“City Council” means the governing body of the City of Wood Village.
“Collection service” means a service that provides for the collecting of solid waste or recyclable materials or both.
“Compensation” means any type of consideration paid for waste collection and/or management services, whether payment be made directly or indirectly, including the exchange of services between persons.
“Hazardous solid waste” means solid waste that may, by itself or in combination with other solid waste, be infectious, explosive, poisonous, caustic, toxic, or otherwise dangerous or injurious to human, plant, animal life or property; also waste as defined by applicable statute, particularly ORS 466.005.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, joint venture, or other public or private legal entity.
“Putrescible material” means organic materials that can decompose and may give rise to foul smelling, offensive odors or products which may create a vector or rodent problem.
“Recyclable material” means any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold or utilized for recycling.
“Recycling” means any process by which solid waste materials are transformed or changed into a reusable, new or different product so that the original waste item can no longer be so identified.
“Resource recovery” means the process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste, including energy recovery, materials recovery, recycling and reuse of or from solid waste.
“Return on gross revenues” means the quotient of the operating margin divided by the gross revenues. Expressed as a percentage, the return on gross revenues shall be approximately ten percent (10%) of gross revenues, which is consistent with industry averages for solid waste recyclable materials and yard debris companies.
“Solid waste” means all putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, refuse, ashes, waste paper, cardboard, grass clippings, compost, tires, equipment and furniture; sewage sludge, septic tank and cesspool pumpings or other sludge; commercial, industrial, demolition and construction wastes; discarded or abandoned vehicles or parts thereof; discarded home or industrial appliances; manure, vegetable or animal solids and semi-solid wastes, dead animals, and including infectious wastes as defined in ORS 459.386; but not including hazardous wastes as defined in ORS 466.005 or materials used for fertilizer or for other productive purposes or which are salvageable as such materials are used on land in agricultural operations and the growing or harvesting of crops and the raising of animals.
“Solid waste management” means the prevention or reduction of solid waste; management of the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid waste; or resource recovery from solid waste; and facilities necessary or convenient to such activities.
"Unallowable expenses" means the following:
    1. All charitable and political contributions;
    2. Fines and penalties incurred by a licensee:
    3. Payments for services provided by related parties to a licensee to the extent that such payments exceed the reasonable cost that would be charged by an independent third party to provide the substantially equivalent service.
    4. Accruals for future unknown regulatory changes;
    5. Costs associated with purchase of other companies including, but not limited to, employee stock ownership plan payments, goodwill, amortization of goodwill and premiums on key-person life insurance policies;
    6. Principal or interest payments on the acquisition of solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection routes; the purchase of equipment and facilities at a price that would be construed to include goodwill or a premium in excess of fair market value at the time of acquisition;
    7. State and federal income taxes;
    8. Attorney's fees and related expenses resulting from:
        a. Any judicial proceeding in which the City and a licensee are adverse parties, unless the licensee is the prevailing party;
        b. Any judicial proceeding in which a licensee is ruled to be liable due to willful misconduct or gross negligence or in violation of law or regulation;
    9. Any other expenses defined as "unallowable" and approved by the Council.
“Waste” means useless or discarded materials. (Ord. 4-2009, 2009; Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 3, 1993)

8.24.040 Rules and regulations.
The City Council shall make and adopt such rules and regulations pertaining to the administration of this chapter and to the collection of solid waste as may be reasonable and required for the management and enforcement hereof, including intergovernmental agreements with other jurisdictions. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted at public session by Council resolution and may be amended from time to time as required. Copies of rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be files of record with the City Recorder and be available for public inspection at all reasonable times. (Ord. 4-1993 § 4, 1993)

8.24.050 Collection of solid waste—License requirement.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to collect solid waste in the City without first obtaining a license therefore, issued by the City; or after issuance of a license, to collect solid waste in a service area not covered thereby. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 5, 1993)

8.24.060 Exemptions and exceptions to license requirements.
Nothing in this chapter shall:
A. Prohibit any person from transporting or disposing of solid waste products produced by himself so long as he or she complies with this chapter, other City ordinances, ORS Chapter 459 and appropriate rules and regulations adopted under any of the foregoing;
B. Prohibit any person from transporting or disposing of or resource recovering sewage sludge, septic tank pumpings and cesspool pumpings or like effluents;
C. Prohibit federal and state agencies to collect, store, transport or dispose of solid waste or those who contract with such agencies to perform such collection service, but only insofar as the service is performed by or for such agencies;
D. Prohibit any person from transporting solid waste through the City that is neither collected nor disposed of within the City;
E. Prohibit any City property owner or resident from personally or by use of a solid waste hauler of their choice from transporting and/or disposing of demolition, construction or land clearing solid wastes; (Ord. 6-1997 § 1, 1997)
F. Prohibit any person from transporting or disposing of waste produced as an integral or incidental part of the regular operation of their business, including but not limited to, gardening or landscaping service, rendering, janitorial service, and motor vehicle wrecking;
G. Prohibit the collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by private charitable organizations regularly engaged in such business or activity, including, but without limitation, Salvation Army, Goodwill, St. Vincent DePaul and similar groups;
H. Prohibit nonprofit charitable, benevolent or civic organizations from recycling recyclable materials, provided that such collection is not a regular or periodic business of such organization, provided that a permit be first obtained for such activity from the City Recorder, and that such permit or permits be valid for a period of not more than four weeks and provided that said organization shall notify the licensee in the area in which such activity is to take place in advance of commencing such “recycling collection.”
I. If a person other than described above and other than a licensee hereunder, desires to collect recyclable materials, a permit may be issued for such collection, if the City Council by resolution determines that the material being collected is not one of the materials normally or customarily collected as part of the City’s recycling collection program or solid waste collection program and the same will not be detrimental to the recycling program. A fee may be charged for such permit as established by the Council resolution. All applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply to permits granted under this subsection.
J. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require a licensee to store, collect or dispose of or otherwise deal with any hazardous waste as defined by ORS Chapter 466. Nothing shall prohibit the City from withdrawing by amendment to this chapter certain solid waste collection services upon finding that such services are not necessary for the implementation of or the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 6, 1993)

8.24.070 Licensing and service areas.
A license to provide solid waste collection service in all or any portion of the City shall be granted only after a determination of need for the service. If one party has been licensed to provide such service, another party normally shall not be licensed to provide the same service in the same area; however, a determination of need is the responsibility of the City Council. In its consideration of license applications, the City Council shall place primary emphasis upon the following objectives:
A. To provide the most efficient solid waste management collection service for the least cost;
B. To avoid duplication of service areas that will cause inefficiency in operation, excessive costs or unnecessary use of energy resources;
C. To provide proper service to all properties, including those properties in areas of the City where full development has not yet occurred;
D. To give due consideration to the license holder and the charges necessary for its service operation to promote an orderly and efficient operation which provides the optimum degree of quality service with modern equipment;
E. Cooperation with other governmental units to encourage development of the highest quality and degree of solid waste management possible for the local and regional service areas; and
F. To give proper consideration at all times to the public interest and consideration to the future, as well as the present needs of the community. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 7, 1993)

8.24.080 Licenses.
A. A license for each solid waste collection service shall be granted by the Council on the basis of:
    1. The service record of applicant in the areas presently and previously served thereby, with particular consideration given to the service record of the applicant currently within the Wood Village service area if applicable;
    2. Financial reputation, integrity and fiscal solvency;
    3. Equipment and personnel of applicant and otherwise the ability to meet current and future needs in the service area for which application is made;
    4. Moral character, general record and experience factors pertinent to the solid waste collection services anticipated.
B. An applicant for a collection license hereunder presently holding a license under City ordinance for such or related service shall in making application for license or renewal thereof, present information on the criteria stated above, in writing, to the City Council, together with such additional information as the City may require or applicant may consider appropriate.
The Council shall consider such information as furnished by applicant, together with information presented by City staff and the public. Upon determination by the Council that all criteria as stated above and other applicable provisions of this chapter are adequately met, the Council shall, by appropriate resolution, grant to such applicant a license to provide solid waste collection service within the City or that portion of the City previously served by such applicant.
In granting a license hereunder, the Council may impose conditions consistent with this chapter and deemed by the Council to be necessary or advisable for the proper operation of the City’s solid waste management and collection program.
C. Should the Council determine that the applicant for a license hereunder who presently serves the City in said capacity does not meet the criteria hereinabove set forth, such license shall not be granted or renewed, as the case may be. Should a license be terminated or not renewed hereunder, the Council shall consider applications for a solid waste collector’s license to serve the concerned area(s) from any interested applicant and award the collector’s license for that area, based upon the determination of which applicant best meets the criteria as stated above. Such applicants shall furnish the City with the information set forth above to the extent applicable.
D. An applicant for a collector’s license hereunder for an area hereinafter annexed to the City, shall likewise be required to submit the information set forth in subsections A and B of this section, and the criteria for granting of such license shall apply; provided, however, an applicant who immediately prior to such annexation provided general solid waste collection services to said area, shall be considered for such purposes, an applicant for collector’s license presently holding license under City ordinance.
E. Any applicant hereunder, whether they be a present provider of solid waste collection services or not, shall be required to provide the City at time of application for a renewal or a new license, a map or street legal description of the area proposed to be serviced by said licensee. In the event an applicant presently provides collection services, either within or without the City, such map or description should clearly indicate those areas to which solid waste collection services are presently furnished or, within the last twelve (12) month period, have been furnished. In the event any portion of the area described shall have been an area franchised, licensed or otherwise regulated by another government agency, applicant shall provide the City with pertinent information relative thereto. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 8, 1993)

8.24.090 Duration of license.
A. Prior to the issuance, renewal or review of a license, the Council shall provide notice and opportunity for public comment.
B. Collector’s licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be for a term of up to eight years, renewable at an agreed time not to exceed twenty-four month intervals, permitting the term to be extended to the agreed term on each renewal. Renewal shall be initiated with a written application by the licensee. The City may impose or modify conditions subject to notice and a hearing. The Council shall make such determination within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of written application by licensee for renewal. (Ord. 5-2013, 2013; Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 9, 1993)

8.24.100 General provisions relating to license grant.
A. Police Power. Licensees are subject to the exercise of the police power of the City and to such reasonable regulations as the City may from time to time hereafter provide by resolution, ordinance or regulation. The issuance of a license shall not be construed as a waiver of any local, state or federal law as now or hereinafter enacted, including modifications to this Chapter, and such licensee shall be subject thereto, if applicable.
B. Surety Bond. A licensee shall concurrently, with its acceptance of the license, file with the City Recorder and maintain in full force and effect for the term of said license or any renewal thereof, at licensee’s sole expense, a surety bond with a responsible company licensed to do business in Oregon in an amount established by the Council guaranteeing full and faithful performance by said licensee of the duties and obligations thereof as required by this chapter. Licensee’s bond shall be subject to review and approval by the city attorney; licensee shall furnish proof annually to the City Recorder, or more often upon request, that said bond remains in effect.
C. Indemnity and Hold Harmless. The licensee by acceptance of City license granted as herein provided shall agree by its endorsement of acceptance hereon to the terms and conditions of the license herein granted and in addition covenants and agrees to save the City harmless from any claim, demand, liability or expense to which the City may be subject as a consequence of any claimed act or omission of the licensee, its agents, or employees, in any manner arising from the rights and privileges herein granted. And agrees further, in the event legal action or suit shall be filed against the City for any loss or damage or claim arising from any act or failure thereof by licensee hereunder that upon notice of City, licensee shall accept the defense thereof and defend the City against the same and in the event of judgment against the City thereupon pay the same and all costs incurred including any legal costs the City may incur hereunder as it shall feel necessary to protect its interests or enforce this provision, and to hold the City harmless therefrom.
D. Insurance. A licensee hereunder shall maintain at all times, insurance in such form and with such companies as shall be approved by the city attorney, which will cover the licensee’s business operation, including each vehicle operated by it. Such insurance coverage shall provide for protection of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each person, or less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury due to each occurrence, and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage due to each occurrence. All insurance coverage shall provide a thirty (30) day written notice to the City Recorder in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in said policies prior to the effective date of said material alteration or cancellation. The City shall be named as an additional insured on each policy required hereunder. Copies of all policies required hereunder shall be filed with the City Recorder prior to the commencement of licensee’s operations or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be. Licensee shall furnish proof annually or more often if required by the City, that such insurance remains in effect.
E. Non-waiver. None of the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of this section providing for the posting of surety bond by licensee or for the attainment and maintenance of public liability and property damage insurance coverage by licensee, shall be construed to excuse the omission of, failure or unfaithful performance by licensee or limit the liability of licensee under this chapter or otherwise for damages resulting from licensee’s operations within the City or with respect to license granted hereunder. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 10, 1993)

8.24.110 Contract for service and transfer of licenses.
A. The licensee may subcontract with another person to provide service within its service area upon the written approval of the City given by Council resolution; provided that the contract does not amount in effect to a transfer of the license, and, the subcontractor:
    1. Is licensed to collect and dispose of solid waste by the City; or
    2. Holds a permit from the City pursuant hereto;
    3. Unless said subcontractor is licensed by the City for such collection services, said subcontractor shall agree in writing in form satisfactory to the City before such contract shall become effective, to abide by provisions of this chapter. In any such instance said licensee shall obtain from its insurance carrier and surety, written approval thereof and assurance that licensee’s insurance and bond shall continue in full force and effect, cover such service as subcontracted, and shall file such consent with the City Recorder.
B. Licensee shall not sell or exchange service accounts or alter service area boundaries except upon approval of the City Council. The Council shall consent to the transfer or sale if it reasonably determines that the same is in the best interests of the City and that the transferee is qualified for and obtains a license pursuant to the appropriate provisions of this chapter. Transferee shall obtain its license prior to the effective date of such sale, transfer or exchange. Such sale or transfer if granted shall bind the transferee to all the provisions of this chapter which refer to licensees. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 11, 1993)

8.24.120 License fees.
For the privilege of being granted a license and in the exercise thereof, using City streets and other facilities, and to defray the City’s regulatory and administrative expenses, each licensee shall pay to the City a fee equal to five (5) percent of the gross receipts received by the licensee from solid waste collection services conducted within the City.
A. The fee shall be computed and collected on a quarterly basis; the quarterly periods to consist of the period ending September 30th, December 31st, March 31st and June 30th, in each fiscal year the license shall be in effect. Fees due hereunder shall be paid within thirty (30) days following the end of each quarter-year period.
B. At the time of payment of said quarterly fees, the licensee must file with the City Recorder a sworn and verified statement of quarterly gross receipts for the period covered by the tendered fee. Licensees shall maintain adequate books and records, disclosing the gross receipts resulting from the solid waste collection services conducted within the City and under City license, which books and records shall be open at reasonable time and place for audit and inspection by authorized City personnel or their representatives. The City may require a uniform system of bookkeeping and record keeping to be used by licensees.
C. Misrepresentation by licensee of gross receipts or failure to keep proper or appropriate books and records shall constitute cause for revocation of the license granted under this chapter.
D. The license fee hereinabove set forth shall be in addition to any other fees charged or taxes now or hereafter imposed by the City or any other governmental unit. Such additional fees may include fees imposed by another jurisdiction when authorized or required by an intergovernmental agreement between the City and such other jurisdiction for services relating to solid waste management. Payment of such additional fees may be enforced by the City pursuant to Sections 8.24.180 to 8.24.230 (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 7-2001 § 1, 2001)

8.24.130 Responsibilities of licensee.
A. A licensee shall provide sufficient equipment and personnel to adequately service the persons and property and to collect their solid waste in its assigned service area, and to otherwise meet the standards of equipment and service established by this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted hereunder, and applicable state law.
B. A licensee shall collect all solid waste from persons availing themselves of such service, provided such persons make such waste available in a manner consistent with the rules and regulations adopted hereunder.
C. A licensee shall not discontinue service to the service area or any portion thereof without giving at least ninety (90) days’ written notice of the proposed discontinuance of service to the City and to the customers affected, and receiving advance approval of the City Council prior to such discontinuance.
D. A licensee may refuse solid waste collection service to any customer if that customer refuses to pay for the service in accordance with the rate approved by the City Council; provided, however, in no event shall a licensee terminate said service without first notifying the customer in writing of such intention not less than seven days prior to the date of the proposed service termination. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 13, 1993)
E. The licensee shall participate in at least one annual city-wide special solid waste collection event as may be determined by the City. (Ord. 7-2004, 2004)

8.24.140 Service standards.
A. Licensees shall provide solid waste collection service to residences at least once every seven days. Six-day-per-week service shall be made available on a regular basis to commercial, industrial, institutional or similar establishments, with such establishments having the option of receiving daily service. The City may, at its discretion, require such additional servicing schedules or may reduce service requests, as it may from time to time deem necessary and in the public interest.
B. Licensees shall on a regular basis within its service areas provide collection and disposal of solid waste from all City facilities, City parks, City sidewalk containers and City activity areas at no cost to the City.
C. Licensees’ collection activity shall not be conducted in predominantly residential areas before six a.m. or after seven p.m., or in commercial areas before five a.m. or after five p.m.
D. Licensees shall provide convenient bill-paying service for its customers and provide telephone service so that it may be reached by the public during the period from eight a.m. to five p.m. weekdays, excluding Christmas and New Year’s Day.
E. Licensees shall respond to questions or complaints within three working days (weekends and holidays excepted).
F. Solid waste collection vehicles shall be constructed, loaded and operated so as to prevent to the greatest extent practicable any dropping, leaking, blowing, sifting or escaping of waste from the vehicle onto private property or public streets. Open body collection vehicles shall have a cover to assist in such control practice.
G. Licensees shall respond to all calls for special hauling requests requiring equipment regularly supplied by licensee within one week of receiving such request. Such request may include bulky items, such as appliances. A special rate schedule may be established for this service. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 14, 1993)

8.24.150 Recycling.
A. In the interest of promoting the optimum use of the earth’s finite resources, the City shall provide opportunity and encourage residents, inhabitants and properties of the City to recycle and accordingly will require licensees hereunder to provide recycling collection programs which will promote and encourage the same in accordance with state goals as set forth in ORS, and particularly ORS Chapter 459A, and appropriate rules and regulations promulgated thereunder or by the City.
B. Accordingly, each licensee hereunder shall provide the recycling opportunity as hereinabove set forth, by the development of specific programs consistent with state statutes and City requirements which the Council shall establish and periodically review. Licensees shall maintain appropriate records to assist in determining the cost and feasibility of providing said programs and rates for solid waste collection services by each licensee shall include consideration of the cost of providing such recycling collection programs within the City, giving due consideration to the revenue generated by the sale or disposal of the various recycled items.
C. The City shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations for the conduct of the various recycling programs mandated by state law or determined necessary by Council resolution following public hearing thereupon. The City may require recycling collection programs to be coordinated through intergovernmental agreements or otherwise at the specific direction of the City Council. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 15, 1993)

8.24.160 Customer responsibilities.
A. Customers who shall avail themselves of the solid waste collection services of a licensee shall be required to pay in regular fashion, the charges imposed by the said licensee for such services, based upon rates approved by the City Council from time to time.
B. Persons who become customers of licensee shall be required to abide by the rules and regulations established by the City for the collection and disposal of solid wastes and for the collection of recyclable materials.
C. It shall be the responsibility of a residential customer to provide appropriate garbage cans or receptacles for the placement of solid waste materials to be collected by licensees unless other containers having the advance approval of the licensee and City are used. Garbage cans or receptacles for manual collection shall be sturdy, located on a solid level base, hold no more than thirty-two (32) gallons of material and shall weigh not more than sixty (60) pounds (gross loaded weight). They shall be provided with a close fitting lid with handle and be watertight in construction.
D. The customer shall provide safe access to the pickup point so as to be readily available to and not jeopardize licensees and employees supplying the collection service.
E. No person shall place hazardous or infectious waste in a garbage can or any solid waste container or box for solid waste collection or disposal by a licensee or the City without first obtaining written approval from the licensee or the City, as the case may be.
F. Business Recycling Requirement. 
    1. All Businesses and Business Recycling Service Customers shall recycle as follows:
        a. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall separate for recycling all paper, cardboard, glass and plastic bottles and jars, and aluminum and tin (metal) cans;
        b. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall provide recycling containers for internal maintenance or work areas to allow for recyclable materials to be collected, sorted, stored, or both; and
        c. Businesses and business recycling service customers shall post accurate signs or adhere labels where recyclable materials are collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the business must source separate and that provide recycling instructions.
    2. A business may seek an exemption from the requirement in Section 8.24.160(F)(1) if:
        a. The business provides access to the City of Wood Village for a site visit; and
        b. The City of Wood Village determines during the site visit that the business cannot comply with the Business and Recycling Requirement because of space constraints or economic restrictions.
    3. To assist businesses in compliance with this section, the City of Wood Village shall:
        a. Notify businesses of the Business Recycling Requirement;
        b. Provide businesses with education and technical assistance to assist with meeting the Business Recycling Requirement; and
        c. Monitor and verify business compliance with the Business Recycling Requirement.
G. Business Food Waste. 
    1. Applicability. This ordinance applies to all covered businesses. A covered business is a business that cooks, assembles, processes, serves, or sells food or does so as service providers for other enterprises.
    Covered businesses subject to the business food waste requirement include but are not limited to:
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Cafeterias & buffets              | Grocery retail                |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Caterers                          | Grocery wholesale             |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Colleges & universities*          | Hospitals*                    |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Correctional facilities           | Hotels*                       |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Drinking places*                  | Limited service restaurants   |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Elementary and secondary schools* | Nursing & residential care*   |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Food product manufacturing        | Retirement & assisted living* |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Food service contractors          | Specialty food markets        |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    | Full service restaurants          | Warehouse clubs               |
    +-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    *Only those with full-service restaurants or on-site food preparation or service are subject to this requirement.
    2. Business Food Waste Requirement. Covered businesses must separate food waste from all other solid waste for collection. Food waste means waste from fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy products, fish, shellfish, nuts, seeds, grains, coffee grounds, and other food that results from the distribution, storage, preparation, cooking, handling, selling or serving of food for human consumption. Food waste includes but is not limited to excess, spoiled or unusable food and includes inedible parts commonly associated with food preparation such as pits, shells, bones, and peels. Food waste does not include liquids or large amounts of oils and meats which are collected for rendering, fuel production or other non-disposal applications, or any food fit for human consumption that has been set aside, stored properly and is accepted for donation by a charitable organization and any food collected to feed animals in compliance with applicable regulations.
    Covered businesses must collect food waste that is controlled by the business, agents, and employees. This requirement does not apply to food wastes controlled by customers or the public. At its discretion, a business may also collect food waste from customers or the public but must ensure that food wastes are free of non-food items. K-12 schools may also include student-generated food waste from school cafeteria meals but must ensure that food wastes are free of non-food items.
    Covered businesses must have correctly-labeled and easily-identifiable receptacles for internal maintenance or work areas where food waste may be collected, stored, or both.
    Covered businesses must post accurate signs where food waste is collected, stored, or both that identify the materials that the covered business must source separate.
    Owners or managers of single or multi-tenant buildings containing covered businesses must allow or otherwise enable the provision of food waste collection service to lessees or occupants subject to the business food waste requirement.
    3. Compliance Timeline. Covered Businesses must comply with the food waste requirement as determined by the quantity of food waste they generate per week, on average. Implementation will begin with Business Group 1 and progress to the other groups according to the dates noted below. Covered Businesses that demonstrate they generate less than 250 pounds per week of food waste are not subject to this requirement.
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Business Group 1                                      |
    | March 31, 2020-March 31, 2021                         |
    | ≥0.5 ton (1,000 pounds) per week food waste generated |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Business Group 2                                      |
    | March 31, 2021-Sept. 30, 2022                         |
    | ≥0.25 ton (500 pounds) per week food waste generated  |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Business Group 3                                      |
    | Sept. 30, 2022-Sept. 30, 2023                         |
    | ≥0.125 ton (250 pounds) per week food waste generated |
    | and                                                   |
    | elementary and secondary schools                      |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    4. Temporary Compliance Waivers to Covered Businesses. A covered business may seek a temporary (12 month) waiver from the business food waste requirement by providing access to a recycling specialist for a site visit and demonstrating that the covered business cannot comply with the business food waste requirement. Businesses must agree to periodic waiver verification site visits to determine if conditions that warrant the waiver are still in place and cannot be remedied in accordance with waiver criteria.
    5. Enforcement of the Business Food Waste Requirement. A covered business that does not comply with the business food waste requirement may receive a written notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance will describe the violation, provide the covered business an opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the notice, and offer assistance with compliance.
    A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation. The citation will provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within the time specified in the citation and will notify the covered business that it may be subject to a fine.
    A covered business that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the citation may be subject to a fine per section 1.06. (Ord. 3-2019, 2019; Ord. 4-2009 § 16, 2009; Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 16, 1993)

8.24.170 Ownership of solid waste.
All solid waste located, placed or deposited in a can, container, roller cart, drop box or receptacle provided by the licensee to a customer, or provided by the customer for collection by licensee shall belong upon collection to the licensee. It is unlawful for any person other than the appropriate licensee to remove any solid waste from such receptacle. Any person removing solid waste materials from containers in violation of this section, shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 4-1993 § 17, 1993)

8.24.180 General offenses.
A. No person shall without permission of the owner or generator of recyclable material, take recyclable materials set out to be collected by a person authorized by the City to provide collection service for that recyclable material, except in accordance with this chapter.
B. No person shall remove any recyclable material from a container, box, collection vehicle, depot or other receptacle provided for the accumulation or storage of recyclable material without permission of the owner of the receptacle or the recyclable material. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 18, 1993)

8.24.190 Suspension, modification or revocation of license.
A. The City Council may suspend, modify or revoke a license or permit granted in accordance with this chapter after written notice and hearing, upon finding that the licensee or permittee has:
    1. Willfully violated this chapter or state statutes applicable to the collection of solid waste materials or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder or by this Council; or
    2. Willfully refused to provide adequate service in its service area after written notice and reasonable opportunity to do so.
B. In the event the City or its chosen representative shall determine, in its opinion that a serious health hazard or danger exists to the public as a result of the act or failure to act on the part of a licensee hereunder in the performance of its licensed responsibilities as provided herein, the City may suspend the license or permit granted by this chapter without a hearing, but shall immediately notify licensee and provide opportunity for hearing before the City Council within five days from date of such suspension, setting forth in such notice the reasons for its action.
    1. Upon such hearing, licensee shall have full opportunity to be heard and the Council may affirm, modify or set aside the suspension ordered and may by resolution take whatever action it may deem appropriate to assure compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
    2. If a license granted hereunder is temporarily or permanently suspended, limited or terminated, for any reason whatsoever, by the City, the City may take whatever steps it may deem appropriate to assure that solid waste collection service is provided to the residents and inhabitants and properties of the area served by the licensee so affected, including the right to provide, on a temporary basis, such service by the City itself. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 19, 1993)

8.24.200 Rates and service charges.
A. The rates to be charged all persons by licensees shall be reasonable, uniform and based upon the level of service rendered.
B. The City shall establish a rate schedule for all service levels for solid waste, recyclable materials and yard debris collection service to be provided by licensees under this ordinance.
C. Rates shall be adopted by the Council by resolution.
D. Rates shall be established to the greatest extent practicable on a cost of service basis.
E. Rates shall be adequate to cover Allowable Expenses and to provide the return on revenue as defined in this ordinance, to allow investment in equipment and to ensure quality collection service. Unallowable expenses shall not be considered when establishing rates.
F. The rates that may be charged by a licensee for collection service shall conform to the latest schedule on file with the City Manager. Any rate not set by current resolution and charged in the City of Gresham must be approved by the City Council prior to implementation.
G. Rates shall be reviewed by the City on an annual basis. Licensees shall furnish financial and other information the council considers necessary to determine the schedule of charges. Licensees may identify information submitted to the City as confidential. Prior to submitting such information to the City, licensees shall prominently mark any such information with the word "confidential." The City shall treat any information so marked as confidential and shall not subject confidential information to public disclosure except as required by the State of Oregon Public Records Law. If the City receives a request to inspect the records under the Public Records Law, licensees will be notified.
H. All books, records, accounts and data relating to collection service operations conducted within the City by licensees are subject to inspection and audit by the City.
I. Upon audit by the City, if it is found deliberate or malicious material misrepresentation of books, records, accounts or data relating to collection service operations has occurred, the licensee shall pay audit costs incurred by the City.
J. To assist the Council in its determination of appropriate rates to be charged by licensee for services rendered pursuant to this chapter, the City may require licensees to furnish a schedule of proposed charges and rates with accompanying justification therefore, and may require that said licensees furnish such financial or other information as the City may deem necessary to determine such schedule of charges. The City shall also conduct such review and investigation as it may deem advisable and pertinent hereto, including contract with another party or government jurisdiction for technical review and assistance.
K. Prior to establishing a new rate schedule or making modifications thereto, the Council shall provide for public hearing to permit said interested persons and concerned licensees the opportunity to be heard thereupon. Notice of said hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City not less than seven nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of said hearing, and by public notice posted in at least three conspicuous places within the City at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
L. The City may by, appropriate resolution establish special rates for collection of brush and garden or other waste categories not otherwise covered by this chapter. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 20, 1993)

8.24.210 Restraining orders.
The City may, in addition to other specific enforcement authority granted hereunder or otherwise available to it, by resolution, based upon sworn affidavit or specific Council complaint, issue a temporary restraining order enjoining the alleged violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, license or permit issued hereunder, or the rules and regulations issued pursuant hereto. Such order shall direct the alleged violator to immediately cease and desist from the act or acts described therein until the Council determines with certainty whether or not a violation has occurred. Such temporary restraining order shall be issued by resolution of the Council and only after the Council shall determine that reasonable ground exists or believes such violation has occurred as stated. If the complainant be other than the Council itself, such order must be based upon sworn affidavit of complainant, setting forth allegations of the alleged violation which shall specify in language sufficient to apprise the alleged violator of the act or acts proposed to be enjoined. The order shall direct the alleged violator to appear at a certain time and place before the Council as stated therein to show cause, if there be any, why the alleged violator should not be immediately enjoined from doing the act or acts specified in the order. Should the Council determine at said show cause hearing that the alleged violator has committed the violation of this chapter as alleged the Council may make and enter order permanently enjoining further violation and may, if it deem appropriate, invoke appropriate penalties or direct appropriate remedial action to be taken concerning such violation. (Ord. 4-1993 § 21, 1993)

8.24.220 Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Licensees or permittees under this chapter shall have the burden and responsibility of disposing of the solid waste which they shall collect; disposal shall not be made within the City limits unless specifically permitted by state statute or City ordinance and said licensee or permittee will obey all applicable laws and regulations regarding disposal of the same and will not make or cause a nuisance in so doing. Both shall file all reports required by the City or state law.
B. Licensees or permittees shall have the privilege of using the streets and alleyways of the City for the collection of solid wastes; all collections will be made with the least possible delay and inconvenience to the public or individuals.
C. Licensees hereunder shall collect all solid wastes from parties availing themselves of the use of the collection system within their specified areas when such materials are placed in proper receptacles and located in proper places in accordance with this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder. The City shall not be responsible in any way for the collection of charges by a licensee hereunder, but the licensee shall collect for its services in a reasonable business manner.
D. The licensees hereunder shall do all things reasonably necessary to give the City a good and efficient solid waste collection and disposal service system and shall operate for the common good, benefit, and the health, welfare and needs of the citizens and inhabitants of the City. (Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 22, 1993)

8.24.230 Penalties and remedies.
A. Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 11, 2006)
B. In addition to the penalties described above, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and the City may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate legal proceedings to temporarily or permanently enjoin or abate such nuisance.
C. The penalties and remedies provided in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other penalties and remedies available to the City under any other ordinance or law.
D. A Business or Business Recycling Service Customer that does not comply with Section 8.24.160(F), Business Recycling Requirement, may receive a notice of noncompliance, which shall describe the violation, give the Business or Business Recycling Service Customer an opportunity to cure the violation within a time specified in the notice, and provide an offer of assistance with compliance. A Business or Business Recycling Service Customer that does not cure a violation within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance may receive a written citation, which shall provide an additional opportunity to cure the violation within a time specified in the citation and shall notify the Business or Business Recycling Service Customer that it may be subject to a fine. (Ord. 4-2009, 2009; Ord. 2-2003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 4-1993 § 23, 1993)

Chapter 8.28 FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY CODE

Sections:
8.28.010     Adoption of Fire Code and Fire and Life Safety Regulations.
8.28.020     Definitions.
8.28.030     Establishment and Duties of the Fire and Life Safety Division.
8.28.040     Amendments to the Oregon Fire Code.
8.28.050     Appeals.
8.28.060     Fire Safety Inspection Program.
8.28.100     Unlawful Burning.

8.28.010 Adoption of Fire Code and Fire and Life Safety Regulations.
A. For the purpose of prescribing minimum regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, panic or explosion, the City adopts the Fire Code known as the Oregon Fire Code, 2010 Edition, and the whole thereof, including Oregon adopted appendices, except as otherwise amended in Section 8.25.070 and incorporated herein, (Ord. 9-2010, 2010; Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)
B. This Code section, including the codes hereby adopted, shall be filed and maintained in the records of the City and in the State Fire Marshal's Office. The whole of this chapter shall be known as the Fire and Life Safety Code of the City of Wood Village, hereafter known as “Fire Code”. (Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)
C. In addition to any fines, penalties, remedies or other enforcement powers authorized by the Oregon Fire Code, any violation of the Oregon Code shall also constitute a public nuisance, subject to enforcement under Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 8.16, and a Class B violation, under Article 750. (Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)
D. Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code or any other applicable law or ordinance, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter adopted by the State of Oregon and the City of Wood Village. (Ord. 11-2004, 2004; Ord. 13-2003 § 1, 2003)

8.28.020 Definitions.
The definitions provided by the Uniform Fire Code adopted by this chapter shall be amended or added to as follows:Manager. Wherever the Oregon Uniform Fire Code uses the term Manager or director, it shall mean the Wood Village City Manager.
Business. Any activity, trade, occupation, profession, or pursuit conducted for the purpose of generating revenue, whether for profit or non-profit regardless of occupancy type assigned by code language.
Jurisdiction. Wherever the Oregon Fire Code uses the term jurisdiction, it shall mean the City of Wood Village.
Fire Code Official. Wherever the Oregon Fire Code uses the term Fire Code Official, it shall mean the City of Gresham Fire Chief or Fire Marshal.
Occupancy. The lawfully permitted purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used.
Illegal Occupancy. Any business occupying a building or on a premises without a City business license application or the changing occupancy without proper building and planning department permits or Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)

8.28.030 Establishment and Duties of the Fire and Life Safety Division.
The 2010 Oregon Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire and Life Safety Division of the Gresham Fire and Emergency Services which shall be operated under the direction of the Fire Chief. (Ord. 9-2010, 2010; Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)

8.28.040 Amendments to the Oregon Fire Code.
1. The 2007 Oregon Fire Code is amended and changed as follows:
2. The jurisdiction shall set by resolution fees for special use permits.
The jurisdiction shall set by resolution fees for the following:
    a. Initial business fire inspections.
    b. Reinspections.
    c. Failure to abate hazards.
    d. False alarms.
3. Section 308.3.1 is amended to read:Exceptions:
1. One and two family dwellings.
4. Section 308.3.1.2 amended to read:Liquefied-petroleum-gas-fueled cooking devices.
LP-gas burners having an LP-gas container with a water capacity greater than 2.5 pounds {nominal 1 pound LP-gas capacity} shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet of combustible construction.
Exception:
1. One and two family dwellings
5. Section 505.1 is amended to read:Address Numbers. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch and larger when required by Gresham Fire and Emergency Services Standard Operating Guideline 3.1.5.
(Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)
6. Section 804.1.1 is amended to read:Restricted occupancies
Natural cut trees shall be prohibited in Group A, E, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and SR occupancies.
Exceptions:
1. Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1 or 903.1.2 shall not be prohibited.
2. Within dwelling units of R-2 occupancies.
7. Section 3401.4 is amended to read:Permits
Permits for the installation of all flammable or combustible liquids within or outside of building are required within all areas of the City.
8. Section 3401.4.1 is amended to read:Plans
Construction documents shall be submitted with each permit application for flammable or combustible liquid tanks and/or the storage of the same.
9. Permits
Permits for the installation of all liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks and/or storage of all LPG are required within all areas of the City. Distributors shall not fill an LP-gas container for which a permit is required unless a permit for installation has been issued for that location by the fire code official.
10. Section 3801.3 is amended to read:Plans
Plans shall be submitted with each permit application for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks and/or storage of the same.
(Ord. 9-2010, 2010; Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)

8.28.050 Appeals.
The Appeals Board specified in Section 108.1 of the Fire Code shall consist of the Building Code Board of Appeals for the City, with the addition of a fire protection professional designated by the Code Official. (Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)

8.28.060 Fire Safety Inspection Program.
1. Purpose and Scope. The purpose of this section is to set forth the requirements of a Fire Safety Inspection Program within the City of Wood Village for violations of the Oregon Fire Code (OFC). The provisions of this section shall apply to each business location of every business within the City of Wood Village.
2. Hazard Level Designations. A hazard level designation for each individual business will be determined by the Fire Marshal based on occupancy, classification and existing hazards. The Fire Marshal will utilize the hazard ratings issued for occupancy designations by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), “Installation of Sprinkler Systems,” and as designated by OFC Chapter 2, In cases of multiple occupancy classifications, hazard level placement will normally correspond to the occupancy classification with the highest rated hazard level.
3. Fire Safety Inspections. Each business location of every business located within the City of Wood Village is subject to a fire safety inspection by Gresham FES each calendar year. An inspection fee will be assessed when the inspection is conducted. Inspection fees shall be established by Council resolution and correspond to the hazard level designation for each business location as determined by the Fire Marshal.
4. Fire Safety Reinspections. When violations of the OFC are found in the course of an annual inspection, Gresham FES shall conduct a reinspection, after allowing the appropriate time for voluntary abatement of the violation. Fees for reinspection shall be established by Council resolution.
5. Failure to Abate OFC Violations. Failure to abate OFC violations shall constitute a public nuisance, subject to enforcement under Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 8.16, and subject the violator to the nuisance abatement remedies established in GRC Article 7.50, including the imposition of an administrative enforcement fee for each month the violation continues. The administrative enforcement fee for inspection violations shall be established by Council resolution. In addition to the imposition of an administrative enforcement fee, the City Manager may enforce abatement proceedings or civil action as provided in GRC Article 7.50, or as otherwise authorized by law, including any enforcement remedies, orders, or powers under the OFC.
6. Business License Inspections. Any person or business entity that applies for a license to conduct business in a physical location within the City of Wood Village must obtain a Business License Inspection by Gresham FES, and pay a fee for that inspection, as established by Council resolution. Any person or business entity that applies for a renewal of any license to conduct business in a physical location within the City of Wood Village may be subject to a Business License Inspection by Gresham FES, and pay a fee for that inspection, as established by Council resolution, if a history of OFC code violations have been found within said business location and a general fire safety inspection has not been completed there within the previous 12 months.
7. Liens. Any fees, including administrative enforcement fees, fire safety inspection and reinspection fees, and business license inspection fees, shall, if not paid within 30 days of imposition, constitute a valid lien against the property in favor of the City of Wood Village, and shall remain a lien against the property until fully paid. The City shall file notices of such liens with the Multnomah County Clerk Recorder’s Office. The City shall collect an administrative fee as set by Council resolution for the release of any lien issued by the City. (Ord. 3-2007, 2007; Ord. 11-2004, 2004)

8.28.100 Unlawful Burning.
A. No person may:
    1. Burn yard debris or any other type of material on any single or multi-family property within the City of Wood Village except when specifically authorized by a valid open burn permit issued by the City of Gresham Fire Marshal or during a designated RESIDENTIAL BACKYARD burn season WHICH CONSISTS OF 10 SPECIFIC DAYS IN THE SPRING AND 10 SPECIFIC DAYS IN THE FALL OF EACH YEAR.
    2. Burn at any time any man-made material; rubber; plastic; garbage; construction materials; petroleum based materials; or any other product for which burning is prohibited by the Department of Environmental Quality.
    3. Conduct any type of burning during a declared fire season.
    4. Set on fire, or cause to be set on fire, any grass, grain, stubble, or other material being or growing on land within the city.
    5. Intentionally or negligently allow fire to escape from the person’s own land, or land of which the person is in possession or control.
    6. Accidentally set any fire on the person’s own land or the land of another and allow it to escape from control without extinguishing it, or using every reasonable effort to do so.
    7. Know of a fire burning on the person’s own land, or land of which the person is in possession or control, and fail or neglect to make every reasonable effort to extinguish it, regardless of whether or not the person is responsible for the starting or the existence of the fire.
B. Unlawful burning is a Class A violation. (Ord. 13-2007, 2007)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:
9.04         General Provisions
9.12         Offenses against Public Peace and Decency
9.16         Offenses against Property
9.24         Weapons
9.28         Curfew

Chapter 9.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
9.04.010     Definitions.
9.04.020     Offenses.
9.04.030     Violation—Penalty.

9.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this title:
“Person” means and includes any natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation, whether he or it is acting for himself or itself or as the clerk, servant, employee or agent of another. (Ord. 15 § 1(a), 1954)

9.04.020 Offenses.
A. The doing of any act or thing prohibited or the failing to do any act or thing commanded to be done in this title within the corporate limits of the City is declared to be an offense against the public peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the City.
B. Any person who shall attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this title, but who for any reason is prevented from consummating such act, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (Ord. 15 §§ 1(b), 75, 1954)

9.04.030 Violation—Penalty.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this title commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code (Ord. 4-2006 § 12, 2006; Ord. 15 §§ 74, 77, 1954)

Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY

Sections:
9.12.050     Purpose.
9.12.060     Definitions.
9.12.270     Unreasonable Noises Prohibited.
9.12.280     Allowable Noise and Exemptions.
9.12.290     Violation-Penalty.

9.12.050 Purpose.
The City Council has determined it necessary to control noise and abate when necessary unreasonable sources of noise for the safety and comfort of those within the City.

9.12.060 Definitions.
Noise Sensitive Receptor: Schools, courts, churches, hospitals, and similar institutions where individuals eat, sleep, or congregate and/or unreasonable noise would interfere with normal functioning.
Sound Producing Sources: Items, property, or people that emit sound using, but not limited to:
    a. Vehicle Horns, Signaling Devices, and Similar Devices
    b. Non-Emergency Signaling Devices
    c. Emergency Signaling Devices
    d. Radios, Televisions, Stereos, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices
    e. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems, and Similar Devices
    f. People shouting, yelling, or otherwise vocally emitting sound
    g. Animals and Birds
    h. Construction activity
    i. Blowers, and Similar Devices
Plainly Audible Sound: Sound that is musical, spoken, or mechanical in nature that is unambiguous
Vehicle: any device which is designed or used for transporting people, goods, or property upon a public street or roadway, including but not limited to a body, engine, transmission, frame, or other major parts, but does not include a device propelled by human power, such as a bicycle, or a device operated exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks. (Ord. 9-2009, 2009)

9.12.270 Unreasonable Noises Prohibited.
The unreasonable making of, or knowingly and unreasonably permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or vibration in any residential area, noise sensitive receptor, public street, commercial establishments adjacent to residential property or other place or building is prohibited. Unreasonable sound caused by the following activities and during the specified hours below is prohibited.
A. Construction and/or Commercial Activity. 
    a. Loading or Unloading Merchandise, Materials, Equipment: The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous, and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence.
    b. Construction or Repair of Buildings, Excavation of Streets and Highways: The construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., on weekdays.
        i. In cases of emergency, construction or repair noises are exempt from this provision.
        ii. In non-emergency cases, the entity wishing to conduct construction or loud commercial activity may reach an agreement with the City Manager outlining hours in which noise may be conducted between the hours listed above and for the length of time such noise will be permitted.
B. Noise Produced from Vehicles. 
    a. Vehicle Horns, Signaling Devices, and Similar Devices: The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space of the City, for more than ten consecutive seconds. The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, as a danger warning is exempt from this prohibition.
    b. Radios, Sound Systems. 
        i. Unreasonable music or other noise emitted from a vehicle’s speakers while parked on residential street or noise sensitive receptor between 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM
C. Signaling Devices. 
    a. Non-Emergency Signaling Devices: Sounding or permitting sounding any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place for more than ten consecutive seconds in any hourly period. The reasonable sounding of such devices by houses of religious worship, ice cream trucks, seasonal contribution solicitors or by the City for traffic control purposes are exempt from the operation of this provision.
    b. Emergency Signaling Devices: The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency or except as provided in subsections (1) and (2), below
        i. 
            1. Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed five minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more than once in each calendar month.
        ii. 
            2. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm, shall terminate in compliance with Section 8.08.110 of the Code and further comply with all provisions of Chapter 8.08 of the Code.
D. Devices amplifying sound for the purpose of communicating information or entertainment:
    a. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems, and Similar Devices:
        i. The unreasonably loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or other device for producing or reproducing sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays in the following areas:
            1. Within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas;
            2. Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real property line of the public space from which the sound emanates, and is unreasonably loud and raucous. This shall not apply to any public performance, gathering, or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the City.
    b. Radios, Televisions, Boomboxes, Phonographs, Stereos, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices: The use or operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any
    person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors and passers-by, or is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from any person in a commercial, industrial area, or public space. The use or operation of a radio, television, boombox, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential or noise sensitive receptors, including multi-family or single-family dwellings.
E. Other Sound Producing Sources:
    a. Yelling, Shouting, and Similar Activities: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in residential or noise sensitive receptors or in public places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities. This section is to be applied only to those situations where the disturbance is not a result of the content of the communication but due to the volume, duration, location, timing or other factors not based on content.
    b. Animals and Birds: Unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls or otherwise cares for the animal or bird.
    c. Blowers, and Similar Devices: In residential or noise sensitive receptors, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, provided that the noise is unreasonably loud and raucous and can be heard across the property line of the property from which it emanates. The operation of any gasoline engine without having the same equipped with and using thereupon a muffler.
F. Enforcement of Prohibited Noise. No person or person in charge of property shall produce or permit to be produced, with a sound producing source, sound that:
    a. When measured at or within the boundary of property on which a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound is located:
        i. Exceeds 50 dBA at any time between the hours specified in the above sections
        ii. Is plainly audible at any time between the hours specified in the above sections
        iii. Within a noise sensitive receptor that is not the source of the sound or on a public right-of-way at a distance of at least 50 feet from the source of the sound.

9.12.280 Allowable Noise and Exemptions.
The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion or vibration incidental to the operation of these places when conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent residences or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted from this provision.Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions set out in Section 9.12.270 and are in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth in Section 9.12.270:
A. Motor vehicles on traffic ways of the City, provided that the prohibition of Section 9.12.270 continues to apply.
B. Repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or significant loss of property.
C. Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity, or imminent danger, provided that the prohibition contained in Section 9.12.270.C continues to apply.
D. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
E. Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the City, the State, or the federal government, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when public welfare and convenience renders it impractical to perform the work between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
F. Construction activity by public or private entity between the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM when deemed appropriate and necessary by the City Manager per Section 9.12.270A(b)ii.
G. Outdoor School and Playground Activities. Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events.
H. Other Outdoor Events. Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting events, and other similar outdoor events, provided that a permit has been obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.

9.12.290 Violation-Penalty.
Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 10-2007, 2007)

Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY

Sections:
9.16.020     Posted notices, defacement.
9.16.030     Posters, unauthorized.
9.16.060     Injurious substances, deposit on streets.
9.16.090     Surface waters, drainage.
9.16.100     Ice and snow, removal.
9.16.110     Attractive nuisances.
9.16.120     Sidewalks, obstructing.
9.16.130     Streets and sidewalks, obstructing.
9.16.160     Sidewalks, driving on.

9.16.020 Posted notices, defacement.
It is unlawful for any person willfully to deface or tear down any official notice or bulletin posted in conformity with law. (Ord. 15 § 58, 1954)

9.16.030 Posters, unauthorized.
It is unlawful for any person to affix a placard, bill or poster upon any personal or real property, private or public, without first obtaining permission of the owner or proper public authority. (Ord. 15 § 59, 1954)

9.16.060 Injurious substances, deposit on streets.
It is unlawful for any person willfully to place or deposit upon any street or public way any substance tending to mar the appearance or to detract from the cleanliness or safety of such street or public way. (Ord. 15 § 62, 1954)

9.16.090 Surface waters, drainage.
It is unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or structure to suffer or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any such building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any such sidewalk, and every such owner, lessee or occupant shall at all times keep and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system sufficient to carry to the street any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such building. (Ord. 15 § 65, 1954)

9.16.100 Ice and snow, removal.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person having the control or custody of any premises or unimproved property to remove all snow or ice which has fallen or has accumulated upon the sidewalks abutting upon such premises or property within two hours after such snow or ice has ceased to fall thereon; provided, however, that if such snow is falling or such ice accumulating after the hour of six p.m., the same shall be removed within two hours after it shall cease to fall or within two hours after seven a.m. on the next succeeding day, as the case may be. (Ord. 15 § 66, 1954)

9.16.110 Attractive nuisances.
It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or any person having control or custody or management of any premises to suffer or permit to remain unguarded upon such premises any machinery, equipment, or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance or which is liable to attract children. It shall further be unlawful for any such owner, lessee, occupant, or person having control or custody or management of any such premises to suffer or permit to remain unguarded upon such premises any pit, quarry, cistern, well, or other excavation. (Ord. 15 § 67, 1954)

9.16.120 Sidewalks, obstructing.
It is unlawful for any crowd or collection of persons to gather or to stand upon any sidewalk or street crossing so as to prevent, interrupt or obstruct the travel or free passage over the same by the public or for any person to fail or refuse to disperse or move on when directed to do so by any peace officer. (Ord. 15 § 51, 1954)

9.16.130 Streets and sidewalks, obstructing.
It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit upon any street or sidewalk any article which tends to prevent, interrupt or obstruct the travel or free passage of pedestrians and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 15 § 52, 1954)

9.16.160 Sidewalks, driving on.
It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse or other animal or any motor vehicle upon, over or across any sidewalk except where a proper incline or crossing is provided for that purpose. (Ord. 15 § 47, 1954)

Chapter 9.24 WEAPONS

Sections:
9.24.010     Firearms, discharging of.

9.24.010 Firearms, discharging of.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any type of firearm; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall apply to any peace officer while acting in performance of his duties or to any person lawfully using a firearm in defense of his property or person. (Ord. 15 § 6, 1954)

Chapter 9.28 CURFEW

Sections:
9.28.010     Violation of curfew by minor prohibited—Exceptions.
9.28.020     Hours.
9.28.030     Burden of proof.
9.28.040     Parental responsibility.
9.28.050     Arrest of minor.
9.28.060     Violation—Penalty.

9.28.010 Violation of curfew by minor prohibited—Exceptions.
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, or remain, in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the City between the hours hereafter specified, unless such minor child is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have the care, custody or control of the minor, or unless such minor is then and there engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which makes it necessary for her or him to be in or upon such street, highway, park, alley or other public place between such specified hours and is authorized by the parent. (Ord. 6-2004, 2004; Ord. 9-1963 § 1, 1963)

9.28.020 Hours.
The specified hours for the purpose of this chapter shall be as follows:
A. For minor children under the age of fourteen (14) years who have not begun the ninth grade the specified hours shall be 9:15 p.m. and six a.m. of the following morning, except that during the summer months when school is not in session the hours shall be between 10:15 p.m. and six a.m. of the following morning;
B. For minor children fourteen (14) years of age or over or who have begun the ninth grade, the specified hours shall be 10:15 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday and six a.m. of the following morning; the specified hours on Friday and Saturday shall be between twelve midnight and six a.m. of the following morning except that during the summer months during which time regular school is not in session the hours on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday shall be between twelve midnight and six a.m. of the following morning; and the hours on Friday and Saturday shall be between twelve midnight and six a.m. of the following morning. (Ord. 9-1963 § 2, 1963)
C. For minor children between seven and eighteen years of age who have not completed the twelfth grade, the specified hours are school hours except while attending school as required by State law unless such minor is traveling directly between school and home or to another location designated by a parent after being authorized and approved to be away from school as provided in State law, but is not suspended or expelled, or is emancipated or exempt from compulsory school attendance pursuant to State law. (Ord. 6-2004, 2004; Ord. 9-1963 § 2, 1963)

9.28.030 Burden of proof.
When a minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years must of necessity by virtue of employment, night school, school activity or other lawful pursuit be in or upon any street, highway, park alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the City between the above specified hours, the burden of proof thereof shall be upon the minor child or person claiming the exempt status of being engaged in a lawful pursuit. (Ord. 9-1963 § 3, 1963)

9.28.040 Parental responsibility.
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow such minor child to be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place during the hours, specified in Section 9.28.020, subsection A, B or C as applicable, except as otherwise provided herein. The conviction of a minor child for violation of this chapter on three separate occasions shall be prima facie evidence that said parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of said minor has allowed or permitted said minor child to violate this chapter. (Ord. 6-2004, 2004; Ord. 9-1963 § 4, 1963)

9.28.050 Arrest of minor.
Any peace officer of the City or any other law enforcement officer may arrest any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years for a violation of any applicable provision of this chapter and said officer may:
A. On any first violation of this chapter take or send the offending minor child to his or her residence and notify the parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of the minor of said violation; or
B. If the arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the parents of the minor are failing to exercise proper control, care or custody of the minor, to take the minor directly before the court having a juvenile jurisdiction in the area where the arrest was made.
C. On any second or subsequent violation of any applicable provision of this chapter the offending minor shall be taken directly before the court having juvenile jurisdiction in the area in which said offense occurred for disposition in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 9-1963 § 5, 1963)

9.28.060 Violation—Penalty.
Any person, including any minor child, who shall violate any provision of this chapter commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 13, 2006; Ord. 9-1963 § 6, 1963)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:
10.04        General Provisions, Administration and Enforcement
10.08        General Traffic Rules
10.10        Street Racing Prohibition
10.12        Stopping, Standing and Parking
10.16        Bicycles
10.20        Parades and Processions
10.24        Abandoned Vehicles

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
10.04.010    Title.
10.04.020    Definitions.
10.04.030    Powers of the City Council.
10.04.040    Implementation of ordinance requirements/traffic regulations.
10.04.050    Public danger.
10.04.060    Standards.
10.04.070    Authority of police and fire officers.

10.04.010 Title.
This title may be cited as the Wood Village traffic control ordinance. (Ord. 2-1988 § 1, 1988)

10.04.020 Definitions.
In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:
“Bus stop” means a roadway space designated by sign for use by buses loading or unloading passengers.
“Holiday” means New Year's Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the Council to be a holiday.
“Loading zone” means a roadway space designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.
“Motor vehicle” means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, fork-lift trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon.
“Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
“Street” means highway, road or street as defined in ORS 801.110, 801.305, 801.450 and 801.535 including the entire width of the right-of-way.
“Taxicab stand” means a roadway space designated by sign for use by taxicabs.
“Traffic lane” means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic.
“Vehicle” means as used in subsequent sections of this title, includes bicycles. (Ord. 2-1988 § 3, 1988)

10.04.030 Powers of the City Council.
A. Subject to state laws, the City Council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another ordinance.
B. The powers of the Council shall include, but not be limited to:
    1. Designation of through streets;
    2. Designation of one-way streets;
    3. Designation of truck routes;
    4. Designation of parking meter zones;
    5. Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage;
    6. Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by state law;
    7. Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones;
    8. Revision of speed limits in parks;
    9. Temporary blocking or closing of streets for public purpose;
    10. Establishment of bicycle lanes and paths and traffic controls for such facilities;
    11. Establishment, removal or alteration of traffic control devices including but not limited to:
        a. Safety zones and traffic lanes,
        b. Intersection channeling and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns and the time when such prohibition applies,
        c. Parking areas and time limitations including permissible parking manner,
        d. Loading zones and stops for vehicles,
        e. Traffic control signals. (Ord. 2-1988 § 4, 1988)

10.04.040 Implementation of ordinance requirements/traffic regulations.
To the extent permissible by law the powers of the Council as hereinabove set forth may be delegated to a Council committee, the City Manager or other officer designated by the Council to perform such function. The installation, maintenance, removal and altering of traffic control devices shall be based on standards contained in the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways and as supplemented from time to time. (Ord. 2-1988 § 5, 1988)

10.04.050 Public danger.
Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the Mayor or his or her designee may install temporary traffic control devices. (Ord. 2-1988 § 6, 1988)

10.04.060 Standards.
The regulations of the Mayor or his traffic control designee shall be based on:
A. Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;
B. Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission;
C. Other recognized traffic control standards. (Ord. 2-1988 § 7, 1988)

10.04.070 Authority of police and fire officers.
A. It shall be the duty of city police officers and so designated by the City Council and other police officers performing duties within the city, to enforce the provisions of this title.
B. In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police and fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
C. In each instance in this title where reference is made to an officer and/or a fire department or the city fire department, such term shall designate and apply to the fire district servicing the City or its designated agents. (Ord. 2-1988 § 8, 1988)

Chapter 10.08 GENERAL TRAFFIC RULES

Sections:
10.08.010    Applicability to state traffic laws (code).
10.08.020    Crossing private property.
10.08.030    Unlawful riding.
10.08.040    Sleds, roller skates, etc. on streets.
10.08.050    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.
10.08.060    Removing glass and debris.
10.08.070    Storage of motor vehicles on streets.
10.08.080    Pedestrians.
10.08.090    Brakes.
10.08.100    Violation—Penalty.

10.08.010 Applicability to state traffic laws (code).
To the extent required or permitted, the City, unless otherwise stated herein or unless otherwise set forth in City ordinance as authorized or allowed by pertinent state statutes, does adopt and incorporate herein by reference all pertinent and applicable provisions of the State Traffic Acts (Code) and particularly ORS Chapter 811 of the Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapter 153. (Ord. 2-1988 § 2, 1988)

10.08.020 Crossing private property.
No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services. (Ord. 2-1988 § 9(1), 1988)

10.08.030 Unlawful riding.
A. No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise.
B. No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a street. (Ord. 2-1988 § 9(2), 1988)

10.08.040 Sleds, roller skates, etc. on streets.
A. No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar devices, except where authorized.
B. No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of a coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall use the streets except while crossing at a crosswalk or in an authorized area. (Ord. 2-1988 § 9(3), 1988)

10.08.050 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.
A. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
B. Driveways must be paved with asphalt, concrete, or ¾ inch gravel designed and constructed in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards
C. No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.
D. No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair. (Ord. 2-1988 § 9(4), 1988)

10.08.060 Removing glass and debris.
A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. (Ord. 2-1988 § 9(5), 1988)

10.08.070 Storage of motor vehicles on streets.
No person shall store or permit to be stored on a street or other public property, without permission of the Council, a motor vehicle or personal property for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. Failure to move, by a minimum distance of five-hundred (500) feet, a motor vehicle or other personal property for a period of forty-eight (48) hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage thereof. This does not include basketball stands when not impeding traffic or presenting a safety hazard as determined by the code or law enforcement officer. (Ord. 2-2008, 2008; Ord. 2-1988 § 9(6), 1988)

10.08.080 Pedestrians.
No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks with marked crosswalks or if within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a marked crosswalk. A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle, unless crossing within a crosswalk. (Ord. 2-1988 § 12, 1988)

10.08.090 Brakes.
A. All motor vehicles or bicycles operated through or on public streets and ways in the city shall conform to the requirements of applicable state law and shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control their movement and to stop and to hold such vehicles.
B. Brakes of a mechanical or hydraulic nature operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise, must be effectively muffled to avoid loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises in the operation thereof. This section shall apply to the use of “exhaust” brakes or “jake” brakes. The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of a motor vehicle or the “exhaust” brakes or braking system of a motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises and/or emission of annoying smoke, shall be considered a violation of this title. (Ord. 2-1988 § 17, 1988)

10.08.100 Violation—Penalty.
A. Violation of Sections 10.08.020 through 10.08.090 is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 14, 2006; Ord. 2-1988 § 18(1), (2), (3) (part), 1988)

Chapter 10.10 STREET RACING PROHIBITION

Sections:
10.10.010    Title.
10.10.020    Definitions.
10.10.030    Purpose.
10.10.040    Administration – Enforcement.
10.10.050    Administration – Rules and Regulations.
10.10.060    Prohibited Activities.
10.10.070    Violation – Penalties.
10.10.080    Violation - Impoundment.

10.10.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as "The City of Wood Village Street Racing Prohibition Ordinance," and may be so pleaded.

10.10.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
A. "Speed racing" is defined as set forth in ORS 811.125.
B. "Spectator" means a person who attends a speed racing activity for the purpose of encouraging such activity.

10.10.030 Purpose.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City, the Council has determined it necessary to establish and maintain regulations to prevent high speed racing on roadways within the City. This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish this purpose.

10.10.040 Administration – Enforcement.
The Manager or Sheriff shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

10.10.050 Administration – Rules and Regulations.
The Manager may adopt rules necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

10.10.060 Prohibited Activities.
A. It is unlawful for any person to participate in speed racing upon any street, public or private, or any premise open to the public, within the City limits.
B. It is unlawful for any person to be a spectator of speed racing within the City limits.
C. Any vehicle utilized within the City limits in violation of this chapter, including vehicles belonging to, or under the control of, spectators may be towed without notice as provided by Section 10.10.080, and all passengers and occupants promoting or encouraging may be cited as provided by Section 10.10.070.

10.10.070 Violation – Penalties.
Violation of Section 10.10.060 is punishable by a fine of not more than the amount provided by state law for a Class A violation.

10.10.080 Violation - Impoundment.
A. Whenever a vehicle is found standing or parking in or upon any street, road or highway or parking area of the City in violation of Section 10.10.060 prohibiting speed racing, the owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle or a spectator as defined in Section 10.10.020, may be issued a citation and the vehicle removed or caused to be removed by the Sheriff and held at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession.
B. If a vehicle is so removed and held, the provisions relating to notice to owner, appraisal of value and owner reclaiming vehicle shall be followed in ORS 809.725 and ORS Chapter 819. If the vehicle is not redeemed within 30 days it will be disposed of as prescribed in ORS Chapter 819.
C. The Sheriff may authorize another police agency to remove and hold motor vehicles that are found in violation of this chapter, and may also define the geographical area within which the agency may order such removal. If a vehicle is so removed and held by another police agency, that agency shall provide notice to the owner of the removal in accordance with the procedures of the removing agency. (Ord. 3-2002 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 10.12 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections:
10.12.010    Method of parking.
10.12.020    Prohibited stopping, standing and parking.
10.12.025    Parking Permit Districts.
10.12.030    Prohibited practices.
10.12.040    Use of loading zone.
10.12.050    Unattended vehicles.
10.12.060    Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.
10.12.070    Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
10.12.080    Extension of parking time.
10.12.090    Exemption.
10.12.100    Emergency vehicles.
10.12.110    Violation of Sections 10.12.010 through 10.12.100—Penalty.
10.12.120    Parking citations and owner responsibility.
10.12.130    Impoundment of vehicles.

10.12.010 Method of parking.
A. Where parking spaces are designated on a street or public lot, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the direction of the traffic flow with the curbside wheel(s) of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the edge of the curb and within a single marked space and, unless the size and shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible.
B. The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street shall have priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to interfere.
C. Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(1), 1988)

10.12.020 Prohibited stopping, standing and parking.
A. It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control signal, in any of the following places:
    1. Within an intersection;
    2. On a crosswalk;
    3. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points of the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless local or traffic authorities shall indicate a different length by signs or markings;
    4. Within twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of curb lines, or if none, then within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection within a business or residence district, except at alleys;
    5. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any official flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway;
    6. Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
    7. Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
    8. In front of a private driveway;
    9. On a sidewalk;
    10. Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic, unless the vehicle so stopped or parked is being used in connection with the maintenance or repair of public or private utility service, above, below or upon the surface of the street or highway and the location of such vehicle is necessary in connection with such maintenance or repair;
    11. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street or highway;
    12. At any place where official traffic signs have been erected prohibiting standing and parking;
    13. Within a twenty-five (25) foot radius of the intersection of the centerlines of a street or highway;
    14. In front of the entrance, or other place where mail is received, of any post office or postal station;
    15. In any street so as to prevent the free passage of other vehicles in both directions at the same time, or so as to prevent any vehicle from turning from one street into another street;
    16. In any street, alley, lane, sidewalk or parking strip for the storage of any vehicle in lieu of a garage or barn;
    17. In any streets of the city for the purpose of displaying the same for sale or exchange;
    18. In the city at any time of day for the purpose of vending merchandise;
    19. In any emergency zone;
    20. In any entrance except to load or unload passengers for a period of time not to exceed one minute;
    21. In any loading zone except as to a commercial vehicle when actually engaged in loading or unloading goods, wares, merchandise or material, for a period of time not to exceed twenty (20) minutes;
    22. In any bus loading zone except a motor bus actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers;
    23. On private property without the consent of the owner of such private property;
    24. In any construction zone except by such vehicles as are actually necessary to the construction work being carried on.
B. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of subsection A of this section, or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00).
C. In addition to the state motor vehicle laws prohibiting parking, no person shall park or stand:
    1. A vehicle in violation of the Oregon Vehicle Code or in violation of a parking limitation device;
    2. A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of twenty (20) consecutive minutes in any two-hour period;
    3. A motor truck on a street between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. of the following day in front of or adjacent to a residence, motel, apartment house, hotel or other sleeping accommodation in a residential zone. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(2), 1988; Ord. 8 §§ 1, 2, 1954)

10.12.025 Parking Permit Districts.
The City Council may, at their sole discretion, designate or eliminate the designation, for permit parking on any roadway segment, portion of a roadway, or other right of way or property. Segments established by the City Council shall be adopted by Resolution, and permits acquired at the fee established by the City Council by Resolution.
A. The City Manager shall cause signs to be erected to designate the location of any permit parking area designated by the City Council.
B. A permit shall be issued upon application and payment of the permit fee only to the owner or the operator of a motor vehicle. Only one permit may be issued per registered vehicle.
C. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Permits shall not be transferable, and should a permitted vehicle be sold, the permit therefore shall be forfeited to the City, and a new permit issued for the remainder of the permit period in effect at the time of the sale.
D. Permits shall be affixed to the left rear bumper of the permitted vehicle.
E. Permits are only applicable for the area identified in the permit, and holders of the permit are not entitled to park in any manner in violation of parking requirements.
F. Permit parking areas are not subject to the time restrictions contained in 10.08.070 of this code.
G. Should parking by a permit holder cause damage to public facilities, the permit holder will be responsible for repair or the cost of repair for damage, beyond normal wear and tear,
H. Parking in a permit area without a permit shall be a violation. (Ord. 3-2012, 2012)

10.12.030 Prohibited practices.
No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street or other public property for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying the vehicle for sale;
B. Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
C. Displaying advertising from the vehicle;
D. Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized.
E. Sleeping, camping, or living in a vehicle for any period of time unless permitted under Section 8.16.200 regarding recreational vehicles, or unless parked in an authorized rest area. (Ord. 4-2013, 2013; Ord. 2-1988 § 10(3), 1988)

10.12.040 Use of loading zone.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case, when the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(4), 1988)

10.12.050 Unattended vehicles.
Whenever a police officer shall find a motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station (City Hall). (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(5), 1988)

10.12.060 Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.
The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping the taxicab outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(6), 1988)

10.12.070 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(7), 1988)

10.12.080 Extension of parking time.
Where maximum parking time limits are designed by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(8), 1988)

10.12.090 Exemption.
The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to a vehicle of the city, county or state or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street, or a vehicle owned by the U.S. Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(9), 1988)

10.12.100 Emergency vehicles.
The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not returning from a fire alarm may park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this title. However, this provision shall not relieve drivers of emergency vehicles from the duty to park or stand with regard to the safety of all persons. (Ord. 2-1988 § 10(10), 1988)

10.12.110 Violation of Sections 10.12.010 through 10.12.100—Penalty.
Violation of Sections 10.12.010 through 10.12.100 is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 15, 2006; Ord. 2-1988 § 18(2) (part), 1988)

10.12.120 Parking citations and owner responsibility.
A. Citation on Illegally Parked Vehicle. Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this title or state law, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation instructing the operator to answer to the charge against him or her or pay the penalty within seven days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation.
B. Failure to Comply with Traffic Citation Attached to Parked Vehicle. If the operator does not respond to a traffic citation affixed to a vehicle within a period of seven days, the City Recorder or municipal court clerk may send to the owner of the vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing the owner of the violation and warning him or her that in the event that the letter is disregarded for a period of ten days the fine will be doubled and the vehicle cited will be subject to impoundment and may be sold if not redeemed.
C. Owner Responsibility. The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, except when the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner's consent.
D. Registered Owner Presumption. In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was then the owner thereof. (Ord. 2-1988 § 15, 1988)

10.12.130 Impoundment of vehicles.
A. Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer may cause the vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner's expense. The owner shall be liable for the costs of towing and storage, notwithstanding that the vehicle was parked by another or that the vehicle was initially parked in a safe manner but subsequently became an obstruction or hazard.
B. The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance of the city relating to impoundment and disposition of vehicles abandoned on the city streets.
C. The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this title.
D. Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle parked in violation of a provision of this title or state law, if the vehicle has four or more unpaid parking violations outstanding against it, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle to be impounded. A vehicle impounded shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this subsection shall be disposed of in the same manner as is provided in subsection B of this section.
E. Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner. (Ord. 2-1988 § 16, 1988)

Chapter 10.16 BICYCLES

Sections:
10.16.010    Bicycle operating rules.
10.16.020    Impounding of bicycles.
10.16.030    Violation—Penalty.

10.16.010 Bicycle operating rules.
In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this title and state law pertaining to bicycles, a person shall:
A. Not leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not leave a bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of motor vehicles;
B. Not ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the city;
C. No person shall leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner thereof. (Ord. 2-1988 § 11(1), 1988)

10.16.020 Impounding of bicycles.
A. A bicycle left on a street or other public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours may be impounded by the police department.
B. If a bicycle impounded under this title is licensed, or other means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle which has been impounded.
C. A bicycle impounded under this title which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the city's procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property.
D. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. (Ord. 2-1988 § 11(2), 1988)

10.16.030 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 16, 2006; Ord. 2-1988 § 18(2) (part), 1988)

Chapter 10.20 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS

Sections:
10.20.010    Parades.
10.20.020    Funeral processions.
10.20.030    Violation—Penalty.

10.20.010 Parades.
A. No person shall organize or participate in a parade upon a public street or property without first obtaining a permit. A procession shall be considered a parade unless otherwise specified herein and a permit shall be required of any such procession of people consisting of fifty (50) or more persons or five or more vehicles.
B. Parade Permit. 
    1. Application for parade permit shall be made to the City Manager's office at least seven days prior to the intended date of the parade unless the time is waived by the City Manager or recorder for good reason.
    2. Parade permit application shall include the following information: name and address of person responsible for parade; date of parade; desired route including assembly and disbursal points; number of persons, vehicles and animals that will participate; proposed starting and ending time. The application shall be signed by the responsible person.
    3. The parade permit shall be granted unless the city finds that the parade will unreasonably disrupt traffic movement; require supervision that the city is unable to supply with its regular staff; applicant refuses to abide or comply with permit conditions.
    4. Applicant may appeal decision of the Manager/Recorder by filing written request with the recorder within seventy-two (72) hours of denial of permit or granting the same with conditions believed by applicant to be unreasonable. If appeal be filed the governing body shall schedule hearing which shall be not later than seven days following the filing of the appeal. Applicant shall be notified of the date and time to appear.
C. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant or operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising the parade.
D. The City may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade is being conducted in a fashion that endangers the well being or safety of the public. (Ord. 2-1988 § 13, 1988)

10.20.020 Funeral processions.
A. No permit is required for a funeral procession.
B. A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable.
C. The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control purposes.
D. All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on.
E. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.
F. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. (Ord. 2-1988 § 14, 1988)

10.20.030 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 16, 2006; Ord. 2-1988 § 18(2), 1988)

Chapter 10.24 ABANDONED VEHICLES

Sections:
10.24.010    Definitions.
10.24.020    Investigation—Notice.
10.24.030    Nuisance—Removal—Storage.
10.24.040    Inquiry and examination.
10.24.050    Notice to owner—Redemption, auction or disposal of vehicle.
10.24.060    Notice of sale.
10.24.070    Redemption procedure.
10.24.080    Sale procedure.
10.24.090    Certificate of sale.
10.24.100    Delivery of vehicle and certificate.
10.24.110    Applicability.
10.24.120    Charges.
10.24.130    Storage in private garage—Conditions.

10.24.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
“Abandoned” means left unoccupied and unclaimed or in a damaged or dismantled condition upon the streets or alleys of the city.
“Chief of police” means and includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city.
“City” means the City of Wood Village.
“Costs” means the expense of removing, storing or selling an impounded vehicle.
“Owner” means any individual, firm, corporation or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or any interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.
“Private garage” means a reputable private storage yard, garage or other storage place selected by the City Council or by an officer of the city designated by the Council to make such selection.
“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 4-1963 § 1, 1963)

10.24.020 Investigation—Notice.
A. It shall be the duty of the police department, whenever a vehicle is found abandoned upon the streets or alleys in the same position for a period of forty-eight (48) hours or more, to:
    1. Make a routine investigation to discover the owner and request removal of the vehicle;
    2. If the owner is not found, to place a notice upon the windshield, or some other part of the vehicle easily seen by the passing public.
B. Such notice shall state that the police department will remove and impound the vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, within twenty-four (24) hours of the day and time of the posting, unless:
    1. The owner removes the vehicle; or
    2. Good cause is shown, satisfactory to the chief of police, why such vehicle should not be removed by the owner or removed and impounded by the city. (Ord. 4-1963 § 2, 1963)

10.24.030 Nuisance—Removal—Storage.
A. An abandoned vehicle which remains in the same position for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after notice to remove has, been posted upon such vehicle, and no person has appeared to show good cause why such vehicle should not be moved, shall constitute a nuisance.
B. It shall be the duty of the police department to remove any vehicle which shall constitute a nuisance, under the provisions of this chapter, and store such vehicle upon city property or in or upon a private garage designated by the City pending investigation into the ownership of such vehicle. (Ord. 4-1963 § 3, 1963)

10.24.040 Inquiry and examination.
The police department, after impounding any vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall:
A. Make a diligent inquiry as to the name and address of the owner of the vehicle;
B. Examine such vehicle for license number, motor number, serial number, make, style, and any other information which will aid in the identification of the ownership of the vehicle; and
C. Thereafter, immediately transmit all available information pertaining to such vehicle to the Oregon Department of Transportation, with an inquiry for the name and address of the owner, whenever such vehicle is required by law to be registered therewith. (Ord. 5-1996 § 1 (part), 1996; Ord. 4-1963 § 4, 1963)

10.24.050 Notice to owner—Redemption, auction or disposal of vehicle.
If the owner is identified, he shall be notified immediately by certified or registered mail that such vehicle is held by the police department of the city. The notice to the owner shall also state:
A. The reason for impounding the vehicle;
B. The existing costs charged against the vehicle;
C. An estimate of future costs, including the cost of advertising the vehicle for sale; and
D. That unless the owner redeems the vehicle, within ten days from the day of mailing the notice if the address of the owner is within the state of Oregon, or within twenty (20) days of the day of mailing the notice if the address of the owner is without the state of Oregon, and pays all the costs, the vehicle:
    1. Will be advertised for sale, in accordance with Section 10.24.060, and
    2. Will be sold at a public auction, at a definite time and place within the city to the highest and best bidder for cash, or otherwise disposed of as by law provided. (Ord. 4-1963 § 5, 1963)

10.24.060 Notice of sale.
If the owner cannot be identified after compliance with Section 10.24.040, or no claim is made by a notified owner within the time specified by Section 10.24.050D, the Chief of Police or City Recorder shall cause to be posted a notice of sale of said vehicle; said notice of sale shall be posted in at least three conspicuous public places within the city for a continuous period of not less than ten days preceding said sale; said notice of sale may also be published in a newspaper circulated within the city if in the discretion of the officer posting said notice such publication would be advisable. The notice of said sale shall state:
A. The sale is of abandoned property in possession of the City;
B. A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, motor number, serial number, and any other information which will aid in accurately identifying the vehicle;
C. The terms of the sale; and
D. The date, time and place of the sale. (Ord. 4-1963 § 6, 1963)

10.24.070 Redemption procedure.
A. An owner may redeem a vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter, before a sale has taken place, by applying to the police department, whereupon he shall:
    1. Submit evidence of his ownership or interest in the vehicle, satisfactory to the chief of police, that such claim is rightful; and
    2. Pay the costs due and owing at the time the application to redeem is made, including a reasonable cost for the preparation of notices and posting the same and the costs of any publication of notice made.
B. Upon compliance with subsection A of this section, the chief of police shall execute a receipt for the owner and cause the vehicle to be returned to him. (Ord. 4-1963 § 7, 1963)

10.24.080 Sale procedure.
A. If no claim shall have been made to redeem an impounded vehicle, the chief of police or other officer designated by the City Council shall hold a sale at the time and place stated in Section 10.24.060. This sale need not be held within the view of the vehicle to be sold if adequate and reasonable opportunity to view the same has been previously given.
B. The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder, providing further that if no bids be entered or such bids as entered are less than the cost incurred by the City, that the city may enter a bid on its own behalf; any and all bids received by the city may be rejected for cause.
C. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied:
    1. To the payment of costs incurred by the city, including expenses incurred by storage of said vehicle in a private garage;
    2. The balance, if any, shall be transferred to the city and be credited to the general fund unless otherwise ordered by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1-1969 § 1, 1969; Ord. 4-1963 § 8, 1963)

10.24.090 Certificate of sale.
A. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police or other authorized city official shall execute a certificate of sale, in duplicate, the original of which shall be delivered to the purchaser, and the copy thereof filed with the City Recorder of the City.
B. The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows:CERTIFICATE OF SALE
WITHIN THE CITY
OF WOOD VILLAGE
This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. 4-1963 entitled “An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Abandoned Vehicles” and pursuant to due notice of the time and place of sale, I did on the ___ day of _____, sell at public auction to ___________ for the sum of $_______ cash he being the highest and best bidder, and that being the highest and best sum bid therefor, the following described personal property, to wit:(brief description of the property)
And in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $_______, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property.
Dated this ___ day of ______,_.
Note: The City of Wood Village assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the above described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to the return of the purchase price.
(Ord. 4-1963 § 9, 1963)

10.24.100 Delivery of vehicle and certificate.
Upon such sale being consummated the chief of police or other appropriate city official shall deliver the vehicle and the certificate of sale to the purchaser. Such sale and conveyance shall be without redemption. (Ord. 4-1963 § 10, 1963)

10.24.110 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all abandoned vehicles now in the possession of the City as well as to all such vehicles as may hereafter be impounded. (Ord. 4-1963 § 11, 1963)

10.24.120 Charges.
In the enforcement and execution of the provisions of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall charge and collect the actual expense of the City for towing and storage charges plus an administrative fee that covers the City’s actual cost of enforcement and execution of this Chapter. (Ord. 4-2006 § 17, 2006; Ord. 5-1996 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 4-1963 § 12, 1963)

10.24.130 Storage in private garage—Conditions.
Where a private garage is selected for the storage of a motor vehicle impounded under the terms of this chapter, the following conditions shall apply:
A. Private garage and the City shall agree in writing in advance of said storage as to the charges for such storage.
B. The operator of said private storage facilities shall agree in writing that no lien shall be created in favor of said garage upon the vehicle so stored and that the City shall not be liable for services rendered by said garage except those of actual storage.
C. The City shall not be liable for any services rendered by a private garage from any source other than such amounts as may be collected from owner on redemption, or from a purchaser upon sale, after the city shall have deducted its expenses, unless the City be the purchaser of the vehicle.
D. The vehicle stored shall not be released from the garage except upon receipt signed by the chief of police or other appropriate official of the City. (Ord. 4-1963 § 13, 1963)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:
12.04        Street, Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Repair
12.06        Right-of-Way Encroachment Standards
12.08        Park and Recreational Area Use Regulations

Chapter 12.04 STREET, SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR

Sections:
12.04.010    Sidewalk/Public Pathway defined.
12.04.020    Standards and specifications.
12.04.030    Limiting use and closure authority.
12.04.040    Maintaining sidewalks, street landscape areas and removing obstructions.
12.04.050    Construction, alteration or repair—Permit required.
12.04.060    Right to supervise.
12.04.070    Periodic survey of sidewalks and curbs.
12.04.080    Resolution adoption for sidewalk, pathway or curb repair.
12.04.090    Notice to repair.
12.04.100    Failure of owner to repair.
12.04.110    Costs of City repair assessed against owner when.
12.04.120    Conflict with Ordinance 2-1961.

12.04.010 Sidewalk/Public Pathway defined.
A. A sidewalk within City right-of-way is defined as that part of the street or right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for the use of pedestrians. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 1, 1969)
B. A public pathway within the City right-of-way is defined as any right-of-way so designated for the use of pedestrians that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk.

12.04.020 Standards and specifications.
A. All Streets, Sidewalks, Public Pathways and Curbs within City rights-of-way shall be constructed in accordance with the Wood Village Design and Construction Standards for Public Works Facilities as adopted by the City Council.

12.04.030 Limiting use and closure authority.
A. Any street, sidewalk, or public pathway may be declared closed to the public by the City Manager or designee at any time and for any interval of time, either entirely or merely to certain uses as the City Manager finds reasonably necessary to ensure the health, welfare or safety of the public.
B. The City Manager shall post notice of the closure of a City street, sidewalk, and/or pathway in a readily visible location at the entrances or along the path. The Notice shall state "Closed pursuant to Wood Village Municipal Code 12.04.030. No trespassing. Violators are subject to citation under Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 1.06."
C. During the period of closure of a City street, sidewalk, and/or pathway in accordance with this section, it is unlawful for any person to enter the area that has been closed, or to remain in the area after having been notified of the closure and having been requested to leave. Violations of this section are civil infractions under Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 1.06
D. The Council may limit, or establish standards and criteria for administrative approval of requests to limit the use of any City street, sidewalk, pathway to a particular event or function for a specified time and interval of time as the City deems appropriate. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007)

12.04.040 Maintaining sidewalks, street landscape areas and removing obstructions.
It is made the duty of each owner of land adjoining any street in the city to maintain in good condition and repair sidewalks on the street and curbs adjoining his land, and in the case of sidewalks, to remove obstructions therefrom which might impede the progress or endanger the safety of pedestrians. It is also made the duty of each owner of land adjoining any street in the city to maintain in good condition and weed-free landscaped areas adjacent to streets and sidewalks. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 4, 1969)

12.04.050 Construction, alteration or repair—Permit required.
No person shall construct, alter or repair a sidewalk pathway or curb within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City and paying the applicable fee, if any. No permit for the construction, alteration or repair of a sidewalk or curb shall be granted by the City until the person making application therefor shall submit, in writing, the plans and specifications for the proposed work to the City public works department and it be determined that the proposed work conforms to the applicable standards and specifications established by the City for such work. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 5, 1969)

12.04.060 Right to supervise.
The City public works department, its agents and employees, shall at all times have the right to supervise the construction, repair or alteration of sidewalks or curbs within the city and to enforce the general plans and specifications covering the construction thereof. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 6, 1969)

12.04.070 Periodic survey of sidewalks and curbs.
It shall be the duty of the City public works department to make periodic survey of city sidewalks pathways and curbs and in the event that it is found that any sidewalk, pathway or curb is in need of repair, to bring the matter to the attention of the City Council. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 7, 1969)

12.04.080 Resolution adoption for sidewalk, pathway or curb repair.
Whenever the Council shall deem it expedient or necessary that any existing sidewalk, pathway or curb shall be repaired, it shall adopt a resolution declaring the same to be expedient and necessary and describe in said resolution the work to be done and the location thereof, the name of the owner of the abutting property, together with the location and description thereof, setting forth the time within which the same shall be completed and setting forth therein, if appropriate, that said construction or repair work shall be made at the expense of the adjacent and abutting property owner. (Ord. 2-1969 § 8, 1969)

12.04.090 Notice to repair.
A. Whenever the Council shall by resolution, direct the repair of a sidewalk, pathway or curbing in the manner indicated in Section 12.04.080, notice containing the substance of the resolution entitled “Notice to repair (curb) (sidewalk) (pathway)” shall be posted by a City agent upon the adjoining property or street immediately in front thereof. The person posting the notice for the City shall file with the City Recorder an affidavit of posting, stating the date when and the place where the notice was posted.
B. The City Recorder shall, upon receiving the affidavit of the person posting such notice, send by mail post-paid, the notice to repair the sidewalk, pathway or curb to the owner or agent of the property, when such post office address is known to the City Recorder and if such post office address is unknown, a notice shall be directed to the owner at Wood Village, Oregon; personal service of notice upon the owner and the affidavit thereof filed with the City Recorder shall be the equivalent to posting notice upon the property and mailing such notice. (Ord. 2-1969 §§ 9, 10, 1969)

12.04.100 Failure of owner to repair.
If the owner of any such lot or parcel of land shall fail, refuse or neglect to repair such sidewalk, pathway or curbing within the time ordered by the Council resolution, the City public works department shall undertake to repair or cause the same to be built or repaired and keep an accurate account of the work and report the same as soon as completed, together with a description of the lot or parcel of land fronting or abutting upon said sidewalk, pathway or curb which has been built or repaired. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 11, 1969)

12.04.110 Costs of City repair assessed against owner when.
The Council shall inspect such reports and if it deems them reasonable, it shall approve the same and by appropriate ordinance or resolution, assess against the property fronting and abutting upon said sidewalk, pathway or curb, the total cost thereof, or if more than one lot or parcel of land is subject to such improvement or repair, the proportionate share thereof shall be borne by each and declare an assessment therefor and a lien upon each lot or parcel of land so affected, and order the same to be entered in the docket of City liens. The ordinance or resolution fixing and determining assessments hereunder may combine several assessments and the same shall be entered on the docket of City liens and collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of assessments for street improvements. (Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 2-1969 § 12, 1969)

12.04.120 Conflict with Ordinance 2-1961.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall in no way repeal, amend, modify or affect Ordinance 2-1961, codified in Chapter 3.12, which shall, in case of conflict, be paramount and supersede any portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2-1969 § 13, 1969)

Chapter 12.06 RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT STANDARDS

Sections:
12.06.010    Purpose.
12.06.020    Definitions.
12.06.030    Permit Required.
12.06.040    Construction, Installation and Relocation.
12.06.050    Liability and Control.
12.06.060    Performance and Completion Bond; Warranty Bond.
12.06.070    Applicant Insurance.
12.06.080    Damage to Right-of-Way.
12.06.090    Use by City.
12.06.100    Safety.
12.06.110    Moving of Structures and Equipment.
12.06.120    Maintenance.
12.06.130    Vacation.
12.06.140    Discontinued Use.
12.06.150    Conflict with Franchise Agreements.

12.06.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the management of the public rights-of-way in the interest of public safety and convenience and the protection of public infrastructure. (Ord. 12-2010, 2010)

12.06.020 Definitions.
A. "City" means the City of Wood Village, an Oregon municipal corporation, and all of the territory within its corporate boundaries, as may change from time to time.
B. "City facilities" means city-owned structures or equipment located within the right-of-way.
C. "Equipment" means any tangible component, whether referred to singly or collectively, installed, maintained, or operated by user.
D. "Franchise" means an Ordinance approved by the City and accepted by the Franchisee granting a privilege to use public right-of-way within the City for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.
E. "Non-City facilities" means light poles, utility poles, pipes, cable, wire, conduit, vaults, ducts, fiber or similar equipment that is not owned or operated by the City and that is lawfully placed in the right-of-way.
F. "Person" means any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other organization authorized to do business in the state of Oregon, and includes any natural person.
G. "Right-of-way" means the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and places used or intended to be used by the general public for travel as the same now or may hereafter exist, that the City has the right to allow user to use.
H. "User" means a person that performs work within the rights-of-way, whether or not a permit is applied for or granted and any person that owns facilities in the right-of-way.
I. "Work" means excavation or fill, or the construction, demolition, installation, replacement, or relocation of equipment, within the right-of-way.

12.06.030 Permit Required.
A. Permit Required. No person shall occupy or encroach on right-of-way, nor store materials in, or perform work in, right-of-way without obtaining a permit from the City, except for maintenance of aboveground equipment such as customer service connections/drops, repairs or maintenance that does not require cutting or breaking of the roadway, curb or sidewalk, and routine maintenance or repair of equipment, and the installation of new replacement cables or wires on existing aerial facilities, when the installation, maintenance or repair will not impact vehicular traffic by closing or blocking a lane of vehicular traffic for more than two (2) hours. The City Manager or designee is authorized to establish application forms, procedures, terms, and conditions for such permits and to approve or deny permit applications. No newly overlaid street or newly constructed street shall be excavated for a period of five (5) years from the time of completion of the street overlay or the street construction unless specifically authorized in writing by the City or in response to an emergency. The City shall provide not less than one hundred twenty (120) days notice to utilities or other companies that currently utilize the right-of-way prior to any new overlay.
B. Permit Nonexclusive. The permit is not exclusive. The City expressly reserves the right to grant permits or rights to other persons, as well as the City's right to use the right-of-way for similar or different purposes, as allowed hereunder. The permit is subject to all recorded deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions, encumbrances, and claims of title of record that may affect the right-of-way. Nothing in the permit shall be deemed to grant, convey, create, or vest in user a real property interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest, or easement.
C. Permit Fee. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the City council.

12.06.040 Construction, Installation and Relocation.
A. Construction and Installation. Subject to the terms of the permit, user may enter upon the right-of-way to perform all work that is necessary to install, operate, maintain, remove, reinstall, relocate, and replace equipment in or on user's non-City facilities or in or on City facilities. Work must meet all standards applicable to the management of the right-of-way, and the City may determine the methods used to place equipment.
B. No Interference. User, in the performance and exercise of its rights and obligations under the permit, shall not interfere in any manner with the existence and operation of any rights-of-way, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains, gas mains, poles, aerial and underground electrical and telephone wires, electroliers, cable television, and other telecommunications, utility, communication system or municipal property, without the express written approval of the owner or owners of the affected personal property or properties. Upon notification by the City, user may be required to review plans of others to determine if interference may occur.
C. Undergrounding Required. All new utility lines shall be placed below ground in a location acceptable to the City. Therefore, user is prohibited from installing any new aerial cables, wire, or conduit. For the purposes of this section, "installing any new aerial cables, wire, or conduit" means a user installing aerial cable, wire, or conduit in a location where that user currently has no aerial cable, wire, or conduit.
D. Obtaining Required Permits. If the excavation, installation, operation, maintenance, removal, reinstallation, relocation or replacement of the equipment in the right-of-way requires any additional permits, user shall obtain the permits and pay any standard and customary permit fees.
E. Relocation. The City shall have the right to require user to change the location of its equipment or to remove its equipment from the right-of-way. Nothing shall be construed to prevent the City from constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any right-of-way, laying down, repairing or removing water mains or constructing or establishing any other public work, utility or improvement, including repairs, replacement or removal of City facilities. Costs for relocation or removal necessitated for anything other than City-funded projects shall be borne by the person requesting relocation or removal. User shall pay the costs for relocation of user's equipment for City-funded projects. When a project is funded with both private and City funds, user shall pay the percentage of the costs that is equal to the percentage of City funds that were spent on the project. Prior to relocation, the City shall make a reasonable effort to find an alternative location within a public right-of-way for relocated facilities.
Should user fail to remove, adjust or relocate its equipment by the date established by the City, the City may cause and/or effect such removal, adjustment or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be paid by user, including all costs and expenses incurred by the City due to user's delay. Upon receipt of a demand for payment from the City, user shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within sixty days.

12.06.050 Liability and Control.
A. The applicant shall be responsible and liable for all accidents, environmental clean-up, damages or injuries to any person or property resulting from the construction, maintenance, repair, operation, or use of a facility for which the applicant may be legally liable. The applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Wood Village, its City Councilors, and all officers, employees, or agents against any and all damages, claims, demands, actions, causes of action, costs and expenses of whatsoever nature which they or any of them may sustain by reasons of the acts, conduct or operation of the applicant, agents or employees in connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, operation or use of said facility.
B. Except for the gross negligence of the City, the City and its Council, City Manager, officers or employees shall not be held responsible or liable for injury or damage that may occur to facilities or any connection or connections thereto resulting from motorists or otherwise.
C. The applicant shall employ any and all methods in performing the operations that the City Manager or Designee may require in order to properly protect the public from injury and the public right-of-way from damage.
D. During the initial installation or construction of a facility, during any future repair, removal, or relocation thereof, or during operations, the applicant shall at all times maintain such flaggers, signs, lights, flares, barricades and other safety devices as required or recommended by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices with Oregon Supplements, as amended. A traffic control plan or additional traffic control measures may be required if deemed to be necessary to properly protect traffic upon the street, and to warn and safeguard the public against injury or damage.
E. In the event of an emergency repair the applicant shall so conduct their operations that there will be a minimum of interference with or interruption of the traffic upon and along the street until the City Manager or Designee has approved a plan for the satisfactory handling of traffic. In emergencies, the applicant shall notify the City Manager or designee as soon as practicable.
F. All traffic control and safety devices used for protection of the work areas shall conform to the current provisions of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, with Oregon Supplements, as amended.
G. To ensure compliance with applicable standards, the City Manager or Designee reserves the right to inspect the job during such periods as the City Manager or Designee deems necessary, to check compliance by the applicant and to require the applicant to correct all deviations from those standards.
H. Any supervision and/or control exercised by the City Manager or Designee shall in no way relieve the applicant of any duty or responsibility to the general public nor shall such supervision and/or control relieve the applicant from any liability for loss, damage or injury to persons or property.
I. The decision of the City Manager or Designee shall be final with respect to any of the standards and the conditions, terms, stipulations or provisions of a permit.

12.06.060 Performance and Completion Bond; Warranty Bond.
A. Unless otherwise provided in a permit, a financial assurance acceptable to the City Manager or Designee equal to at least 110% of the estimated cost of reconstructing the impacted public facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be approved by the City before construction is commenced.
B. The financial assurance shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction or for the period stated in the special conditions on a permit.
C. The financial assurance shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City Manager or Designee:
    1. Timely completion of construction;
    2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes, Public Works Standards and other applicable standards;
    3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City Manager or designee;
    4. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction; and
    5. Timely payment and satisfaction of all fees and charges due to the city.
D. Additional financial assurance acceptable to the City Manager or Designee for the greater of $500 or 10% of the estimated cost of reconstructing the impacted public facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be secured prior to acceptance of the work by the City. This warranty assurance shall be in effect for a period of two years from the date of acceptance. Repairs required within the warranty period shall be guaranteed by a separate warranty bond for two years from the date of completion of such repair. The City Manager or Designee may require an additional financial assurance for any repairs done pursuant to the warranty obligation.
E. Any financial assurance as required by the City may be applicable to multiple projects in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Manager or designee.
F. The City Manager or Designee may waive any financial assurance required if the applicant has demonstrated a history of quality restoration of the public right-of-way.

12.06.070 Applicant Insurance.
Unless otherwise provided in a permit, each applicant shall, while working in the public right-of-way, secure and maintain the following insurance coverage. The City and the City's elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds on liability policies by endorsement on the certificate of insurance.
The applicant’s insurance providers and coverage amounts will be subject to approval by the City Manager or designee at the time of the permit based upon the types of insurance and coverage amounts required of construction contractors on city projects. The applicant shall furnish certificates of insurance acceptable to the City prior to commencing work. The applicant may provide proof of self-insurance, satisfactory to the City, as an alternative means of meeting the insurance requirement.
At a minimum, the following insurance coverage may be required by the City with limits as determined by the City Manager or designee:
A. Commercial comprehensive general liability covering:
    1. bodily injury or death to each person;
    2. property damage resulting from any one accident; and
    3. all other types of liability.
B. Commercial automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles for each person and for each accident.
C. Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance.
D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard and underground hazard which may be included in the general liability policy.

12.06.080 Damage to Right-of-Way.
Whenever the user's installation, operation, maintenance, removal, reinstallation, replacement or relocation of equipment damages or disturbs the right-of-way, user, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return the right-of-way to the condition it was in before it was damaged or disturbed, as approved by the City Manager or designee. If user does not repair the right-of-way to at least the condition that existed prior to construction within the time frame given in the permit or as otherwise agreed to by the City, then the City may, upon fifteen days' (or less if public safety requires) prior written notice to user, repair the right-of-way at user's sole expense. Upon the receipt of a demand for payment from the City, user shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within sixty days.

12.06.090 Use by City.
The City, at its cost, may install pipes or conduit in any trench or excavation created by user, to the extent that such space therein is reasonably available without compromising the safe operation of the user’s asset. The City may also require user to excavate trenches larger than needed by user, with the excess capacity to be utilized by the City and with the City responsible for the incremental cost thereof.

12.06.100 Safety.
User shall perform all work in a manner that ensures safety of workers and the public. As a minimum, user shall provide signs, signals, and flaggers as necessary to control traffic.

12.06.110 Moving of Structures and Equipment.
Whenever it becomes necessary to allow for the passage of buildings, machinery or other objects, user shall temporarily rearrange, remove, lower or raise its wires, cables or other plant as necessary, at no cost to the City. However, any person or persons, other than the City, desiring to move any such buildings, machinery or other objects, shall pay the entire actual cost incurred by user for changing, altering, moving, removing or replacing its wires, cables, or other plant so as to permit such passage, and shall deposit in advance with user a sum equal to such cost as estimated by user. The person or persons that requested the move shall pay all direct damages caused directly by the changing, altering, moving, removing or replacing of such wires, cables or other plant, except for damages and claims that are the direct result of user's negligent acts. Except in an emergency, user shall be given not less than thirty days' written notice by the party desiring to move such building or other objects. Such notice shall detail the route of movement of such buildings or other objects over and along the streets, alleys, avenues, thoroughfares and public highways of the City. Upon receiving required notice, user shall complete such moves as soon as practicable, and without undue delay. Furthermore, the passage of buildings, machinery or other objects shall be with as much haste as possible and shall not be necessarily delayed or cause user unnecessary expense or waste of time.

12.06.120 Maintenance.
User shall install and maintain all equipment in a manner that prevents injury to the right-of-way, the City's property or the property belonging to another person. User shall, at its own expense, repair, and maintain equipment from time to time as may be necessary to accomplish this purpose.

12.06.130 Vacation.
If the City vacates any right-of-way, or portion thereof, each user shall abandon, or if deemed necessary by the City remove its equipment from the right-of-way at its own expense unless the City reserves a public utility easement, which the City shall make a reasonable effort to do. Users shall be notified at least ninety days before being required to relocate or remove equipment. If user fails to remove its equipment within thirty (30) days, or within a time set by the City in recognition of an exceptional circumstance after a right-of-way is vacated, the City may remove the equipment at user's sole expense. Upon receipt of a demand for payment from the City, user shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within sixty days.

12.06.140 Discontinued Use.
Whenever user discontinues use of any equipment and does not intend to use the equipment within six months, user shall remove the equipment from the right-of-way unless the City agrees, in writing, that the equipment may remain in the right-of-way and the user conveys title or ownership of the equipment to the City. The City shall not unreasonably withhold such agreement. If user fails to remove equipment that is no longer going to be used, and the City has not agreed to allow user to abandon such equipment in place, the City may remove the equipment at user's sole expense. Upon receipt of a demand for payment from the City, user shall pay the City for the costs the City incurred within sixty days.

12.06.150 Conflict with Franchise Agreements.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter 12.06 and any approved and effective Franchise, the terms of the Franchise shall control.

Chapter 12.08 PARK AND RECREATIONAL AREA USE REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.08.010    Park hours.
12.08.020    Posting of park rules.
12.08.040    Limiting use and closure authority.
12.08.050    Sports field reservations—Permit required.
12.08.060    Vending and peddling—Permit required.
12.08.070    Exhibiting permits to authorities.
12.08.080    Interference with permittees prohibited.
12.08.090    Permit revocation.
12.08.100    Areas of limited activities—Sign posting.
12.08.110    Camping prohibited.
12.08.115    Special Event or Festival Permit.
12.08.130    Domestic animals.
12.08.140    Killing or disturbing animals prohibited.
12.08.150    Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
12.08.155    Tobacco Use Prohibited.
12.08.160    Bicycles.
12.08.170    Conduct—Fighting, obscenity, noise.
12.08.180    Fires.
12.08.190    Firearms.
12.08.200    Fireworks and explosives.
12.08.210    Games and other prohibited activities.
12.08.220    Motor vehicles—Traffic prohibitions.
12.08.230    Motor vehicles—Parking prohibitions.
12.08.240    Park buildings and other property restrictions.
12.08.250    Refuse and trash.
12.08.260    Sign restrictions.
12.08.280    Trees, shrubbery, lawns and other park property.
12.08.290    Water pollution prohibited.
12.08.300    Enforcement—Agents designated—Interference.
12.08.310    Trespass.
12.08.320    Violation—Penalty.

12.08.010 Park hours.
Except for unusual and unforeseen circumstances and emergencies, park hours shall be as established by the City Council. (Ord. 3-1995 § 1, 1995)

12.08.020 Posting of park rules.
The rules and provisions for use and administration of parks, notice of those rules or summaries of those rules shall be posted at suitable locations within each park. (Ord. 3-1995 § 2, 1995)

12.08.040 Limiting use and closure authority.
A. Any park or portion of any park may be declared closed to the public by designated City employees at any time and for any interval of time, either entirely or merely to certain uses as the City shall find reasonably necessary to ensure the health, welfare or safety of the public.
B. The City shall post notice of the closure of a City park in a readily visible location. The Notice shall state "Closed pursuant to Wood Village Municipal Code 12.08.040. No trespassing. Violators are subject to citation under Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 1.06."
C. During the period of closure of a park or portion thereof in accordance with this section, it is unlawful for any person to enter such park or any part thereof that has been closed, or to remain in such park, or part thereof, after having been notified of the closure and having been requested to leave. Violations of this section are civil infractions under Wood Village Municipal Code.
D. The Council may limit, or establish standards and criteria for administrative approval of requests to limit, the use of any park or portion of any park to a particular event or function for a specified time and interval of time as the city deems appropriate. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 7-2007, 2007; Ord. 3-1995 § 4, 1995)

12.08.050 Sports field reservations—Permit required.
Organized sports groups may make application for a permit, in such form as prescribed by the City, to reserve specific times for use of sports playing fields for practice and tournament play. Appropriate conditions may be attached to any permit issued. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 3-1995 § 5, 1995)

12.08.060 Vending and peddling—Permit required.
No person shall display, advertise or offer for sale any article or thing, or station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any article or thing, unless the person obtains a concessionaire permit issued by the City. An application, in such form as prescribed, may be submitted to the City for a concessionaire permit. Such application shall be considered by the City as directed by the Council, and the applicant will be notified as to the acceptance or rejection of the application. Appropriate conditions may be attached to any permit issued. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 3-1995 § 6, 1995)

12.08.070 Exhibiting permits to authorities.
No person shall refuse to produce any permit the person claims to have upon request of any City employee or law enforcement officer. (Ord. 3-1995 § 7, 1995)

12.08.080 Interference with permittees prohibited.
No person shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or group occupying any area, or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. (Ord. 3-1995 § 8, 1995)

12.08.090 Permit revocation.
The City shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding that any rule or ordinance has been violated. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 3-1995 § 9, 1995)

12.08.100 Areas of limited activities—Sign posting.
No person shall participate in any prohibited activity in areas so specified and posted. The City may designate areas of limited activity. Such areas shall be designated by posted notices which clearly define the activities prohibited. Such notices shall be posted in one or more places which are conspicuous to any person in the near vicinity of the designated area. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 3-1995 § 10, 1995)

12.08.110 Camping prohibited.
No person shall camp in any park at any time of day or night. (Ord. 3-1995 § 11, 1995)

12.08.115 Special Event or Festival Permit.
In addition to the permits included in this chapter, the City Council may, at their sole discretion following a finding that the proposed festival is in the public interest and will promote the general welfare of the community, issue special event or Festival Permit for sponsored events at the Park. Such events may include the ability to camp in the park, provide limited access to the public for park facilities, and may provide for other privileges specifically granted in the permit. An application for any such special event or festival shall be made not less than 60 days prior to the scheduled event, and shall include information on the sponsoring organization, the intended use, the number of participants or public anticipated, the transportation and parking, public safety, sanitation and solid waste collection plans to accommodate the proposed activity. Applicants are required to pay the fees established by resolution, provide insurance for any such event or festival at the limits prescribed by the City, and a refundable deposit shall be required. Applications must be reviewed by the City Council and the Parks and Recreation Board. The Council must find the proposed festival or special event is in the public interest and will promote the general welfare of the community, and the applicant has provided all required fees, public accommodations and plans, and insurance provisions. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015)

12.08.130 Domestic animals.
No person shall bring a dog or other domestic animal into a park unless it is controlled on a leash. Any person in physical possession and control of any animal in a public park shall remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by the animal. (Ord. 3-1995 § 13, 1995)

12.08.140 Killing or disturbing animals prohibited.
No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, shoot or throw missiles at any animals, bird, fish or other living creature or remove or have in possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird provided however, designated City employees or contractors are exempted from this prohibition. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 3-1995 § 14, 1995)

12.08.150 Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall bring into, possess or consume alcoholic beverages in any park. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the City Council may allow alcoholic beverages to be consumed in the park during City-sponsored events provided that any and all alcoholic beverages are purchased from a City-approved vendor in the park. (Ord. 10-2010, 2010; Ord. 3-1995 § 15, 1995)

12.08.155 Tobacco Use Prohibited.
No person shall smoke or use any tobacco product or other materials in any park, pathway, public building, or facility designated by the City for public recreation. For purposes of this section, tobacco product shall mean any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco, weed, plant or other tobacco like product which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation, or other means of ingestion. In addition to the use prohibitions of this code, no person shall the burn, carry burning materials, or be in possession of any lighted cigar, cigarette, weed, plant, or other tobacco like product or substance.
Tobacco use is prohibited in all fields, buildings, playgrounds, pathways and walkways, and public access areas in any park.
Tobacco use shall be prohibited on all of the City-owned grounds, patios, plazas, steps, ramps, public garden and facilities located at the Wood Village City Hall. This prohibition does not include public rights-of-way. (Ord. 4-2012, 2012)

12.08.160 Bicycles.
No person shall:
A. Ride a bicycle on other than a vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use;
B. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road pavement as close as conditions permit. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their bicycles with reasonable regard to the safety of others. (Ord. 3-1995 § 16, 1995)

12.08.170 Conduct—Fighting, obscenity, noise.
No person shall engage in, promote, instigate, encourage, aid or abet fighting or similar violent conduct which would threaten the physical well-being of the public, use obscene language, make obscene gestures or cause excessive amplified or nonverbal noise. (Ord. 3-1995 § 17, 1995)

12.08.180 Fires.
No person shall:
A. Build or attempt to build a fire except within a barbecue grill for cooking purposes only;
B. Drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material, within any park or on any highway, road or street abutting and contiguous to any park;
C. Leave a fire unattended or fail to completely extinguish a fire after use. (Ord. 3-1995 § 18, 1995)

12.08.190 Firearms.
No person shall discharge a firearm, air rifle, spring gun, bow and arrow or other weapon in or over any park. (Ord. 3-1995 § 19, 1995)

12.08.200 Fireworks and explosives.
No person shall bring, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn, any fireworks, explosive or flammable material in any park, or discharge them or throw them into any park from adjacent land or highway. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. (Ord. 3-1995 § 20, 1995)

12.08.210 Games and other prohibited activities.
No person shall participate or assist others in the playing of any game or activity within which any object such as a stone, arrow, javelin, model airplane, golf ball, baseball or any other sharp or hard object or projectile is thrown or otherwise propelled except in areas specifically designed and designated for that use. (Ord. 3-1995 § 21, 1995)

12.08.220 Motor vehicles—Traffic prohibitions.
No person shall:
A. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in the city's park rules, or other ordinances;
B. Fail to obey all traffic officers and park attendants authorized to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent to the parks in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, supplementary rules issued by the City or appropriate state law. (Ord. 3-1995 § 22, 1995)

12.08.230 Motor vehicles—Parking prohibitions.
No person shall:
A. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area or not comply with the posted directions and instructions of any attendant who may be present at an established or designated parking area;
B. Double park any vehicle on a road or parkway unless directed by a park attendant. (Ord. 3-1995 § 23, 1995)

12.08.240 Park buildings and other property restrictions.
No person shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any building, restroom, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, fences, paving or paving material, water lines, light poles or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, recreation facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;
B. Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, cut timber, other wood, plants or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency except as authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 3-1995 § 24, 1995)

12.08.250 Refuse and trash.
No person shall deposit, dump, place or leave rubbish, bottles, cans, garbage or refuse of any type regardless of its source in a city park or recreation area, except refuse, garbage or litter occasioned through use of a city park or recreation area which shall be deposited in refuse receptacles provided for that purpose. (Ord. 3-1995 § 25, 1995)

12.08.260 Sign restrictions.
No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatsoever in a park or erect any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or road adjacent to a park except upon permission of the City, or as provided by a valid concessionaire permit or other authority issued by the city. (Ord. 3-1995 § 26, 1995)

12.08.280 Trees, shrubbery, lawns and other park property.
No person shall:
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant;
B. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other park property not designated or customarily used for those purposes. (Ord. 3-1995 § 28, 1995)

12.08.290 Water pollution prohibited.
No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park, any matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of those waters or disturb the natural appearance thereof. (Ord. 3-1995 § 29, 1995)

12.08.300 Enforcement—Agents designated—Interference.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be diligently enforced by any peace officer, as defined by ORS 133.005(3), as amended, and the City Manager and his authorized representatives.
B. No person shall interfere with any authorized person in carrying out the enforcement of this chapter or rules adopted under this chapter. (Ord. 3-2015, 2015; Ord. 3-1995 § 30, 1995)

12.08.310 Trespass.
In addition to other measures provided for violation of this chapter, or any of the laws of the state of Oregon, authorized enforcement agents may exclude any person who violates any provision of this or any other city ordinance or any of the laws of the state of Oregon, from any city park for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
A. Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any city park. Such notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion and reason therefor. It shall be signed by the issuing party. Warning of consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.
B. A person receiving such notice may, for good cause, file written appeal therefrom with the City Council within ten days of receipt of the exclusion notice. (Ord. 3-1995 § 31, 1995)

12.08.320 Violation—Penalty.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 18, 2006; Ord. 2-2006 § 1, 2006)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:
13.04        Water Service System
13.06        Inflow and Infiltration Reduction Program
13.08        Sewer Service System Generally
13.12        Sewer Service Rates and Charges
13.16        Sewage Pretreatment Program
13.20        Retired Citizen Utility Rates
13.24        Conveyance of Public Utility Easements
13.26        Illicit Discharge and Connection
13.30        Transportation and Stormwater Utility Fees

Chapter 13.04 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM

Sections:
13.04.010    Definitions.
13.04.020    Water service/application for use, connection or disconnection of service.
13.04.030    Water service installations.
13.04.040    Fire protection and other special services.
13.04.050    Access to premises.
13.04.060    Connection of service.
13.04.070    Separate service to each house or premises.
13.04.080    Temporary service.
13.04.090    Cross-connections or physical connections with other water supplies or systems.
13.04.100    Plumbing-Back siphonage.
13.04.110    Turning on or off water service or meters.
13.04.120    Maintenance and repair of customer lines.
13.04.130    Leakage within premises/damages thereto.
13.04.140    Pressure regulation.
13.04.150    Service interruptions.
13.04.160    Maintenance, repair and testing of meters.
13.04.170    Maintenance and repair of service lines – meter damage.
13.04.180    Use of fire hydrants.
13.04.190    Stop and waste cocks.
13.04.200    Services outside city limits.
13.04.210    Contracts/special use requirements.
13.04.220    Water rates and charges.
13.04.230    Meter reading and billing.
13.04.235    Limitation on Credit, Rebate or City Back Charges on Water Billing Omissions or Errors.
13.04.237    Water Leak Adjustment.
13.04.240    Water account and charge delinquencies.
13.04.250    Water charges and user charges as liens.
13.04.260    Discontinuance of service or change of occupancy.
13.04.270    Miscellaneous rates and charges.
13.04.280    Violation-Penalty.

13.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Council” means the Common Council of the City of Wood Village, Oregon.
“Cross-connection” means any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between the City's water supply system and any other source, system or any plumbing fixture, tank, receptacle, equipment or device through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, or other water or substance, to enter into any part of the city's water system under any condition.
“Customer” means any person granted water service by the City.
“Customer line” means the pipe, valves and fittings leading from the water meter into the premises served.
“Dwelling” means premises occupied or intended to be occupied by one family living unit.
“Main” or “water main” means the pipe in the street, alley, right-of-way or easement owned and maintained by the City for the purpose of distributing water to customers and servicing fire hydrants.
“Meter” means a device for measuring the flow of water to a particular service.
“Person” means and includes any natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation.
“Premises” means any building, structure, land area or other place to which water service, temporary or permanent, is supplied by the City.
“Service line” or “service connection” means the pipe, valves, stops and fittings, from a main to and including the meter and meter box.
“System” means all or any part of the water system owned and operated by the city and shall include all service lines to and including all meters.
“Vault” means an enclosure used to protect meters, valves or similar devices.
“Water department” means the water department of the City of Wood Village, Oregon. (Ord. 4-1982 § 1, 1982)

13.04.020 Water service/application for use, connection or disconnection of service.
Application for water service, for permit to connect a premises to the City water system or to fully remove service capacity of the water service at any premises, shall be made in writing to the City Recorder by the owner of the concerned premises or the owner’s duly authorized agent, on regular application forms furnished by the city. No service shall be rendered with respect to such application until the same is fully completed and approved, and if required, payment received. The application will be dated, indicate the location of the premises, the date applicant desires service to begin or cease, if applicable, purpose for which service is to be used, class and size of meter service desired, together with such other information as the water department shall deem reasonably necessary. Each applicant for service from the city water department must agree to conform to all city ordinances, rules and regulations concerning the use of city water and the water system.
Application for service shall be considered merely as a request for service and shall not bind the city to provide such service. Charges for the installation of water services shall be paid in full and in advance of installation by the City.
Each dwelling or building or premises shall be provided with its own water service connection and meter. No person shall furnish water to any other building, property or premises without written approval of the City Council being first obtained, and then only in accordance with the specific terms of any such authorization which might be granted.
So-ca1led “spider connections” which would provide service from one road or street to premises abutting or dwellings fronting on another road or street, shall not be permitted. (Ord. 4-1982 § 2, 1982)

13.04.030 Water service installations.
If the application for water service is for premises not previously served or for a new additional service, the following requirements shall be met:
A. Where water mains exist adjacent to the property or premises to be served, upon submission to the water department of information as to the location and nature of the premises to be served, applicant will be furnished with information as to the proposed location of the meter setting. If the customer service line has been installed prior to the application for service, it shall be the applicant’s responsibility to clearly mark the location thereof. However, the water department shall have sole jurisdiction to determine the location of the street service line and the feasibility of a connection to the customer’s service line. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility at his own expense, to run his service line from the premises being served to the meter setting at or near the curbline in a manner consistent with city regulations and the State Plumbing Code. Service pipes and connections from the water main to and including the meter setting shall be installed at consumer’s expense by the water department. No service connections less than three-quarter inch in size shall be installed. An advance payment of the estimated cost of the work by the City shall be made before a permit is granted for such installation; provided, however, if the estimated cost paid is not sufficient to cover the total expense for labor and material and overhead as established by the city's current charge schedule for such installation, the deficit shall be paid promptly upon billing and shall be a charge against the property for which such installation was made and the owner thereof until so paid; any excess estimate payment shall be returned to the person applying for the installation. Permanent water service shall not be furnished by the city until all charges as indicated have been fully paid.
B. Installation of Service Pipes. Pipes of all sizes, for all purposes, laid from the property line to the stop and waste cock in the building must in no case be less than three-quarter inch in diameter of galvanized steel, iron, Type K copper water tubing, or other material as approved by the State Plumbing Code, including approved plastic piping. Cast iron or steel pipes when properly dipped may, with the approval of the City water department be used for fire protection purposes. Services from the property line to the wall of the building to be served shall be laid with not less than thirty (30) inches of cover below the surface of the graded ground. No pipes shall be laid in sewer ditches or culverts. Service pipes shall be so connected and maintained as to provide electrical continuity from within the building to the main.
C. Unusual Conditions. When in the judgment of the city water department, unusual conditions exist which require greater attention, extra fittings, meter boxes, vaults, backflow preventers, or other safeguards to assure adequate volume and pressure of water to an individual service and/or to minimize repair and maintenance problems inherent in the installation or to prevent cross-connections, the City may require the applicant to meet the cost of such additional fittings, meter vaults or other safeguards at customary city charges which will be taxed to the applicant and be in addition to the usual meter and service installation charges and considered a part thereof. Where meters are required to be installed in driveways or roadways or under other circumstances which in the opinion of the water department may give rise to unusual installation or maintenance problems, the city shall have the right in its discretion, to require concrete meter vaults or other devices to likewise be installed; the cost of such vault or other protective device shall be borne by the owner of the property requesting the service installation. Meters shall be set at property lines and the service pipe from the main to the meter, as well as the meter and meter box, shall be the property of the City and not the person owning the premises or paying for the installation.
D. Services larger than three-quarter inch may, in the discretion of the water department, be installed when requested in writing, provided the system is able to adequately serve such larger connections without interfering with the water service of others. The charges made for the installation of larger services shall be sufficient to cover all costs thereof, and the minimum or “ready to serve” charge shall be higher than for standard three-quarter inch service connections.
E. Installation, Connection, System Development Charges and Service Charges. The charges for installation of water service as hereinabove provided, connection fees therefor, and system development charges as provided in Ordinance 7-1998 and WVMC 13.16, shall be fixed by the City Council by resolution or ordinance, which charges or fees may be amended or altered from time to time in like manner. (Ord. 9-1998 § 1, 1998; Ord. 4-1982 § 3, 1982)

13.04.040 Fire protection and other special services.
Applications for special services shall be made in writing in the same manner as required for a standard service and shall in-addition, conform to all requirements of applicable state and city codes, including the Uniform Building Code, Electrical Code and Plumbing Code, and shall meet all requirements and regulations of the fire department; and it shall be applicant’s responsibility to obtain written approval, as required, from the fire department. Application for private fire service and special service connections shall have attached a sketch showing sizing and material designations of all piping, valves, hydrants, standpipes, backflow prevention devices, tanks, openings and appurtenances contemplated. All private fire service connections may be metered at the city's discretion. All fire service lines shall be used exclusively for extinguishment of fires and no connection from or for any other use may be attached thereto. The size of fire service connections shall in no case be smaller than four inches and in no case, attached or tapped to a water main of less than six inches. In the event a main extension is required for a private fire service or a special connection, the cost of the same shall be borne by the applicant and shall be computed in accordance with the City’s current installation service charge schedules. Any customer requiring pressures higher than normally maintained in the system or abnormal quantities of water for fire protection or other special purposes, may, in the discretion of the City water department, be required to provide additional pumping and storage facilities within its property and pay for the same. Services of a special nature will be rendered only at the option of the City and under conditions which will not interfere with normal, service to other customers. Special services provided by the city may, at the discretion of the city, be provided only under special contract specifying conditions and requirements felt necessary by the City, and in all instances, are subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 4-1982 § 4, 1982)

13.04.050 Access to premises.
Employees and agents of the City water department shall have free access, at reasonable and proper times and upon due notice, to all parts of buildings and premises for the purposes of installing, inspecting, repairing, testing or removing any or all of its apparatus used in connection with the supply and metering of water, and for the purpose of inspecting the condition of the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which water is being used. By making application for water service or by using water service supplied by the city, every applicant, customer or user does grant and give to the City water department, its duly authorized agents and employees, the right to enter upon the concerned premises to which water is furnished, at all reasonable times for the purposes of inspection for compliance with the applicable city and state rules, regulations and codes. (Ord. 4-1982 § 5, 1982)

13.04.060 Connection of service.
It shall be the expense of the customer to install and maintain connections to the city meter box. Installation shall be so constructed that all water used by the customer shall pass through the meter. It shall be required that the customer install a shutoff valve on his line somewhere outside the meter box. Under no circumstances will a customer be permitted to sell, trade, bargain or extend water service to any other person or premises. No plumber or other person shall make any connection with the mains or pipes of the City, make alterations in any conduit, pipe or fixture connected therewith, connect pipes when they have been disconnected therewith or turn on water from the city mains or pipes without written permission from the City water superintendent. Plumbers doing any work by which water may be drawn from the city mains or pipes shall do so only after written permit is obtained from the city water superintendent. All water pipes must extend into the building; no faucets shall be allowed on the outside of any building except hose connections which must be controlled with a separate stop and waste cock. No hose connections for domestic use will be allowed. (Ord. 4-1982 § 6, 1982)

13.04.070 Separate service to each house or premises.
Upon advance payment of the charges and fees herein prescribed, the city water department shall install a separate service from the city water main to the property or curbline of each house or other premises to be supplied with water. Each and every premises, business, or place of business shall be on a separate service and meter. Where water is now supplied through one service to several houses, stores, persons, or businesses, the City water department may, at its discretion, either decline to furnish water until separate services are provided or may continue the supply on the condition that water may be shut off from all in case of nonpayment of charges or the violation of the rules and regulations of the city water or sewer departments by any one thereof. No new joint services shall be allowed without specific written permission of the City Council. (Ord. 4-1982 § 7, 1982)

13.04.080 Temporary service.
Application for temporary service shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the water department. Applicant shall pay the established charge for installation of the service connections requested, plus any additional charge that may be required by the water department for the removal or resetting of the service following the termination of the temporary use. Applicant or customer shall also pay in advance, one month’s anticipated or estimated water service charge and shall continue to do so each month thereafter so long as the temporary service is maintained.
No temporary service may be continued in excess of a six-month period of time without the consent of the City Council and may be terminated at any time upon thirty (30) days’ written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises so served. Temporary service shall impart no special privilege or provide any vested right to water service to the premises receiving the same, and shall not under any circumstance, alleviate said premises and/or occupant or owner thereof, as the case may be, from being required to pay proper or proportionate share of any charges incurred for line or main extensions, or assessments otherwise rendered for the provision of permanent service or facilities for permanent service to the area of concern. (Ord. 4-1982 § 8, 1982)

13.04.090 Cross-connections or physical connections with other water supplies or systems.
Cross-connections or physical connections of any kind to any other water supply, whether public or private, without the written approval and consent of the City Council and the written approval of the Oregon Board of Health or other appropriate agency, are prohibited. Included in this category are all pipelines, appurtenances, pumps, tanks, storage reservoirs, facilities, equipment, appliances, etc., of other systems, whether located within or on public or private property, or the premises of a water user. At all times, all pertinent requirements of the Plumbing Code of the state of Oregon will be followed with respect to any request for approval in the manner above indicated.
The water superintendent or other authorized representative of the city shall have the right, without being guilty of trespassing or unlawful act, to check the premises of customers and users for physical connections with other water supplies at any reasonable time. Any such connection as set forth above shall be removed by the customer, user or premises owner immediately or the City water department will discontinue service without further notice. Service discontinued for such cause shall not be reestablished until satisfactory proof is furnished that the prohibited connection bas been completely and permanently severed (Ord. 4-1982 § 9, 1982)

13.04.100 Plumbing-Back siphonage.
All plumbing within buildings or to premises served by the City water system shall be so installed and all plumbing fixtures so constructed and maintained as to prevent pollution or contamination of the city’s water supply, mains, lines and system by back siphonage or cross-connections. Water service to any premises or building known or found to have such defects and hazards shall be disconnected and not restored until such defects and hazards have been eliminated. (Ord. 4-1982 § 10, 1982)

13.04.110 Turning on or off water service or meters.
No customer, user or person other than an employee of the water department shall turn on or off any of the services or meters. Customers or owners of premises desiring either discontinuance or restoration of service or a new or modified service, shall make written arrangements therefor with the city water department upon forms provided therefor. (Ord. 4-1982 § 11, 1982)

13.04.120 Maintenance and repair of customer lines.
Customers shall install, maintain and repair any piping between meters and premises and buildings served thereby, and shall install the same at a depth sufficient to protect the same from damage and freezing. (Ord. 4-1982 § 12, 1982)

13.04.130 Leakage within premises/damages thereto.
The City shall not be liable for any damages or injury whatsoever for leaking or the running of water on premises or buildings from pipelines, plumbing fixtures, open faucets, valves, fixtures and hoses beyond the city’s service meters, or for any damage or injury whatsoever for the malfunction or improper maintenance or installation of customer’s system.
All leakage occurring beyond the meter installation shall be at the expense of the customer, who shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of their own lines, stop and waste valves, gate valves, pressure regulators, plumbing fixtures, etc., within their own premises.
As previously indicated, customers shall install, maintain and repair all piping between meters and premises served in accordance with good engineering practice. Pipes must be laid not less than thirty (30) inches deep and provided with stop and waste drainage; all standpipes or fittings of any kind must be so located, anchored and installed as to not interfere with or endanger the meter. All pipe must be well protected from freezing. (Ord. 4-1982 § 13, 1982)

13.04.140 Pressure regulation.
Insofar as is reasonably possible, feasible and economical, the city will furnish water at desirable pressures. In locations in which service pressures are higher than needed or desired by users, it shall be customer’s responsibility to install and maintain within their premises, any pressure regulators as may be required.
The City shall not be responsible for damages or difficulties experienced by reason of variations in pressure within the system. (Ord. 4-1982 §14, 1982)

13.04.150 Service interruptions.
The City, from time to time, must interrupt service for repairing mains, making extensions, repairing valves, pumps and control devices, etc., and for cleaning, maintaining and reconditioning reservoirs and storage tanks. The City shall not be responsible for any damages caused by such interruptions of service or fluctuations in pressure, but shall, whenever feasible to do so, give customers advance notice whenever it is known that service is to be interrupted for any appreciable length of time; however, failure to give such notice shall in no manner cause the city to become liable for loss or damage caused by service interruptions, such as bursting of boilers, the breakage of any pipes or fixtures, stoppage or interruption of water supply, water heater damage, or any other damage resulting from such service interruptions. (Ord. 4-1982 §15, 1982)

13.04.160 Maintenance, repair and testing of meters.
Normal maintenance and repairs of meters shall be carried on by the City at its expense.
Should a customer wish to have his meter tested, the City will make such test, but should the meter so tested be found accurate within four percent of true delivery, the customer requesting such testing shall pay the cost thereof, provided, however, that should such meter be found to under-register in excess of four percent, the City shall bear the cost thereof.
Customer deposits required for meter testing shall be paid in advance and shall be as shown in the current city charge schedules. The deposit shall be refunded if such meter testing be found to over-register in excess of four percent of true flow.
Whenever a meter has been found to over-register more than four percent, an adjustment in reasonable amount may be made to the customer for past billings, but in no case shall such adjustment exceed a period of four months.
A customer may request of the water department that his meter be reread if be feels that his current billing is in error. (Ord. 4-1982 §16, 1982)

13.04.170 Maintenance and repair of service lines – meter damage.
The City shall maintain or repair service piping between mains and meters at its expense. Service lines shall be installed at such depth that pipes shall be protected from traffic and other overhead uses, as well as freezing. Owners and customers shall take all reasonable precautions to protect service lines and meter installations from damage of any kind whatsoever. Failure of an owner or customer to take such precautions or make such repairs required by the City shall be cause for the City to stop or interrupt such service until said precautions or repairs are completed to the city's satisfaction.
Whenever a City-owned meter is burned out by hot water or damaged by carelessness or negligence or other improper practice or activity of the owner or occupant of the premises, the City will repair the meter and charge the billing against the property served. The cost of such repairs shall be as prescribed by applicable city charge schedules. (Ord. 4-1982 §17, 1982)

13.04.180 Use of fire hydrants.
It is unlawful for any person to operate, alter, change, remove, disconnect, connect with, or interfere in any manner with any fire hydrant owned, operated or maintained by the city without first obtaining written permission from the city water department. The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized fire departments operating within the City. (Ord. 4-1982 § 18, 1982)

13.04.190 Stop and waste cocks.
A stop and waste cock of approved pattern, by means of which pipes in a building may be drained, must in all cases be placed just inside the basement wall in a convenient location. If the building or premises is not provided with a basement, such stop and waste cock must be placed near the outside wall thereof and protected by a suitable box. Variations to the above regulation will be permitted only when approved, in writing, by the city water department. (Ord. 4-1982 § 19, 1982)

13.04.200 Services outside city limits.
Water services may be provided by the city to individual persons, firms, co-partnerships, associations, corporations or governmental agencies outside the city boundaries under such rates, charges and conditions as the City Council may from time to time prescribe, or as outlined under special contract approved by the Council. All regulations in effect for customers within the city shall apply to outside users and customers except as otherwise provided by the Council by resolution or contract. Service and water supply to customers outside the city shall at all times be subject to the prior and superior rights of the people of the city to said water, and all contracts with outside users shall so state that if the City does not have sufficient surplus water over and above the requirements of its customers, users, residents and properties within the city, such outside water service may be discontinued at any time if the interests and needs of the city so require. (Ord. 4-1982 § 20, 1982)

13.04.210 Contracts/special use requirements.
Whenever an applicant or customer’s requirements for water service are unusual, large or subject to rate fluctuation or variation, the City may require a special contract and may require reasonable security satisfactory to the City, sufficient to protect the City against loss and to guarantee performance under the terms thereof. (Ord. 4-1982 § 21, 1982)

13.04.220 Water rates and charges.
The City shall adopt and maintain appropriate rate charge schedules for water furnished and services rendered within and without the city. These schedules shall be reviewed and amended from time to time by the City Council as required. Rates charged may be fixed and classified according to the type of use and according to the amount of water used. In the event a particular service is not specified, a rate will be established upon request by the City Council.
Current rate and charge schedules of the city will be maintained on file by the city at the office of the city recorder and city water department, and will be available for viewing by the public.
Charges for installation of service pipe and meters from main to property line, various materials furnished by the city and such other services rendered shall likewise be set forth in the City’s current rate and charge schedules, and may be amended from time to time to meet the needs of the city and current economic conditions. In determining appropriate service and installation schedules, the city shall consider and include therein appropriate charge for city overhead.
In addition to current rate and charge schedules, the City Council may from time to time by appropriate resolution or ordinance, adopt appropriate connection, system development and general surcharges as the needs of the city may require after due public hearing thereupon; provided that all such charges and schedules of the city presently in effect as of the date of adoption of these revised rules and regulations, shall remain in full force and effect until further amended or revised by the city. (Ord. 4-1982 § 22, 1982)

13.04.230 Meter reading and billing.
All consumers of water and all water customers of the water system of the City shall pay a monthly charge for the service and water furnished as fixed by City Council resolution or ordinance, which resolution or ordinance may in like manner, be amended or altered from time to time as conditions require.
Billings for water used by a consumer or customer or water service furnished by the city water department shall be computed by a reading of the concerned meter on a regular periodic basis as established by the City Council.
All charges for water service shall be due and payable on the date of billing, usually the 1st of the month. Any water account shall become delinquent if not paid on or before the 15th of the month following billing. Water accounts of the City on special contract shall be due and payable as hereinabove provided unless otherwise stated in said contract.
The minimum rate for a monthly water service as fixed by the City Council for the use of water from the municipal water system, shall be charged any person, each family dwelling unit or group of individuals maintaining separate and distinct living quarters, whether located in an individual residence or multiple-dwelling facility or apartment, as well as any firm, association or corporation now using or making application in the future for use of such water. Each premises, business entity, group or organization not forming a living unit or family dwelling unit shall likewise be charged the minimum rate as fixed by the City for the type of service classification concerned, and in any event, where a present service connection exists for more than one dwelling, family living unit, premises or business, the water department may, at its discretion, decline to furnish water thereto unless the individual, firm or corporation upon whose premises the service connection is made from the city main, shall guarantee the payment of all water used through said service connection. (Ord. 2-1989 § 2, 1989: Ord. 4-1982 § 23, 1982)

13.04.235 Limitation on Credit, Rebate or City Back Charges on Water Billing Omissions or Errors.
A customer that has a billing error or incorrect billing may have that billing corrected to the date of occurrence with the maximum potential period for consideration being four (4) months. In the event a customer consuming water is under billed, the City may correct such billing and charge the customer to the date of occurrence, provided however, no billing will be made for a period of greater than 4 months. For all active accounts, credit will be applied to future billing amounts if due. For accounts that are closing, changing ownership, or for some good reason cannot benefit from a credit, a direct refund shall be provided.
For customers that have been under billed or not billed, the City Manager shall offer a payment plan with a period of up to six months for the customer to become current with all amounts due, with the provision that all current charges in the months following any such payment plan shall be paid in full as provided in this code. (Ord. 2-2014, 2014)

13.04.237 Water Leak Adjustment.
The City provides water to the meter, and is responsible for any leak or maintenance requirements between the meter and the municipal main on any water service. Water is delivered to the customer when it passes through the meter, and the customer is responsible for all facilities between the meter and the use of the water. Any leak that occurs in the customer facilities may be subject to a partial adjustment, with the terms and conditions of such adjustments adopted by Resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 9-2017, 2017)

13.04.240 Water account and charge delinquencies.
All charges for water service furnished shall be due and payable when billed. The City Manager, or designated representative, shall establish a billing calendar for each month, with said calendar including the billing date, due dates, delinquency date, and shut off. Payment in full for all services billed must be made by the delinquency date established in the billing calendar, such date to be not less than 20 days subsequent to the date of billing or a late charge, as fixed by resolution of the City Council, shall be added to the delinquent account, thereby increasing the amount due and payable. The bill for water service shall clearly state the last date on which full payment may be made to avoid the late charge and shall also state the increased amount due and payable from assessing the late charge if the account becomes delinquent. When a water account becomes delinquent as above defined, a written turnoff notice shall be sent to each delinquent account on the day and date established in the billing calendar. In the event the customer and billing address is other than the premises address where the account has been incurred, a copy of such written notice shall also be furnished to the occupant of said premises.
The City water department’s turnoff notice shall specifically advise that this is the final notice and that the concerned delinquent water service will be turned off by the city on the date identified in the billing calendar, which date shall be not less than five days subsequent to the date of said turnoff notice, and that a disconnect fee established by resolution of the City Council shall be added to the customer’s account.
If the delinquent water account of concern is not paid in full or other satisfactory arrangement made specifically in writing with the water department of the City for payment thereof prior to the specific date set forth in the turnoff notice, an employee or agent of the City water department shall thereafter turn off the water service to the premises concerned at the earliest convenient time following the expiration of the time specified in said turnoff notice; provided, further, that the city water department employee or agent effecting the actual water turnoff shall immediately prior thereto, advise an occupant of the premises concerned, if any be present, that such turnoff is being made at that time.
However, in the event no occupant is present upon the premises or none responds to the water department’s notification of such turnoff, this shall not in any way cause the city to delay the premises water turnoff in accordance with notice previously given, but in such event, a notice shall be placed conspicuously upon the premises, advising that such turnoff has occurred.
In all instances where a water service has been turned off because of a delinquent account or charges, a service charge shall be made for the restoration thereof in accordance with the current city rate and charge schedule as established by resolution of the City Council. Whenever a water service charge, or portion thereof, remains unpaid on the forty-fifth day following the date of billing, the delinquent account shall bear interest at the legal rate or the rate established by resolution of the City Council.
A premises water service terminated or disconnected for lack of payment of water bills due the City and/or other water charges relating to the concerned premises, shall not be restored until all such delinquent water bills and charges are paid and this requirement shall not be avoided by change in user, customer or owner of said building or premises.
In addition to the City's right to discontinue or turn off water service for delinquencies in water service accounts and/or charges as hereinabove set forth, the city shall have the further right, upon due and reasonable notice, to discontinue or turn off a customer’s premises water service in the event a delinquency occurs in the sewer account and/or the street utility fee to said premises and said delinquency is not corrected within the time set forth herein for delinquent water service accounts.
The failure of the City to discontinue water service for any reason, including the nonpayment of water service charges due, shall not relieve the owner of the premises or customer from the obligation and duty to pay for all of said services, whether said owner or customer does or does not have knowledge of any delinquencies for water uses or charges. (Ord. 2-2013, 2013; Ord. 11-2010, 2010; Ord. 2-1989 § 3, 1989: Ord. 4-1982 § 24, 1982)

13.04.250 Water charges and user charges as liens.
All water charges due the City by a customer or for services rendered any premises shall, when appropriate under Oregon law, be deemed a lien against the real property concerned, and be subject to foreclosure in the manner provided by Oregon Revised Statutes, particularly ORS 223.510-223.650, and such rights shall be in addition to any and all other methods by law available to the City to collect such accounts or water charges. When permitted by applicable Oregon law, said water charges shall become a lien upon and against the property where such water service is furnished and charges incurred from and after the date of billing and entry upon the ledger or other records of the city pertaining to its municipal water system, and such ledger record or other records shall be accessible for inspection by any interested person in accordance with Oregon public records law.
Whenever a charge for water service remains unpaid for more than sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the lien thereby created, if any, may be foreclosed in the manner provided by Oregon law, and specifically ORS Chapter 223.505-223.650, or in any other manner provided by law or city ordinance for the collection of municipal and public liens upon properties within the corporate limits of the city. The city shall also have available as means of enforcement and collection of all water and user charges herein defined, any and all other methods provided by law, including the institution of civil suit, for payment thereof. (Ord. 4-1982 § 25, 1982)

13.04.260 Discontinuance of service or change of occupancy.
A customer occupying premises served with water, may have the water service to such premises temporarily or indefinitely terminated by giving the City written notice four days in advance of the effective termination date. A customer who is about to vacate any premises supplied with water service by the City shall be required to give written notice four days in advance of the specified “move-out” date to the City water department. Water and sewer service charges will be calculated on the final date of use with a meter reading to verify water consumption and the base rates being pro-rated through the same date. Until the City shall have such notice, the customer or water user shall be held responsible for all services rendered at the location concerned.
Whenever a water service is discontinued for such reason as hereinabove defined, the City may require a payment for the particular service rendered in addition to a reconnection or turn on charge, as set forth in the City's rate and charge schedules. In the event water has been disconnected or shut off to a particular premises due to a delinquency in a premises account, the water shall not be turned on or reconnected until all past due charges against said premises have been duly paid and satisfied.
Should a water service be turned off or on by any water customer or user or other person without authority from the City water department, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed, at the discretion of the water superintendent. The charge for shutting water off at the City main or removal of the meter shall be as set forth in applicable City rate schedules as adopted from time to time by the City Council. All such charges shall be billed to the premises where the water was supplied and water shall not again be furnished to such premises until said charges are paid. (Ord. 4-1982 § 26, 1982)

13.04.270 Miscellaneous rates and charges.
Rates and charges for services performed by the City water department for water users, customers and other persons or incident thereto and not herein provided, shall be as established in appropriate rate and charge schedules adopted by resolution of the Wood Village City Council, which schedules may be amended by the Council in the same manner. (Ord. 4-1982 § 27, 1982)

13.04.280 Violation-Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 10-2012, 2012; Ord. 4-2006 § 19, 2006; Ord. 4-1982 § 29, 1982)

Chapter 13.06 INFLOW AND INFILTRATION REDUCTION PROGRAM

Sections:
13.06.010    Definitions.
13.06.020    Inflow and Infiltration Prohibited.
13.06.030    System ownership.
13.06.040    Access to premises.
13.06.050    Notice to property owner.
13.06.070    Loan program.
13.06.080    Document of certification.
13.06.090    Document of certification application.
13.06.100    Temporary document of certification.
13.06.110    Enforcement.
13.06.120    Violation-Penalty.

13.06.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
"Inflow and Infiltration" means the volume of both infiltration water and inflow water found in the sanitary sewer system.
“Infiltration” means the intrusion of groundwater into the sanitary sewerage system through defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes in the sanitary sewerage system or building sewers.
“Inflow” means a direct flow of water other than wastewater that enters the sanitary sewerage system or building sewers from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard, area, and foundation drains; uncontaminated or no-contact cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross connections from storm drains; catch basins; stormwater; surface runoff; and street wash waters.

13.06.020 Inflow and Infiltration Prohibited.
No person may discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated or non-contact cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water, unless specifically authorized by the City Manager.

13.06.030 System ownership.
Ownership of plumbing and building sewers including laterals begin and end at the property line.

13.06.040 Access to premises.
The Public Works Director or authorized representative shall be permitted to enter upon all properties and into all buildings for the purpose of determining if illegal, improperly constructed, failing plumbing or building sewers exist which could contribute to the infiltration or inflow into the sanitary sewerage system.

13.06.050 Notice to property owner.
Should the Director determine that infiltration or inflow into the sanitary sewerage system is being received or could be received into the system from any building drain or building sewer, the owner of the property on which the infiltration or inflow originates shall be notified by certified mail to:
a. Eliminate the cause of the actual or potential infiltration or inflow within one year of the notice date;
b. Show cause within 30 days why the elimination should not be required;
c. Be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 13.06.100.
In the event the owner of the property fails to eliminate the cause or the actual or potential infiltration or inflow within one year of the notice date, the property owner's non-compliance shall be deemed a public nuisance under WVMC Chapter 8.16.200 and is subject to enforcement and abatement as provided in WVMC Sections 8.16.220 to 8.16.250. (Ord. 12-2007 § 1, 2007)

13.06.070 Loan program.
The City will apply for any available grant funds for the purpose of establishing a low interest loan program to be available to low and moderate income households required by the City to repair I&I sources. If the City is successful in its grant application and the funds are available those eligible will apply in accordance with the ordinance establishing the fund.

13.06.080 Document of certification.
After the effective date of this Ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell real estate within the City of Wood Village on which a building or improvement exists, without first delivering to the purchaser a document certifying the lateral has been inspected, tested and found to be a legal, properly functioning lateral that neither contributes to nor carries water from an inflow or infiltration source.

13.06.090 Document of certification application.
Any person (hereinafter “Applicant”) selling real estate located within the City of Wood Village shall make application on a form furnished by the City at least seven (7) working days prior to the date of sale. The Applicant shall then have a plumber who is registered and licensed by the State of Oregon perform a dye test and a smoke or air test of the sewer drainage system on the property to be sold. The smoke test is to be accomplished using nontoxic, nonstaining smoke, which is forced through the sewer system by the use of air blowers. The plumber shall notify the City at least two (2) working days before the test is made so the City may witness the test. The City shall have the right to approve the test as performed and/or require additional tests be made. The City may also rely on the results of any internal televising of the main sewer completed by the City or its contractor. The plumber shall complete the appropriate portions on the forms and certify that the property has been dye tested, smoke tested or air tested and certify the results of such test. In the event there is no illegal storm or surface water connections and the existing drainage system is sound, the City Building Official or designee shall issue a Document of Certification upon the payment of any established fee. When an illegal storm or surface water connection or malfunctioning drainage system is discovered by the means of the above-mentioned testing, no Document of Certification will be issued until the illegal connections/malfunctioning drainage system are removed/repaired, the system retested and certification of such removal/repair by a licensed plumber is received. The certificate shall be valid for three years and applicable to any real estate transaction within the three year period.

13.06.100 Temporary document of certification.
A Temporary Document of Certification may be issued at the City's sole discretion when either:
1. The Applicant proves that such testing cannot be performed because of weather conditions in which case the Applicant shall provide the City with security in the amount established by Resolution of the City Council to guarantee that the appropriate test will be performed. The Applicant will cause to have the appropriate test performed within fourteen (14) days of notification from the City given when the weather conditions make testing possible. In addition, the Applicant shall provide a signed written acknowledgement from the purchaser of the real estate, agreeing to correct, at the purchaser's expense, any violations/defects that may be discovered as the result of subsequent tests. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the Applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs incurred; provided, nevertheless, the primary liability shall run with the land and no such agreement shall affect the City's enforcement powers or excuse the current owner from performance.
2. When an illegal storm or surface water connection or malfunctioning drainage system has been discovered and the necessary remedial activities to correct such connection would require a length of time such as to create a practical hardship for the Applicant, the Applicant may apply to the City's Building Official for a Temporary Document of Certification which may only be issued when the Applicant provides the City with all of the following:
•A bona fide executed contract between the Applicant and a registered, licensed plumber to complete the necessary remedial work with the City listed therein as a third party beneficiary
•Cash security in the amount of said contract as posted with the City and,
•An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all cost overruns related to the remedial work, together with a license to the City to enter upon the property to complete work in case of default by the contractor. The Building Official shall determine when the Temporary Document of Certification will expire, at which time the security shall be forfeited, and the City may use the security to have the necessary remedial work completed.

13.06.110 Enforcement.
The Building Official is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this Chapter as deemed necessary, which shall include but not be limited to:
•Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees;
•Acceptable testing methods
•Establishing the forms of applications, purchaser acknowledgements and plumber certifications;
•Limiting the times of year in which Temporary Documents of Certification are available for reasons of weather. (Ord. 11-2007 § 1, 2007)

13.06.120 Violation-Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this chapter commits is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code.

Chapter 13.08 SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM GENERALLY

Sections:
13.08.010    Sewer connection permit required.
13.08.020    Application-How made.
13.08.030    Application and connection fees required.
13.08.040    Issuance of permit.
13.08.050    Special charges.
13.08.060    Right to reject application.
13.08.070    Applicant responsibilities.
13.08.080    Street opening permit required.
13.08.090    Applicant's agreement with City.
13.08.100    Requirements of other City ordinances.
13.08.110    Notice for inspection and inspection fee.
13.08.120    Prohibitions against septic tanks and dry wells.
13.08.130    Regulation of discharges.
13.08.140    Requirement of grease traps.
13.08.150    Payment and disposition of fees.
13.08.160    Protection from damage.
13.08.170    City employees authorized to inspect.
13.08.180    Connection date requirements-New structures.
13.08.190    Violation-Penalty.

13.08.010 Sewer connection permit required.
No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall make any sewer connection to any part of the sanitary sewer system or storm sewer system of the City without first making application and securing permit therefor. (Ord. 6-1971 § 1, 1971)

13.08.020 Application-How made.
Application for sewer connection permit shall be made in writing to the City in the form prescribed by the City and shall give the location of the property, street number of the building(s) to be connected, the kind and number of fixtures to be connected, the name of the owner of the property to be connected, the name of the person, firm, association, partnership or corporation engaged to make the connection and a statement as to whether or not the premises to be connected were in the past assessed for the construction of a sanitary sewer into which the applicant desires to connect, and such other information or plans as may be required by the City. (Ord. 6-1971 § 2, 1971)

13.08.030 Application and connection fees required.
Application, system development charges and connection fees required: All applications be accompanied by an application fee in an amount fixed by the City Council by resolution for each unit to which service is desired; the number of units to be determined in the manner hereinafter set forth. If the City approves the application, the applicant for sewer connection and service shall then pay to the City system development charge as determined by reference to WVMC 3.16. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 10-1998 § 1, 1998)

13.08.040 Issuance of permit.
If the City approves the application and the fee or fees are paid as herein provided, the City shall thereupon issue a sewer connection permit for the premises covered in said application, in the form prescribed by the City. A copy of said permit then issued shall also be provided the City building department. (Ord. 6-1971 § 4, 1971)

13.08.050 Special charges.
Connection charges for industry and/or establishments producing industrial wastes and/or discharging other caustic effluents into the sanitary sewer system shall be individually determined by the City Council. (Ord. 6-1971 § 5, 1971)

13.08.060 Right to reject application.
The City shall have the right to reject any and all applications for sewer connections and service from an applicant desiring to service a building or premises if it be determined after proper investigation, that such service cannot be economically so provided or is not practical or feasible or consistent with the proper development or present capacity of the Wood Village sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 6-1971 § 6, 1971)

13.08.070 Applicant responsibilities.
After a sewer connection permit is issued, it shall be the obligation and responsibility of the applicant to construct and lay the connection line from the applicable premises or building(s) to the city line indicated by the City; said applicant shall furnish the necessary materials and workers and save the City harmless from any and all costs for such construction, laying and connection. (Ord. 6-1971 § 7, 1971)

13.08.080 Street opening permit required.
If in making connection to the Wood Village sewer system said applicant shall be required to cut into, open, or in any way remove the surface of any city street or roadway, said applicant shall apply in advance of undertaking such work to the City for a street opening permit and pay the necessary fee set therefor and abide by the regulations concerning the use of said permit. (Ord. 6-1971 § 8, 1971)

13.08.090 Applicant's agreement with City.
Each applicant for a sewer connection as above defined shall agree with the City at such time as the application is granted and connection fee, if any, is paid and before actual construction of said connection is commenced, that the applicant will in all ways abide by the rules and regulations of the City relative to the construction and use of said sewer system lines and services and that title to all sewer lines not located upon applicant's property or upon other private property shall vest in the City after the construction and acceptance by the City thereof. (Ord. 6-1971 § 9, 1971)

13.08.100 Requirements of other City ordinances.
In making connection, the applicant shall be bound by and subject to all provisions of pertinent City codes and ordinances, including the building code and the comprehensive zoning ordinances of the City, and shall agree to abide thereby without any reservations or qua1ifications. (Ord. 6-1971 § 10, 1971)

13.08.110 Notice for inspection and inspection fee.
Reasonable notice shall be given to the City to inspect all sewer connections before their completion and while said connections are still uncovered. All work must be done in accordance with specifications prescribed by the City and subject to the approval of the city sewer inspector. There shall be collected at the time of application for sewer connection permit, a sewer inspection in an amount set by City Council by resolution for each physical connection made into a city sewer line. (Ord. 10-1998 § 2, 1998; Ord. 6-1971 § 11, 1971)

13.08.120 Prohibitions against septic tanks and dry wells.
It is unlawful to make alterations or repairs or to install new septic tanks, and/or dry wells for sanitary disposal purposes upon any premises in the city located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of an existing sewer line and owners of property upon which buildings are located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of an existing sewer line must connect their sanitary facilities to said sewer line, unless special permission is granted by the City Council through ordinance. (Ord. 6-1971 § 12, 1971)

13.08.130 Regulation of discharges.
Neither temporary nor permanent drainage of excavations into the sanitary sewer system shall be permitted. Drainage from roofs, storm sewers or storm drains shall not be permitted into the sanitary sewer system and no such connections shall be permitted. The following shall not be allowed to flow into or be disposed of in the City sanitary sewer system:
A. Greases, oils, sludge from service stations, garages, repair shops, machine shops, cleaning establishments or other industries or establishments;
B. Fats, Oils and Greases;
B. Explosives, volatile or inflammable liquids or gases;
C. Acids, alkalis or other corrosive liquids or substances of sufficient strength to damage sewers, manholes, pumping stations or treatment plant equipment;
D. Paper products, materials or clothing that do not dissolve fully in the wastewater flow;
E. Paints or waste products from paint manufacture;
F. Cannery or industrial wastes;
G. Any substance which will form deposits or obstructions in the sewer system, or which when mixed with sewage will precipitate materials causing deposits in sewer lines;
H. Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, rubbish or metals of any kind;
I. Live steam, exhaust steam or water having a temperature above one hundred forty (140) degrees;
J. Cull fruits and vegetables, and pits and seeds from peaches, apricots, cherries, prunes, pumpkins, squash and nuts of any kind;
K. Paunch, stable and barn manure;
L. Effluent from septic tanks or dry wells;
M. Offal from slaughterhouses;
N. Dead animals or fowl or fish;
O. Sulphate or sulphite liquor. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 6-1971 § 13, 1971)

13.08.140 Requirement of grease traps.
Garages, service stations, washracks of any kind, restaurant and food preparation uses, and other uses identified in the plumbing code shall be equipped with suitable grease traps, approved after inspection by the City, before the same may be connected to the sanitary sewer system; such grease traps shall be maintained by the operator of any such establishment in a manner so as to prevent grease, oil or sludge from entering the City sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 6-1971 § 14, 1971)

13.08.150 Payment and disposition of fees.
The fees hereinabove provided for to be paid by any person, firm or corporation shall be paid to the City and shall be deposited to the appropriate sewer fund of the City, to be used expressly for sewer purposes. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 6-1971 § 16, 1971)

13.08.160 Protection from damage.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, obstruct, remove or in any way interfere with any manhole, tank flush, pumping station or other appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system of the City, whether located on private ground or on or under any street, sidewalk or elsewhere in the city and violation hereof shall make such person, firm or corporation subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 6-1971 § 17, 1971)

13.08.170 City employees authorized to inspect.
Plumbing inspector or other duly authorized employee of the City, bearing proper credential and identification shall have the right to enter upon all properties and premises receiving sanitary sewer service, at reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection, observation and regulation of such pertinent provisions of this chapter and in accordance therewith. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 6-1971 § 18, 1971)

13.08.180 Connection date requirements-New structures.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes which shall hereafter the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter be constructed, converted to use as above defined, or annexed to the city and which are located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of an existing sanitary sewer shall install suitable toilet facilities and connect such facilities with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice by the City to do so. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 6-1971 § 19, 1971)

13.08.190 Violation-Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code.
A. In addition to penalties provided in Chapter 1.06 of the Code, any discharger releasing materials prohibited under 13.08.130 may be directly charged for the costs of removal and disposal of offending materials, or may be directly billed for costs incurred by City to dispose of deposited material that violate the code.
B. Failure to appropriately maintain grease traps required by this code may result in both the provision of the civil penalties indented in this chapter, and direct billing for the costs incurred by the City to provide for the cleaning and disposal of materials collected in grease traps. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 10-2012, 2012; Ord. 4-2006 § 20, 2006; Ord. 6-1971 § 20, 1971)
C. In Addition to other remedies provided in this code, the City Manager may cause the termination of service for any user that violates the terms of this code by placing a plug in the discharge lines of any user that fails to make payment of charges levied in accord with this code, or discharges materials prohibited by this code. (Ord. 8-2017, 2017)

Chapter 13.12 SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:
13.12.010    Monthly sewer service charge--Generally.
13.12.020    Customer classification criteria.
13.12.030    City Council authorized to amend classifications.
13.12.040    Establishment Amendment-Where on file.
13.12.050    Late charge.
13.12.060    Meter installation required when.
13.12.070    Billing- Sewer maintenance fund.
13.12.072    Consumption Credit for Water Consumed in Products.
13.12.075    Limitation on Credit or Rebate for Water Not Returned to System.
13.12.080    Delinquent charges.
13.12.090    Enforcement and collection.
13.12.100    Use date.
13.12.110    Users agree to regulations.
13.12.120    Violation-Penalty.

13.12.010 Monthly sewer service charge--Generally.
There shall be assessed against the occupant/user of all houses, buildings or other properties used for human occupancy, employment, education, recreation or other purpose located within the city which are connected, or by law should be connected, to the Wood Village sanitary sewer system, a monthly charge, to be known as the sewer service charge, which shall be for the purpose of providing funds to meet the expenses incurred by the City for the treatment and disposal of sewage, the operation, maintenance and repair and improvement of such facilities and administrative costs attendant thereto. (Ord. 3-1991 § I, 1991)

13.12.020 Customer classification criteria.
The monthly charge to the occupant/user as above indicated shall be based on the customer classification criteria set forth below, said classification method being considered the most equitable manner by which to allocate said operation, maintenance and administrative costs.
Customer Classifications:
A. Sing1e-family residential user: the occupant of a residential dwelling unit designed for permanent occupancy by an individual or a single-family unit, which unit includes kitchen and bathroom facilities;
B. Multiple residential user: the occupant of a residential dwelling unit which includes kitchen and bathroom facilities within a residential dwelling designed for permanent occupancy by more than one individual or more than one single family, a hotel/motel;
C. Nonresidential user: includes the occupant/user of all structures, buildings and properties not included in the above definitions, including but not limited to, industrial and commercial buildings, public and private institutions and facilities, and agricultural structures;
D. Contract/seasonal user: a non-residential user who, because of a use pattern deviate from the norm of the otherwise pertinent classification requires special or peculiar attention thereto as far as use, treatment and other factors concerned. (Ord. 3-1991 § 2, 1991)

13.12.030 City Council authorized to amend classifications.
The City Council shall have the right, by appropriate resolution, to enlarge or amend the number and/or classifications, provided, however, no occupant in any classification listed shall be billed for less than the minimum sewer service charge within the specific related classification and the method for determining such charge shall be uniform and consistent. (Ord. 3-1991 § 3, 1991)

13.12.040 Establishment Amendment-Where on file.
The service charges for the use of the city sanitary sewer system shall be completed on a monthly basis and established by Council resolution following public hearing thereupon.
The monthly sewer service charges adopted by resolution of the City Council, may be increased or decreased from time to time, conditioned upon the amount of revenue necessary to maintain the Wood Village sanitary sewer system and the operation and administration thereof. The monthly charge may be based upon a fixed figure or a volume rate or a combination of the two. Any increase or decrease of said charge in any classification must be by resolution of the City Council following a public hearing. Current rate and charge schedules of the city sanitary sewer system shall be maintained on file at City Hall, and are available for inspection and review by any interested person. (Ord. 3-1991 § 4 (part), 1991)

13.12.050 Late charge.
The customer and owner of the property served shall each be responsible for payment of the service charges provided for by this section. A late charge as established by resolution of the City Council shall be added on all charges that are delinquent as outlined in section 13.04.240. (Ord. 3-1991 § 4(b), 1991)

13.12.060 Meter installation required when.
In the event any nonresidential user connected to the city's sanitary sewer system does not obtain the entire amount of water used upon the premises from the city, then and in that event, said user shall be required to install a meter at their expense and make the same available to the City for reading to determine the amount of water actually used upon the premises in the event a portion of the monthly service charge is based upon a volume usage. In the event that water, of whatever origin, is used for the manufacture of commodities for sale, and said water does not reach the sewage system of the City at the point of manufacture, then and in that event, the flow into the sewer from the said point of manufacture shall be metered at the expense of the user, and the rate shall be based upon the applicable schedule as set forth herein. (Ord. 3-1991 § 4(c), 1991)

13.12.070 Billing- Sewer maintenance fund.
Sewer service charges shall be billed monthly, and are due upon receipt and such funds when collected, shall be placed in a separate fund known as the sewer maintenance fund or other appropriate title. Payment of the cost of sewage collection, treatment, maintenance of sewage facilities, repairs and administrative costs related thereto shall be made from said fund; capital expenses may also be paid from said fund. (Ord. 3-1991 § 4(d), 1991)

13.12.072 Consumption Credit for Water Consumed in Products.
For all customer classifications where sanitary sewer billing is established based on water consumption, a consumption credit may be offered for water that is consumed as an integral part of a product sold or produced from the customer’s location. Any customer seeking a consumption credit must establish that water is consumed in the product produced, is not returned to the sanitary sewer system and can be effectively measured. Credit may also be offered for water utilized for other processing uses, provided that any such water must have a method of measurement, and it must be proven that such water does not return to the sanitary sewer system. The City Manager, or his/her designated representative, may establish the method used to determine the quantity adjustments for water not returned to the sanitary sewer system. Once established, the credit method shall be provided continuously to the customer, provided however; should the customer fail to provide sufficient information, information in a timely manner, or change business practices in the use of water for processing purposes, the City Manager or his/her designated representative may determine to limit or eliminate any such consumption credit for a period, or entirely. Decisions made by the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council as provided in this code. (Ord. 11-2011, 2011)

13.12.075 Limitation on Credit or Rebate for Water Not Returned to System.
A customer in a classification where sanitary sewer billing is established based on water consumption who has a leak or similar unusual water consumption for water and can demonstrate that the water has not been returned to the sanitary sewer system may request the City Manager provide a credit or rebate of sanitary sewer fees to the customer as follows:
A. The City Manager will determine the amount of the credit or rebate based on the following considerations:
    1. Historic consumption for prior periods as compared to consumption during the period when the leak or unusual consumption occurred;
    2. Specific evidence of the leak or the cause of the unusual consumption;
    3. The sanitary sewer fee credit or rebate will be calculated by subtracting the average water consumption during the prior period from the actual water consumption during the period of the leak or unusual consumption and then applying the volumetric portion of the applicable sanitary sewer rate to the difference in volume.
B. The credit or rebate may be offered from the time of the leak or other cause for unusual consumption; however, in no event will the total credit or rebate be for a period greater than four (4) months.
For all active accounts, credit will be applied to future billing amounts. For accounts that are closing, changing ownership, or for some good reason cannot benefit from a credit, a direct refund shall be provided. (Ord. 11-2011, 2011)

13.12.080 Delinquent charges.
A. Any charge not paid by the day and date established in the monthly billing calendar as adopted by the City Manager or designated representative shall be delinquent. Delinquent accounts may be collected, water and sewage service discontinued, property liens as appropriate and late penalties imposed in the manner set forth in the City’s water regulation ordinances. All billings for sanitary sewer service shall be made in conjunction with billings for water service and shall be due and payable and become delinquent in the same manner as the water service charges.
B. All monthly service charges not paid in accord with the monthly billing calendar and determined to be delinquent may draw interest as provided by law, or as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2-2013, 2013; Ord. 3-1991 Section 4(e), 5, 1991)

13.12.090 Enforcement and collection.
The City may enforce and collect delinquent sewer service charges, in addition to the manner provided by the City water ordinances, in any manner provided by Oregon law or the City Charter and may, with permission of the City Council, when appropriate, file a lien against the premises served as provided by law, the City Charter or City ordinances appertaining thereto. In addition, any delinquency may be certified to the tax assessor of Multnomah County for collection in the manner provided by law or may be recovered in an action at law by the City. These provisions for enforcement and collection also apply to any penalties or charges incurred as provided in Section 13.08.190 (Ord. 8-2017, 2017; Ord. 3-1991 § 6, 1991)

13.12.100 Use date.
When sewage disposal service has not been previously provided to a residence or other building or user within the city, the use date shall be considered to have commenced five days following the final inspection for connection of sewer made by the City or its agent, unless good cause be shown why this should not be the case. In all other cases, use shall be deemed to have commenced upon the date when water service is commenced, when applicable, or if not applicable, then in the discretion of the City Manager or City employee assigned the task of determining the same. The decision of the City Manager regarding use or commencement date shall be final, provided however, the City Council may at its option, review such determination and if so reviewed, its decision shall be final. (Ord. 3-1991 § 7, 1991)

13.12.110 Users agree to regulations.
All applicants and users of the Wood Village sanitary sewer system shall by such application and/or use agree to be bound by the rules and regulations governing connections to and the use of the sanitary sewer system without reservation or qualification. (Ord. 3-1991 § 8, 1991)

13.12.120 Violation-Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 10-2012, 2012; Ord. 4-2006 § 21, 2006; Ord. 3-1991 § 9, 1991)

Chapter 13.16 SEWAGE PRETREATMENT PROGRAM

Sections:
13.16.010    Definitions.
13.16.020    Limitations on Wastewater Discharge Characteristics.
13.16.030    Categorical Standards Compliance Deadline.
13.16.040    Industrial Pretreatment Program Implementation Manual.
13.16.050    Accidental Discharges.
13.16.060    Installation of Pretreatment Technology.
13.16.070    Industrial User.
13.16.080    Charges and Fees.
13.16.090    Industrial Waste Discharge Permits.
13.16.100    Permit Application.
13.16.110    Permit Conditions.
13.16.120    Permit Modifications.
13.16.130    Baseline Reports and Final Compliance Reports.
13.16.140    Reports on Continued Compliance.
13.16.150    Signatory and Certification of Reports.
13.16.160    Monitoring Facilities.
13.16.170    Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling.
13.16.180    Confidential Information.
13.16.190    Emergency Suspension of Sanitary Sewerage Service and the Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit.
13.16.200    Revocation of Industrial Waste Discharge Permit and Termination of Wastewater Treatment Service.
13.16.210    Remedies for Industrial User Noncompliance.
13.16.220    Notice and Appeal for Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a Permit.
13.16.230    Enforcement.
13.16.240    Civil Administrative Penalties.
13.16.250    Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan.
13.16.260    Levels of Civil Administrative Enforcement.
13.16.270    Operating Upsets.
13.16.280    Bypass.
13.16.290    Prohibited Conduct.
13.16.300    Records Retention.
13.16.310    City Recovery of Costs.

13.16.010 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions set forth in Wood Village Municipal Code (WVMC)1.04.010, as used in this chapter, sanitary sewer, sewer, and wastewater have the same meaning. Unless the context requires otherwise, for purposes of Chapter 13.16 the following mean:
Act. The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.
Actual Cost. Labor, materials, equipment, construction services, and administrative overhead.
Applicable Pretreatment Standards. Any federal, state or City discharge prohibition or standard, whichever is most stringent.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the limitations listed in the WVMC 13.16.040. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand(BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at twenty (20) degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
Building Drain. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the building wall.
Building Service Lateral. A public sanitary sewer beginning at the property line or public easement line, and extending to the sanitary sewer main.
Building Sewer. A private sanitary sewer beginning five feet outside the building and extending to the property line or public easement line, connecting to the building service lateral.
Capital Improvements. Facilities or assets used for wastewater collection, transmission, treatment, and disposal.
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, incorporated herein by reference.
Collector Sewer. The portion of the public sewerage system that is primarily installed to receive wastewater directly from individual residences and other individual public or private structures.
Combined Sewer. A sewer that is designed as both a sanitary and a stormwater sewer.
Customer/User. The owner, renter or lessee of property served by the sanitary sewerage system.
Daily Maximum Limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property, including but not limited to construction, installation, or alteration of a building or other structure; condominium conversion; land division; establishment or termination of a right of access; storage on real property; tree cutting; drilling; and site alteration such as that due to land surface mining, dredging, grading, paving, excavation, or clearing.
Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Improvement Fee. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted.
Industrial User. Any user of the sanitary sewerage system who is the source of a nondomestic discharge.
Industrial Wastes. Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
Infiltration. The intrusion of groundwater into the sanitary sewerage system through defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes in the sanitary sewerage system or building sewers.
Inflow. A direct flow of water other than wastewater that enters the sanitary sewerage system or building sewers from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard, area, and foundation drains; uncontaminated or non-contact cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross-connections from storm drains; catch basins; stormwaters; surface runoff; and street wash waters.
Interceptor (Trunk) Sewer. A sanitary sewer primarily intended to receive wastewater from a collector sewer, another interceptor sewer, an existing major discharge of raw or inadequately treated wastewater, or a water pollution control facility.
Interference. Discharge by an industrial discharger which, alone or in conjunction with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the wastewater treatment plant; its treatment processes or operations; or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
    1. causes a violation of any requirement of the NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation; or
    2. causes the sludge or sludge disposal to violate any of the following requirements:
        a. state or local regulations,
        b. permits, or
        c. the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder:
            i. Section 405 of the Clean Water Act,
            ii. the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), or
            iii. state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Land Area. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.
Milligram per liter (mg/L). A weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. “Milligram per liter” shall be considered as equivalent to parts per million (ppm).
Multi-family. Any building, group of buildings, housing complex or manufactured home park that contains four or more dwelling units.
National Pretreatment Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act applicable to industrial users, including the general and specific prohibitions found in 40 CFR 403.5.
Natural Waters. Any watercourse, stream, creek, pond, ditch, 1ake, or other body of surface water or groundwater that supports wildlife or serves as a source of drinking water for humans or animals, or any water that may be hydrologically connected to such waters.
New Source. 
    1. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act. The Pretreatment Standards will be applicable to such source if such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
        a. the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located, or
        b. the building, structure, facility or installation completely replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source, or
        c. the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
    2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)(b) and (1)(c) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
    3. Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:
        a. begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program;
            i. any placement assembly or installation of facilities or equipment, or
            ii. significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, installation of new source facilities or equipment, or
        b. entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
Nondomestic Discharge. The discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewerage system from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
Non-Significant Industrial User. Any user which provides a service or one connected with commerce which is not classified as a Significant Industrial User.
NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
O & M (Operation and maintenance). Activities required to ensure the dependable and economical functioning of the sanitary sewerage system.
    1. Maintenance. The preservation of the functional integrity and efficiency of the sanitary sewerage system. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance, and the replacement of any portion of the sanitary sewerage system.
    2. Operation. The control of the unit processes and equipment that make up the sanitary sewerage system. This includes keeping financial and personal management records, laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning, employment of attorneys and consultants, payment of court costs, and payment of any costs or fees reasonably associated with any of the above.
Oils and Grease. Any oil and/or greases of mineral or petroleum origin.
Other Wastes. Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
Parcel of Land. A lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinance.
Pass Through. Discharge that exits the Gresham wastewater treatment plant into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Gresham's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Pollutant. Any substance discharged into the sanitary sewerage system, except water, including any items identified in a resolution adopted by Council.
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or instead of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewerage system.
Pretreatment Requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than categorical standards and prohibitive discharge standards, imposed on an Industrial User.
Private Wastewater Disposal System. A privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
Properly Shredded Garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sanitary sewer, with no particle being greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Public Sanitary Sewer. Any sanitary sewer owned, operated and maintained by the public.
Qualified Public Improvements. A capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval, identified in the plan adopted pursuant to WVMC 13.16.250, and either:
    1. not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval; or
    2. located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.
Reimbursement Fee. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted for which capacity exists.
Renewal. Any application to validate an expired or voided permit.
Replacement. Obtaining and installing equipment accessories or appurtenances that are necessary during the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of the sanitary sewerage system to maintain the capacity and performance for which the system is designed and constructed.
Sanitary Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and industrial wastes.
Sanitary Sewer Connection. A connection of the building service lateral to the sewer main or a connection of the building sewer to the building service lateral.
Sanitary Sewer Connection Charges. All charges required for the right to connect to the sanitary sewerage system including sanitary sewer inspection fees, system development charges, and public wastewater facility charges.
Sanitary Sewer Main. A public sanitary sewer that collects all of the building service laterals and transmits wastewater.
Sanitary Sewerage System. All publicly owned facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater.
Sewage. Water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, except industrial wastes.
Significant Industrial User. Any Industrial User of the sanitary sewerage system who:
    1. Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, except as provided in (1)(a) of this definition.
        a. The City Manager may determine that an Industrial User subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, is a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User rather than a Significant Industrial User on a finding that the Industrial User never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the following conditions are met:
            i. the Industrial User, prior to the City’s finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements;
            ii. the Industrial User annually submits the certification statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(a) together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and
            iii. the Industrial User never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
    2. has a non-domestic flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday;
    3. contributes more than five percent of the average dry weather hydraulic, organic, or solids handling load to the sanitary sewerage system; or
    4. is determined by the City Manager to have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater treatment facility’s operation by either upset, inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination, or other means, or for violating a pretreatment standard or requirement.
Significant Noncompliance (SNC).
    1. A Significant Industrial User is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
        a. chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a 6 month period exceed (by any magnitude) numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
        b. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a 6 month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
        c. any other violation of a pretreatment Standard or Requirement, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the City Manager believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of sanitary sewerage system personnel or the general public);
        d. any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the City Manager’s exercise of their emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
        e. failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
        f. failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
        g. failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
        h. any other violation or group of violations, including a violation of Best Management Practices, that the City Manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of its pretreatment program.
    2. An Industrial User is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
        a. any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the City Manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of sanitary sewerage system personnel of the general public);
        b. any discharge of a pollutant that had caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the City Manager’s exercise of their emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; or
        c. any other violation or group of violations, including a violation of Best Management Practices, that the City Manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of its pretreatment program.
Slug Discharge. Any discharge to the sanitary sewerage system of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the City’s regulations, local limitations, or Permit conditions.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes”, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association.
Storm Drain. A pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface waters, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted water.
Surcharge. The charge in addition to the user charge which is charged to those customers whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established by the City.
Suspended Solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are suspended in wastewater which are removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids is made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
System Development Charge. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination of fees assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. System development charge includes that portion of a sewer system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the City for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. System development charge does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.
Toxic Pollutants. Those pollutants, or combination of pollutants, including disease-causing agents, that after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of information available to the City Manager, cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction), or physical deformations, in such organisms or their offspring. “Toxic pollutants” include those substances listed in the federal priority pollutant list and any other pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Manager of the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307 of the Act (33 USC 1317).
Unpolluted Water or Liquids. Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; substances that may impart taste, odor or color characteristics; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; odorous or otherwise obnoxious gases. It shall contain no more than 1.0 milligrams per liter each of suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand. Analytical determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Upset. An exceptional incident in which a discharge unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards due to the factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
User Charge. A charge paid by a customer of the sanitary sewerage system for the customer’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the system.
Wastewater. Water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
Wastewater Treatment Plant. The arrangement of devices and structures used for treating wastewater.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009; Ord. 4-2003, 2003)

13.16.020 Limitations on Wastewater Discharge Characteristics.
1. Categorical Standards. All dischargers shall meet the supplementary limitations (Subsection E) and where applicable, Categorical Standards.
2. State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges into the sanitary sewer system apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this code.
3. Right of Revision. The City reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the sanitary sewerage system if necessary to comply with the objectives of the federal general pretreatment regulations.
4. Dilution. No Industrial User may increase the use of potable or process water in any way, for the purpose of diluting wastewater to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this code.
5. Local Limitations. No Industrial User may discharge wastewater containing concentrations of the following materials, exceeding the follow
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
|    Pollutant    | Maximum Daily Maximum Limit |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
|                 |           (Mg/L)            |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Arsenic (As)    | .48                         |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Cadmium (Cd)    | .50                         |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Chromium (Cr)   | 1.58                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Copper (Cu)     | 2.00                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Cyanide (CN)    | 1.00                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Lead (Pb)       | 1.00                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Mercury (Hg)    | 0.10                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Molybdenum (M0) | 6.58                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Oil and Grease  | 100                         |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Nickel (Ni)     | 3.00                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Selenium (Se)   | 4.48                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Silver (Ag)     | 0.47                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
| Zinc (Zn)       | 4.00                        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------+
1Limits established for total metals and total cyanide.
2Oil and Grease limit is for total non-polar oils; petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin.
6. Additional Limitations. The City Manager may apply best professional judgment (BPJ) and impose technical or performance based pollutant concentrations and Best Management Practices, in addition to limits specified in subsection E of this section above, on Industrial Users. The City Manager may impose flow (gallons per day), mass (pounds per day), pH, and/or temperature limitations on Industrial Users. The City Manager may impose categorical equivalent mass or equivalent concentration limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(c).
7. The prohibitions of Section 13.16.030 are incorporated into Chapter 13.16 by this reference and may be enforced, pursuant to this Chapter, against users subject to Chapter 13.16. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009; Ord. 2-2003, 2003)

13.16.030 Categorical Standards Compliance Deadline.
1. Existing Sources. Compliance by existing sources with Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be within 3 years of the date the Standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N. Existing sources which become Industrial Users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall be considered existing Industrial Users except where such sources meet the definition of a New Source.
2. New Sources. New Sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), New Sources shall meet all applicable Pretreatment Standards.

13.16.040 Industrial Pretreatment Program Implementation Manual.
The City Manager may adopt an "Industrial Pretreatment Program Implementation Manual" to carry out the provisions of Chapter 13.16 and all aspects of the industrial pretreatment program. (Ord. 2-2003, 2003)

13.16.050 Accidental Discharges.
1. Each Industrial User shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or other substances as established by this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the Industrial User’s cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City Manager for review, and shall be approved by the City Manager before construction of the facility. Industrial Users shall complete the accidental discharge plan meeting the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi) and submit the plan to the City Manager within ninety (90) days of being notified. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the City Manager shall not relieve the Industrial User from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of the chapter.
2. Industrial Users shall notify the City Manager immediately upon the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time of the discharge, description of the waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge the user shall submit to the City Manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the sanitary sewerage system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
3. Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the Industrial User’s premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.

13.16.060 Installation of Pretreatment Technology.
1. Industrial Users shall provide wastewater treatment, including pretreatment technology, devices and facilities, as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance within the time limitations specified by EPA, DEQ, or the City Manager, whichever is more stringent, to meet requirements of this chapter, including:
    a. limitations on wastewater discharge characteristics;
    b. general discharge prohibitions into the sanitary sewerage system;
    c. industrial waste discharge permit requirements, where applicable;
    d. all categorical pretreatment standards.
2. Any pretreatment devices and facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense.
3. Detailed plans describing such devices and facilities and the operating procedures for such shall be submitted to the City Manager for review and shall be acceptable to the City Manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities or devices as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter.
4. Pretreatment devices and facilities shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning, maintenance, and inspection.

13.16.070 Industrial User.
1. If any sampling by an Industrial User indicates a violation of its industrial waste discharge permit or any provision of this chapter, the Industrial User shall notify the City Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The Industrial User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results of the repeat analysis and corrective actions required to prevent recurrence of the violation to the City Manager within 30 days.
2. All Industrial Users shall notify the City Manager prior to any substantial changes in volume or character of pollutants in their discharges, including hazardous wastes.
C. All Industrial Users shall notify the City Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality in writing of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.

13.16.080 Charges and Fees.
The Council shall adopt by resolution charges and fees to compensate the City for the cost of administration of the pretreatment program. These charges and fees may include:
1. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
2. Fees for Industrial Waste Discharge Permits, including:
    a. new permit;
    b. permit renewal;
    c. annual permit; and
    d. permit modification (where requested by the Significant Industrial User).
3. Fees for filing appeals.
4. Fees for non-return of preliminary reports required by Chapter 13.16.090(2) (Ord. 2-2003, 2003)

13.16.090 Industrial Waste Discharge Permits.
1. Significant Industrial User Permits. All Significant Industrial Users proposing to connect to or to discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewerage system shall obtain an industrial waste discharge permit before connecting to or discharging to the sanitary sewerage system.
2. Non-Significant Industrial User Permits. The City Manager may issue a Non-Significant Industrial Waste Discharge Permit for users that meet the definition of a Non-Significant Industrial User. A permit may include but not be limited to self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements may include an identification of pollutants monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State and local law.
3. Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Permits. The City Manager may issue a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Waste Discharge Permit for users meeting the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical User when deemed such level of control is protective of the public sanitary sewer system. A permit may include but not be limited to self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements.
4. Preliminary Report. The City Manager may request information from all Industrial Users to determine if the Industrial User is a Significant Industrial User, Non-Significant Industrial User, Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User. The Industrial Users shall provide the information within 60 days of the date the City Manager requests the information.

13.16.100 Permit Application.
1. Industrial Users shall file with the City Manager an Industrial Waste Discharge permit application in the form prescribed by the City Manager.
2. Non-permitted, existing Industrial Users shall apply for an Industrial Waste Discharge permit within 60 days after being notified by the City Manager.
3. Renewals. Existing permitted Industrial Users shall reapply at least 90 days before the expiration date of their Industrial Waste Discharge Permit.
4. Modifications. 
    a. Existing permitted Industrial Users proposing facility expansion, production increase or process modification which may result in a change in the character of pollutants to be discharged or which may result in new or increased discharge which may exceed the condition of their permit, shall apply for a new permit at least 90 days prior to changing the discharge to the sanitary sewerage system.
5. Proposed new Industrial Users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to the sanitary sewerage system.
6. The applicant for a permit shall provide the following information:
    a. Name, address and location of the Industrial User.
    b. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended and the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) number according to the NAICS Manual.
    c. Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in this chapter. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with Section 13.16.140.
    d. Time and duration of discharges.
    e. Average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations. All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the City Manager due to cost or non-feasibility.
    f. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all building sewers, sanitary sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
    g. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises including all materials that are or may be discharged to the sanitary sewerage system.
    h. For existing plants at time of adoption of ordinance codified in this chapter, the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this chapter in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this chapter on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and additional pretreatment is required for the Industrial User to comply with this chapter.
    i. Where additional pretreatment and operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this chapter, the Industrial User shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the Industrial User will provide such additional pretreatment and implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:
        1. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and others).
        2. No increment referred to in paragraph (i)(1.) may exceed nine months,
        3. Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance the Industrial User shall submit a progress report to the City Manager, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the Industrial User to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the City Manager.
    j. Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized by the Industrial User (average and maximum per day).
    k. Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on WVMC 13.16.140 (k).
    l. Permit applications shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the Industrial User or per WVMC 13.16.150(2), and a qualified engineer where required.
    m. The permit application shall include the certification statement of WVMC 13.16150(1)
7. The City Manager will evaluate the complete application and data furnished by the Industrial User and may require additional information prior to granting or denying an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit. (Ord. 2-2003, 2003)

13.16.110 Permit Conditions.
1. Industrial Users shall be subject to the terms and conditions of their Industrial Waste Discharge Permit.
2. Industrial Waste Discharge Permits shall contain the following terms and conditions:
    a. limits, including Best Management Practices, on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
    b. limits on average rate, maximum rate, and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. The Industrial User shall notify the City Manager within two business days after the Industrial User has a reasonable basis to know that the equivalent mass or concentration limits will significantly change within the next calendar month;
    c. requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
    d. specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations; frequency of sampling; number, types and standards for tests; and reporting schedule;
    e. compliance schedules, including effective date and final compliance date;
    f. requirements for reports on continued compliance as provided in Section 13.16.140, and submission of special technical reports or discharge reports;
    g. a statement that the Industrial User shall notify the City if the Industrial User discovers, through its own sampling, violations of limitations on the wastewater strength or permit standards; and
    h. a requirement to control Slug Discharges, to notify the City Manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a Slug Discharge and to develop a slug control plan or other action, if the City Manager determines that such a plan or action is necessary as required by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi).
    i. Permit Duration. Industrial Waste Discharge Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed five years, subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this chapter, except that the City Manager may administratively extend an existing permit during the permit renewal process.
    j. Limitations on Permit Transfer. Industrial Waste Discharge Permits are issued to a specific Industrial User for a specific operation and are non-transferable without, at a minimum, prior notification to the City Manager and prior written approval of the City Manager.
        i. If prior written approval for permit transfer is granted, a copy of the existing permit or a new permit, if required, will be issued to the new owner or operator.
        ii. Industrial Waste Discharge Permits are issued for a specific location and are not transferable to any other location.
    k. Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, Gresham Revised Code, or the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit requirements;
    l. Recordkeeping requirements;
    m. Other conditions necessary to achieve the requirements of this chapter, as determined by the City Manager. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009)

13.16.120 Permit Modifications.
1. Permit conditions included in an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit shall remain in effect for the permit until it expires, except that the permit conditions may be revised from time to time as the City Manager deems necessary to effectively manage industrial waste discharges. If the permittee wishes to exceed any conditions of its permit, the permittee shall apply for a new permit.
2. After the promulgation of the Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit of each Industrial User subject to the standards shall be revised to require compliance with the standards. The City Manager may amend the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit to assure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.

13.16.130 Baseline Reports and Final Compliance Reports.
Baseline reports and Final Compliance reports, where required, shall be submitted to the City Manager in a form prescribed by the City Manager. Baseline reports and Final Compliance reports shall be submitted within the time limitations and shall contain, at a minimum, information and certifications, as required under 40 CFR 403.12.

13.16.140 Reports on Continued Compliance.
1. Industrial Users shall submit to the City Manager periodic reports on continued compliance. Monitoring, Sampling Information, and Reporting Requirements shall be reported, as specified by the City Manager. Reports shall be made on a form approved by the City Manager.
2. Industrial Users subject to an applicable pretreatment standard set forth in this Chapter, after the compliance date of that pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new Industrial User, after commencement of the discharge to the city, shall submit to the City Manager, monthly (or other frequency as specified by the City Manager), a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the wastewater which are limited by the pretreatment standards, this Chapter, or the user's wastewater discharge permit. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement. In cases where the pretreatment standard or local limitation requires compliance with a Best Management Practice (or pollution prevention alternative), the Industrial User shall submit documentation required by the City Manager of the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the Industrial User.
3. Reports of Industrial Users shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, description, nature and concentration of pollutants, or mass where required by the City Manager. The frequency of monitoring by the Industrial User shall be as prescribed in the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit. If an Industrial User monitors more frequently than required by its Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, the Industrial User shall notify the City Manager of the results of all such monitoring according to the reporting requirements of the user's Industrial Waste Discharge Permit.
4. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements shall be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
    a. Except as indicated in Section (b) and (c) below, the Industrial User shall collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City Manager. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the City Manager, the samples shall be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the City Manager, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with Instantaneous Limits.
    b. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques.
    c. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in WVMC 13.16.130, a minimum of four (4) grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the City Manager may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by WVMC 13.16.140(1), the Industrial User is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
    d. All effluent analysis conducted for reports required by this chapter, except pH, shall be performed by an accredited environmental laboratory.
5. Significant industrial users shall submit to the City Manager reports on continued compliance no less than once each six months. Categorical SIUs shall submit to the City Manager reports on continued compliance in the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by EPA, DEQ, or the user’s Industrial Waste Discharge Permit. The City Manager may alter the months for which CIUs continued compliance reports are to be submitted.
6. Annual certification by the Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users. A facility determined to be a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) shall annually submit the certification statement in 40 CFR 403.12(q) signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in WVMC 13.16.150. This certification shall accompany any alternative report required by the City Manager. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009)
7. An Industrial User subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard may apply for and obtain a waiver to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a Categorical Pretreatment Standard if the Industrial User has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the Industrial User. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:
    a. The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable Categorical Standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
    b. The monitoring waiver is valid only for the effective period of the Industrial Waste Discharge Permits, but in no case longer than 5 years. The Industrial User shall submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent Industrial Waste Discharge Permit.
    c. In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the Industrial User shall provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
    d. The request for a monitoring waiver shall be signed in accordance with WVMC 13.16.150 (2) and include the following certification statement:
    Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR___(specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s). I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of _____ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since the filing of the last periodic report under WVMC 13.16.140(7)(d).
    e. Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
    f. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the City Manager shall be included as a condition in the Industrial User’s permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the User in its request for the waiver shall be maintained by the City for 3 years after expiration of the waiver.
    g. Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the Industrial User’s permit by the City Manager, the Industrial User shall certify on each report with the statement in WVMC 13.16.140(7)(d), that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the Industrial User.
    h. In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the Industrial User’s operations, the User shall immediately: comply with the monitoring requirements of WVMC 13.16.140(1), or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the City Manager, and notify the City Manager.
    i. This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in Categorical Pretreatment Standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical Pretreatment Standard.

13.16.150 Signatory and Certification of Reports.
Industrial Waste Discharge Permit Applications, Baseline reports, Final Compliance reports (90-Day Compliance Reports), Continued Compliance reports, and other required reports shall:
1. Contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations; and
2. Be signed by a responsible corporate officer, by a general partner or proprietor, or by a duly authorized representative of the Industrial User, as defined under 40 CFR 403.12(l).

13.16.160 Monitoring Facilities.
1. Each Industrial User shall provide and operate at the Industrial User’s own expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each pipe or conduit which discharges to the sanitary sewerage system. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the Industrial User’s premises. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the Industrial User, the City Manager may allow the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way if the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The Industrial User shall pay all costs associated with such alternate location.
2. There shall be ample room in or near the sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The sampling facility, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the Industrial User.
2. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed no later than 120 days of the Industrial User being notified by the City Manager.

13.16.170 Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling.
1. The City Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any Industrial User to determine whether the Industrial User is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any Industrial Waste Discharge Permits or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the City Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
    a. Where an Industrial User has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the manager shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
    b. The City Manager shall have the right to set up on the Industrial User’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the User’s operations.
    c. The City Manager may require the Industrial User to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the User at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated per manufacturer’s recommendations or more frequently as required to ensure their accuracy.
    d. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the Industrial User at the written or verbal request of the City Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the User.
    e. The Industrial User shall not cause unreasonable delays in allowing the City Manager access to the User’s premises.
2. If the Industrial User refuses to provide the City Manager access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the City Manager is authorized to obtain an administrative inspection warrant and enter the premises in accordance with WVMC 13.16.230-260.

13.16.180 Confidential Information.
1. Information and data on a user obtained by the City Manager from reports, questionnaires, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from the City Manager’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the Industrial User specifically requests in writing that it be confidential and demonstrates to the satisfaction of the manager that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as provided by federal or state law. Any such request shall be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data in accordance with the City's established confidentiality procedures. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by federal law will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
2. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES permit, or pretreatment programs and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009)

13.16.190 Emergency Suspension of Sanitary Sewerage Service and the Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit.
1. The City Manager may suspend an Industrial User’s sanitary sewerage service or suspend an Industrial User’s Industrial Waste Discharge Permit when it appears to the City Manager that an actual or threatened discharge:
    a. presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to public health and safety,
    b. presents or may present substantial danger to the environment,
    c. interferes or may interfere with the operation of the sanitary sewerage system, or
    d. violates or may violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter or any Industrial Waste Discharge Permit issued under this chapter.
2. Any Industrial User notified of the suspension of sanitary sewerage service or the Industrial User’s Industrial Waste Discharge Permit shall within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the City Manager, cease all discharges. If the Industrial User to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the City Manager shall take such steps necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sanitary sewerage system or danger to any individuals. The City Manager shall reinstate the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof by the Industrial User of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.

13.16.200 Revocation of Industrial Waste Discharge Permit and Termination of Wastewater Treatment Service.
The City Manager may revoke the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit of any Industrial User for any of the following reasons:
1. failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
2. failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
4. violation of conditions of its permit.

13.16.210 Remedies for Industrial User Noncompliance.
Whenever the City Manager finds that any Industrial User has engaged in conduct which justifies revocation of an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, pursuant to Section 13.16.220, the City Manager may obtain remedies for noncompliance by any Industrial User as described in the Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan.

13.16.220 Notice and Appeal for Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a Permit.
1. Upon denial, suspension or revocation of an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, the City Manager shall give notice of such action to the permit holder in writing. Such notice shall include the following:
    a. a statement explaining the action taken,
    b. the reasons for the action,
    c. the date the decision becomes effective, and
    d. the opportunity to protest the decision as set forth in WVMC 1.06.035(D.-H.).
2. Notice of denial, revocation or suspension of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be sent by regular and certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event the suspension or revocation is effective immediately, notice shall also be delivered by posting it on the property at the location listed on the permit application.
3. Unless otherwise provided the action shall be effective 10 days after the date of the notice.
4. Any permit applicant or holder aggrieved by a denial, suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of a license or permit regulated under this section, may protest such action to a hearings officer pursuant to WVMC 1.06.035(D.-H.).
5. Unless otherwise provided, submitting a protest of a revocation or suspension of a permit shall stay the effectiveness of the suspension or revocation until the protest hearing is held and the hearings officer issues a decision.
6. A permit may be suspended in the event of an imminent threat to public health and safety and in circumstances in which it is necessary to take immediate action in order to prevent serious harm. Suspension under this section is effective upon the date the notice is posted on the property. Subsection (5), above, does not apply to suspensions under this section.

13.16.230 Enforcement.
1. When the City Manager finds that an Industrial User has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, rules adopted hereunder, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the City Manager may:
    a. take civil administrative actions, as set out in the Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan, adopted under the authority of Section 13.16.250;
    b. issue compliance orders;
    c. cause a petition to be filed in the appropriate state or federal court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance or any rule adopted hereunder on activities of the user. The City Manager may also seek other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user;
    d. cause an appropriate action to be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction; or
    e. suspend or revoke a permit in accordance with WVMC 13.16.190 and 13.16.200.
    f. Take other action the City Manager deems appropriate.
2. Annual Publication. A list of all Industrial Users that were in significant noncompliance of applicable pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements during the 12 previous months shall be annually published by the City Manager in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the City Manager.
3. Reports. If any Industrial User fails, upon demand by the City Manager, to supply up-to-date, accurate and complete self-monitoring reports and records as required in Section 13.16.140, the City Manager, at their discretion, may consider the Industrial User’s monthly discharge to be the Industrial User’s water consumption. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009)

13.16.240 Civil Administrative Penalties.
Violations of this chapter, the requirements of a wastewater discharge permit, or the requirements of a wastewater discharge permit, or the requirements of an order issued under this chapter, may result in assessment of civil administrative penalties subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code or the City Manager may initiate any other enforcement action as outlined in this chapter and in the Enforcement Response Plan. Failure to pay a civil administrative penalty within 30 days following a final determination regarding the penalty is grounds for permit revocation or termination of an Industrial User’s discharge. In addition to the civil administrative penalties, the City Manager may recover other costs associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. 4-2006 § 22, 2006)

13.16.250 Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan.
1. The Council may adopt by resolution an “Industrial Pretreatment Enforcement Response Plan” (Enforcement Response Plan) which shall describe the enforcement procedures that may be used to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager may approve an “Enforcement Response Guide” to carry out the provisions of the Enforcement Response Plan.
2. The Enforcement Response Plan shall describe in detail the system of escalating levels of civil administrative penalties described in Section 13.16.180. (Ord. 2-1996 § 7, 1996: Ord. 3-1993 § 13, 1993: Ord. 3-1987 § 15, 1987)
3. A person challenging an enforcement decision pursuant to WVMC 13.16.230-250 may protest the enforcement decision to a hearing officer pursuant to WVMC 1.06.035(D.-H.).

13.16.260 Levels of Civil Administrative Enforcement.
1. There are three levels of civil administrative enforcement.
    a. Level I Procedures. This level of civil administrative enforcement applies to Industrial Users in violation of this chapter or their discharge permits, but not in significant noncompliance (SNC).
    b. Level II Procedures. This level of civil administrative enforcement applies to Industrial Users in significant noncompliance (SNC) and may apply to Industrial Users with repeated or intentional violations of this chapter or their discharge permits.
    c. Level III Procedures. This level of civil administrative enforcement applies to Industrial Users that have not responded to previous enforcement action or to severe or willful violations of the requirements of this chapter.
2. Alternative Enforcement. This section does not limit the City Manager’s authority to take any other enforcement action against an Industrial User as provided by the Code. The City Manager may follow the provisions of this section and at any time abandon these provisions and proceed with any other enforcement actions provided in the code.

13.16.270 Operating Upsets.
1. Any Industrial User which experiences an upset in operations which places the Industrial User in a temporary state of noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter or an Industrial Waste Discharge Permit shall inform the City Manager as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours of first awareness of the commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the Industrial User with the City Manager within five days. The report shall specify:
    a. description of the upset, the cause of the upset and the upset’s impact on an Industrial User’s compliance status;
    b. duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur;
    c. all steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance; And
    d. provide evidence that the facility was at the time of the upset being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures.
2. A documented and verified operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the City Manager against an Industrial User for noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards, which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards only if all requirements of paragraph (1) above are met.

13.16.280 Bypass.
1. For the purpose of this section,
    a. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an Industrial User’s treatment facility.
    b. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
2. An Industrial User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section.
3. Prohibition of Bypass:
    a. Bypass is prohibited, and the City Manager may take enforcement action against an Industrial User for bypass, unless;
        i. the bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
        ii. there were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
        iii. the Industrial User submitted notices as required under paragraph (4), below.
    b. The Industrial User may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the City Manager determines that it will meet the three conditions listed above in paragraph (3)(a) of this section.
4. Notification of bypass:
    a. Anticipated bypass: If the Industrial User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, to the City Manager.
    b. Unanticipated bypass: The Industrial User shall immediately submit oral notice of unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the City Manager within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided to the City Manager within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written notice shall specify:
        i. A description of the bypass and its cause; including its duration, exact dates and time;
        ii. Whether the bypass has been corrected; and
        iii. The anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent a recurrence of the bypass.

13.16.290 Prohibited Conduct.
1. No person may knowingly make any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter.
2. No person may falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter.

13.16.300 Records Retention.
All Industrial Users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three years, any records, books, documents, (including documentation associated with Best Management Practices), memoranda, reports, correspondence and summaries relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of an Industrial User in connection with its discharge. All such records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the City Manager, DEQ, or EPA. The period of records retention shall be extended when requested by the City Manager, DEQ, or EPA. All records subject to administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities shall be retained by the Industrial User until all enforcement activities have concluded and all appeals have expired. (Ord. 3-2009, 2009)

13.16.310 City Recovery of Costs.
Any Industrial User who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the City’s sanitary sewerage system shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The City Manager shall bill the Industrial User for the actual costs incurred by the City, including but not limited to any administrative costs, cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. (Ord. 12-2012, 2012; Ord. 3-2009, 2009; Ord. 4-2003, 2003; Ord. 9-2001, 2001; Ord. 3-1987, 1987)

Chapter 13.20 RETIRED CITIZEN UTILITY RATES

Sections:
13.20.010    Definition of retired citizen.
13.20.020    Eligibility.
13.20.030    Application.
13.20.040    Retired citizen discount rate.
13.20.050    Those not eligible.
13.20.060    Exemptions from other rules not granted.
13.20.070    Section 13.12.030 inapplicable.
13.20.080    Section 13.04.230 inapplicable.
13.20.090    Section 13.30.040 inapplicable.

13.20.010 Definition of retired citizen.
For the purposes of this chapter, "retired citizen” shall be defined as any person, resident of the City of Wood Village for a period of at least six months, who is collecting retirement income due to age or disability. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3-1973 § 1, 1973)

13.20.020 Eligibility.
Any retired citizen of this city who, meeting the qualifications set forth in Section 13.20.010, who maintains for their personal use a separate living unit in which all adult persons residing are retired, is entitled to make application to the City Recorder for classification as such with respect to the payment of the monthly minimum charges of the City levied upon utility users. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3-1973 § 2, 1973)

13.20.030 Application.
Application shall be in writing, upon form furnished by the City and shall set forth the name of the applicant; list all occupants of the living unit, together with proof of retirement, and shall state whether said applicant is presently making direct payment to the City of the monthly utility user charges. The application shall be sworn by applicant, and shall contain such additional information as the City shall deem pertinent. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3-1973 § 3, 1973)

13.20.040 Retired citizen discount rate.
Upon receipt of such application, if applicant shall qualify for Retired citizen classification as defined herein, one-quarter (twenty-five (25) percent) of the monthly minimum charge for water, sewer and the transportation and drainage utility service provided by the City shall be forgiven of said applicant, commencing with the billing period following such qualification and continuing so long as applicant remains so qualified. (Ord. 11-2012 § 1 (part), 2012; Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 7-1992 § 1, 1992)

13.20.050 Those not eligible.
The classification here defined shall not be available to anyone , who has not been a continuous resident of the City for at least six months; or who does not maintain a separate living unit in which all adults residing are retired. This classification shall not be available unless the applicant is regularly billed directly for his or her utility user service by the City. Inclusion of a charge for utility services of the City by a landlord, whether stated separately or included in a monthly rental or lease fee, shall not be considered to be a direct billing by the City as herein defined. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3-1973 § 5, 1973)

13.20.060 Exemptions from other rules not granted.
Classification of retired citizen as herein defined shall not entitle said party to any exemption whatsoever from any and all other pertinent regulations, rules and ordinances of the City or otherwise with respect to water and/or sewer use, maintenance, assessment or construction of such facilities, and shall not extend to any charges levied by the City for water and/or sewer volume use in excess of the monthly single-family residential minimum. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 3-1973 § 6, 1973)

13.20.070 Section 13.12.030 inapplicable.
To the extent that Section 13.12.030 relating to minimum unit billing charges for monthly sewer use is pertinent hereto, the same is decided to be inapplicable in that the policy of the City is stated to be to allow the City to forbear the collection of one-quarter (twenty-five (25) percent) of the monthly minimum charge for single-family or individual dwelling units to those qualifying under the retired citizen classification stated in this chapter. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 7-1992 § I (part), 1992)

13.20.080 Section 13.04.230 inapplicable.
To the extent that Section 13.04.230, relating to a minimum monthly water rate charge for single-family dwelling units, is pertinent hereto, the same is declared to be inapplicable in that the policy of the City as stated in this chapter is to allow the City to forbear the collection of one-quarter (twenty-five (25) percent) of the minimum monthly charge to be made to those who qualify hereunder for the classification of retired citizen. (Ord. 4-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 7-1992 § 1 (part), 1992)

13.20.090 Section 13.30.040 inapplicable.
To the extent that section 13.30.040, relating to a minimum monthly transportation and stormwater fee for single family dwelling units, is pertinent hereto, the same is declared to be inapplicable in that the policy of the City as stated in this chapter is to allow the City to forbear the collection of one-quarter (twenty-five (25) percent) of the minimum monthly charge to be made to those who qualify hereunder for the classification of retired citizen. (Ord. 11-2012 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 13.24 CONVEYANCE OF PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS

Sections:
13.24.010    Purpose, Definitions.
13.24.020    Request for Transfer or Modification.
13.24.030    Evaluation of Request.
13.24.040    Recommendation by the City Manager.
13.24.050    Approval by the City Council.

13.24.010 Purpose, Definitions.
1. Pursuant to the provisions of ORS 221.725, prior to the sale of any interest in real property the City is required to hold a public hearing and consider various aspects of the sale. ORS 221.727 alternatively permits the establishment of a procedure for the sale or transfer of any interests in real property of an identified class instead of holding a public hearing on each individual transaction. It is the purpose of Chapter 13.24 to establish the process allowed by ORS 221.727 and to vest in the City Manager the authority to transfer the City's interests in certain classes of City owned property or property interests.
2. For purposes of Chapter 13.24, the following definitions apply:
Public Utility Easement is an interest in real property which is held by or granted to the City or the public for the limited purpose of allowing installation, construction, and/or maintenance of public utility facilities.
Public Utility Facilities include water, sewer, stormwater, cable, telecommunication, fiber optic, gas, and electric transmission facilities, and similar facilities.

13.24.020 Request for Transfer or Modification.
1. Any person or persons holding fee title to real property which is subject to a public utility easement may request the transfer of or modification of the easement by the City. The City Manager will rely on the records of the County Assessor's Office to determine the holder of fee title. Notwithstanding the Assessor's records, the City Manager may rely on competent evidence that some other person or persons hold fee title. A contract purchaser or someone with equitable interest alone in the property may not request the transfer or modification.
2. The City Manager may establish a fee to be charged for the processing of the application.
3. The applicant shall submit information requested by the City Manager that the Manager finds necessary or helpful in making a recommendation regarding the application.

13.24.030 Evaluation of Request.
The City Manager shall consider whether granting the request is in the best interests of the City. Relevant factors to be considered include, but are not limited to:
1. The need of the City or a utility provider for the public utility easement or any portion of the easement.
2. Existing utility facilities within or near the easement.
3. Future plans for development or for extension of utility services within or near the easement.
4. Topography and lateral support of the easement and of surrounding area.
5. Development proposals for the applicant's property or any nearby property.
6. Appropriate consideration to be provided in exchange for the transfer.

13.24.040 Recommendation by the City Manager.
If the City Manager is satisfied after consideration of relevant factors and the best interests of the public that there is no need to retain all or a portion of the public utility easement, the City Manager may recommend the City Council transfer the easement, or a portion of the easement, by quitclaim deed only. The City Manager may transfer the property interest conditioned upon the satisfaction of conditions under which the public interest may be better served.

13.24.050 Approval by the City Council.
1. The City Manager’s recommendation shall be considered by the City Council at a regular or a special meeting. If the City Manager recommends denial or recommends approval with conditions, the applicant shall be notified of the City Council meeting and given the opportunity to testify.
2. The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the City Manager and any new information supplied by the applicant and the Manager and shall be guided by the factors set forth in Section 13.24.030 in reaching its decision. The Council may approve, deny, or modify the request or continue the matter for additional consideration..
3. The Council shall within a reasonable time after the hearing make a final decision which shall be set forth in a written order which contains the basis for the decision.
4. If the Council approves the transfer, the City Manager is authorized to execute the documents to convey the easement by quitclaim deed. (Ord. 1-2000 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 13.26 ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION

Sections:
13.26.010    Purpose/Intent.
13.26.020    Definitions.
13.26.030    Applicability.
13.26.040    Responsibility for Administration.
13.26.050    Severability.
13.26.060    Ultimate Responsibility.
13.26.070    Discharge Prohibitions.
13.26.080    Suspension of MS4 Access.
13.26.090    Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
13.26.100    Monitoring of Discharges.
13.26.110    Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of Best Management Practices.
13.26.120    Watercourse Protection.
13.26.130    Notification of Spills.
13.26.140    Enforcement.
13.26.150    Appeal of Notice of Violation.
13.26.160    Enforcement Measures After Appeal.
13.26.170    Cost of Abatement of the Violation.
13.26.180    Injunctive Relief.
13.26.190    Compensatory Action.
13.26.200    Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
13.26.210    Civil Penalty.
13.26.220    Remedies Not Exclusive.

13.26.010 Purpose/Intent.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Wood Village through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the stormdrainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
2. To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system;
3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.

13.26.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
City. The City of Wood Village, Oregon.
City Manager. The City Manager of the City of Wood Village or the City Manager's designee.
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 5 acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES Stormwater Phase II permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of 1 acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the stormdrain system, except as exempted in Section 7 A.(a) through (d) of this ordinance.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the stormdrain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the stormdrain system and any connections to the stormdrain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by the City or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the stormdrain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the City.
Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section122.26 (b)(14).
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. Means a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC§ 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
Non-Stormwater Discharge. Any discharge to the stormdrain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
Person. Means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers: hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Stormdrainage System. Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped stormdrains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Storm water, Stormwater Conveyance Systems and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
Wastewater. Means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.

13.26.030 Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the stormdrain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City of Wood Village.

13.26.040 Responsibility for Administration.
The City Manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.

13.26.050 Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Ordinance.

13.26.060 Ultimate Responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.

13.26.070 Discharge Prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal stormdrain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the stormdrain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
    a. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to stormdrains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated- typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants.
    b. Discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
    c. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the City prior to the time of the test.
    d. The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormdrain system.
B. Prohibition of Illicit Connections. 
    a. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormdrain system is prohibited.
    b. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
    c. A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.

13.26.080 Suspension of MS4 Access.
Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The City of Wood Village may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the City.

13.26.090 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES Stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City of Wood Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.

13.26.100 Monitoring of Discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.
B. Access to Facilities. 
    a. The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City.
    b. Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge Stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
    c. The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's Stormwater discharge.
    d. The City has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
    e. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
    f. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge pe1mit and of this ordinance. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge Stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the City reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
    g. If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from which Stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.

13.26.110 Requirement to Prevent, Control and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of Best Management Practices.
The City will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the stormdrain system or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal stormdrain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of Stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. Such SWPP shall be adopted by the City of Wood Village by the City Manager.

13.26.120 Watercourse Protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse.

13.26.130 Notification of Spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the stormdrain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the City in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Wood Village within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.

13.26.140 Enforcement.
A. Notice of Violation. Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the City may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
    a. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
    b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
    c. That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;
    d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
    e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
    f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.

13.26.150 Appeal of Notice of Violation.
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the City. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.

13.26.160 Enforcement Measures After Appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the City, then representatives of the City shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.

13.26.170 Cost of Abatement of the Violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. After proper notice, the City may assess the owner of the facility the total of repair work and penalties. The cost shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the benefited users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes.

13.26.180 Injunctive Relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Ordinance. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, the City may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.

13.26.190 Compensatory Action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by this Ordinance, the City may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.

13.26.200 Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken, as provided in Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 8.16.

13.26.210 Civil Penalty.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 dollars per violation per day as provided in Wood Village Municipal Code Chapter 1.06.
The City may recover all attorney fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.

13.26.220 Remedies Not Exclusive.
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies.

Chapter 13.30 TRANSPORTATION AND STORMWATER UTILITY FEES

Sections:
13.30.010    Purpose.
13.30.020    Applicability.
13.30.030    Definitions.
13.30.040    Rate Structure.
13.30.050    Unit Rate Established.
13.30.060    Principals of Categorization.
13.30.070    Vacancy Credit.
13.30.080    Falsification of Vacancies.
13.30.090    Cessation of Fee with Cessation of Other Utilities.
13.30.100    Cessation of Fee for Properties not on Municipal Utilities.
13.30.110    Service Charge Adjustments and Appeals.
13.30.115    Limitation on Credit, Rebate or City Back Charges on Street and Stormwater Billing Omissions or Errors.
13.30.120    Use of Funds.
13.30.130    Commencement of Charges.
13.30.140    Charges Retroactive.
13.30.150    Delinquent Charges.

13.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this Code is to provide for the recovery of the costs of maintaining and operating the City of Wood Village transportation and storm water systems. All fees and charges imposed herein shall be placed in the Street Fund for the purpose of paying expenses related to the replacement, repair, maintenance, operation, or administration of the transportation and storm water systems.

13.30.020 Applicability.
The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all parcels of real property in the City of Wood Village, including publicly and privately owned property.

13.30.030 Definitions.
Billing Period shall consist of 30 days beginning at the first of each month, equivalent to a 360 day calendar year. For the one month with fewer than thirty days, adjustments in the billing cycle, prorates, and similar matters shall be based on a thirty (30) day equivalent, with monthly fees divided by 30 to achieve daily rates for billing purposes as well as for proration of credits or benefits provided in this code.
City means the City of Wood Village, Oregon, or as indicated by the context, may mean any official, officer, employee or agency representing the City in the discharge of his or her duties.
City Manager means the City Manager or his or her designee.
City Roads means all public roads, excluding State and County roads, in the City of Wood Village.
Developed Parcel means a parcel of real property which has been altered by development coverage.
Gross Square Footage means the calculated area of all structures, located on a site, measured along the exterior walls of such structures, including but not limited to enclosed courtyards, stairwells, and square footage on each level of multi-story structures, but not including fences and parking areas which are not enclosed within a building.
ITE Manual means Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
Multi-Family Residence means a residential structure accommodating two or more dwelling units as contained in Appendix A.
Parcel shall mean the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, boundaries, and surface area which constitutes a separate lot or tract capable of being conveyed without further subdivision.
Residential Land Uses shall mean the 200 series of land uses from the ITE Manual.
Service Charges shall mean the amount owed after applying the appropriate rate to a particular parcel of real property based upon factors established by this ordinance.
Single Family Residence shall mean a residential structure accommodating one dwelling unit.
Unit Rate means the dollar amount charged per adjusted average daily trip. There shall be a Unit Rate applied to residential land uses, identified as the Residential Unit Rate, and a Unit Rate applied to all other land uses, identified as the Commercial Unit Rate.

13.30.040 Rate Structure.
A. Service Charges for the transportation utility are hereby authorized and imposed, in amounts and on terms consistent with this Chapter.
B. Service Charges shall be based on the service provided and the relative usage of the City transportation system for a given Parcel. The estimated or measured trip ends will be used to determine the relative usage of the Parcel. The rate shall be calculated by multiplying the Unit Rate by the assigned average daily trip estimate, provided however, that a minimum commercial rate shall be established for all occupied commercial properties.
Undeveloped Parcels shall not be charged. City Roads shall not be charged. The monthly Service Charge for all Developed Parcels, including publicly-owned properties, shall be computed by multiplying the Unit Rate times the number of average daily trips applicable to the Parcel, as delineated in Appendix A, except as provided in item B of this section. For all customer classes not identified in Appendix A, Average Daily Trips shall be applied as specified in the ITE Manual.

13.30.050 Unit Rate Established.
The Residential Unit Rate and the Commercial Unit Rate may be established and revised by resolution of the City Council. Rates may not exceed $1.50 per unit for residential or $.50 per unit for commercial without first providing a direct mail notice to all potentially billed users in the system and conducting a public hearing thereon, and re-establishing maximum limits for the fees associated with the transportation and storm water utility.

13.30.060 Principals of Categorization.
A. Each building is categorized based on the primary activity of the establishment that occupies the building or site. The primary activity will be established by the relative number of transactions or visits from the general public rather than the volume of sales or dollars.
B. Where distinct and separate businesses are located within a single building and share a common entrance from the parking area, the businesses shall be categorized and charged as a single business using the category which fits a majority of the businesses within the building.
C. Where distinct and separate businesses in any commercial zoned area are located within a single building and each has a separate entrance from the parking area, the businesses shall be categorized and charged as separate businesses, with a single billing provided to the responsible person for other municipal utilities for that building, except in manufacturing zones as provided in item G of this section.
D. The gross square footage for any incidental use within a building shall be included in the total gross square footage for the building. Example: an office in a retail store shall all be classified retail; the shipping and receiving area of a retail outlet that is predominantly retail shall all be classified retail.
E. Where categories are not clear, the City shall identify the most similar category and the rationale for such a determination. Any aggrieved party may utilize the appeal procedures of this Code to seek adjustments or change as identified in this Code.
F. Where two potential trip generation rates may be applied to a single category such as elderly care facilities, the calculations shall be made utilizing both methods, and the lesser of the two fees established as the applicable fee for the development.
G. Manufacturing Zoned Properties and Industrial Lease Space buildings shall be billed based on the total gross square footage of the entire building, with the ITE Code 140 Manufacturing assigned for all areas. Vacancy credit shall be available for any unoccupied leasable areas.
H. Public Utility or private utility occupancies that do not have active structures shall be classified as Public Service and shall receive the commercial minimum billing as provided in this chapter.
I. Where multiple buildings in single ownership occur on a single parcel, the billing for transportation and storm water will be based on the individual occupancies of the structures, their respective ITE categories and average trip generation, and billed to the responsible person as a single composite billing.
J. Condominiums in place in Wood Village at the time of the adoption of this code in May of 2012 shall all be treated as multifamily for purposes of this section. Any new condominium construction shall be classified and billed in accord with the appropriate categories of the ITE.

13.30.070 Vacancy Credit.
The billing for the transportation and storm water utility will be credited for any property unoccupied throughout the monthly billing cycle when the individual responsible for all utility bills for the property makes application to the City of Wood Village on the prescribed forms to credit the transportation and storm water utility fee in accord with the following:
A. Residential and Multifamily customers will receive billing for transportation and drainage services for each month. Residential and Multifamily customers that are absent from the community for 7 or more consecutive days, can apply for a vacancy credit. A separate written application must be made to the City for each billing period or portion of a period the customer claims they are absent from the community, or their property is vacant. Vacancy credit application for extended planned absences may be made in advance for owner occupied residential properties. Credit is prorated based on the billing period definition.
B. Residential Properties for Sale or Rent may make application for vacancy credit. Application must be made for each 7 or more consecutive day period of vacancy. An individual credit application may be made for an entire billing period, defined as 30 consecutive days beginning on the first day of the month, provided however, proof of vacancy status must be provided in the form of other utility bills identifying no consumption, or vacant status, or an affidavit signed by the owner or responsible person that the property is unoccupied for the period.
C. Commercial, Manufacturing, and Industrial customers may make application for vacancy credit for an entire building or any separate business or leasable space within the building. An application must be made to the City for each 7 or more consecutive day period the premise is vacant. An individual credit application may be made for an entire billing period, defined as 30 consecutive days beginning on the first day of the month. During the vacancy, there can be no use of the property, buildings or portion of the buildings on the property for which the vacancy credit is applied. Proof of vacancy status for the claimed period must be provided in the form of other utility bills identifying no consumption, or vacant status, or an affidavit signed by the owner or responsible person that the building or leasable space within the building is unoccupied for the period. The City reserves the right to inspect the premises or verify the customer is entitled to the credit.
D. Motels, Assisted Living facilities, Nursing Homes and similar facilities are not eligible for vacancy credits.
E. All Vacancy Credits may be applied retroactively, however, they are limited to a retroactive period of no more than four (4) billing periods if proof of vacancy during this period is provided in writing with the application.
F. Proration of Vacancy Credits may occur based on the billing cycle defined in this code for each period of vacancy, provided however, the minimum time for vacancy credit is 7 consecutive days.

13.30.080 Falsification of Vacancies.
Any person falsifying or providing inaccurate information to achieve a vacancy credit shall be assessed a civil penalty equal to one month of transportation and storm water utility fees for the occupancy, in addition to the requirement to pay for the period falsely claimed.

13.30.090 Cessation of Fee with Cessation of Other Utilities.
The fee for transportation and storm water utilities as provided in this chapter shall not be levied on properties where the water and sewer services to the property are terminated or suspended unless the services are terminated or suspended due to non-payment.

13.30.100 Cessation of Fee for Properties not on Municipal Utilities.
For those properties within the City that are not connected to municipal water or sewer, the fee may be suspended or stopped by providing proof that the improvements or uses on the property have been eliminated. If such proof cannot be established, the users in this class may apply for and receive vacancy credits as prescribed in this chapter.

13.30.110 Service Charge Adjustments and Appeals.
A. Any person billed for Service Charges may file a “Request for Service Charge Adjustment” with the City Manager within thirty (30) days of the date of the bill. However, submittal of such a request does not extend the period of payment for the charge.
B. A request for Service Charge adjustment may be granted or approved by the City Manager only when one or more of the following conditions exist:
    1. The amount charged is in error; or
    2. The Parcel is nonresidential and the actual trips generated by that parcel, as established by a licensed surveyor or engineer at the expense of the owner, would result in a trip generation total that is greater than or less than the applied average daily trip estimate used in determining the charge; or
    3. The Parcel exists in its natural unimproved condition and will remain in its natural unimproved condition with no allowable human activities or manmade improvements that would generate trips to or from the Parcel.
C. Service Charge adjustments will only apply to the bill then due and payable, and bills subsequently issued. The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the Service Charge adjustment should be granted.
D. Decisions on requests for service charge adjustment shall be made by the City Manager based on information submitted by the applicant and by the City within thirty (30) days of the adjustment request, except when additional information is needed. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the City Manager’s decision.
E. Decisions of the City Manager on requests for service charge adjustments shall be final unless appealed to City Council within thirty (30) days of the date the decision.

13.30.115 Limitation on Credit, Rebate or City Back Charges on Street and Stormwater Billing Omissions or Errors.
A customer that has a billing error or incorrect billing may have that billing corrected to the date of occurrence with the maximum potential period for consideration being four (4) months. In the event a customer is under billed, the City may correct such billing and charge the customer to the date of occurrence, provided however that no billing shall be for a period greater than 4 months. For all active accounts, credit will be applied to future billing amounts if due. For accounts that are closing, changing ownership, or for some good reason cannot benefit from a credit, a direct refund shall be provided.
For customers that have been under billed or not billed, the City Manager shall offer a payment plan with a period of up to six months for the customer to become current with all amounts due, with the provision that all current charges in the months following any such payment plan shall be paid in full as provided in this code. (Ord. 2-2014, 2014)

13.30.120 Use of Funds.
Service Charges collected under this Chapter shall be deposited into the City of Wood Village Street Fund or funds to be used only for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost and expense of maintaining and operating the transportation and stormwater systems, all or any part of the cost and expense of planning, designing, establishing, acquiring, developing, constructing, maintaining and improving the transportation and stormwater systems.

13.30.130 Commencement of Charges.
A. For new construction, Service Charges will commence with the occupancy of the structure constructed.
B. For existing structures, Service Charges will commence on the effective date of the ordinance establishing this Chapter.
C. For changes in occupancy, renovations, modifications or new tenants, the effective date of occupancy, meaning the time at which materials are moved into the space, tenant improvements are underway, or the space is occupied for its intended purpose.
Should properties be occupied without notice to the City, retroactive billing for transportation and storm water utility fees will be made to the date of the building permit, or the installation of the water meter, whichever is earlier, for all new construction. Changes in tenancy will incur fees to the occupancy of the space, up to four billing periods.

13.30.140 Charges Retroactive.
All fees and charges created by sections 13.30.010 to 13.30.150 are retroactive fees, with the charges billed in the ensuring billing period for services provided in the prior period. Proration of all incurred charges shall be based on the billing period as defined in this section of the code, and shall be due and payable in the ensuing billing period as provided in the Wood Village Municipal Code for the provision of water or sewer services.

13.30.150 Delinquent Charges.
Delinquent accounts shall be treated in the same manner as delinquent water service accounts under Wood Village Municipal Code 13.04.240. However, delinquent Service Charges shall not become a lien on real property. In the event that the City receives partial payment on a bill that includes Service Charges and charges from other utilities, the City shall apply the payment first to any penalties or fees, then to balance due for the transportation and stormwater utility, then to any balance due for the sewer utility, and then to any balance due for the water utility.

Section 2 Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2012.

Section 3 Severability
If any provision of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of this ordinance or the application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.

Section 4 Classification of Charges
For purposes of ORS 310.145 (Classification of Taxes and Fees for Purposes of Measure 5 Limits), the Service Charges described in this Chapter are hereby classified as a fee or charge not subject to the limits of Section 11(b), Article XI, of the Oregon Constitution.

Section 5 Codification
The section above noted shall be made a part of the Wood Village Municipal Code in the manner identified in the text of this ordinance. (Ord. 9-2012, 2012)
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| ITE Code |     Land Use     | Rate Basis | Weekday | Saturday | Sunday | Pass-by &  | Average |
|          |                  |    Unit    |         |          |        |  Diverted  |   Day   |
|          |                  |            |         |          |        |   Linked   |         |
|          |                  |            |         |          |        | Adjustment |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 110      | General          | 1,000 Sq.  | 6.97    | 1.32     | 0.68   | 100.00%    | 5.26    |
|          | Light            | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Industrial       |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 140      | Manufacturing    | 1,000 Sq.  | 3.82    | 1.49     | 0.62   | 100.00%    | 3.03    |
|          |                  | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 151      | Mini-Warehouse   | 1,000 Sq.  | 2.5     | 2.33     | 1.78   | 100.00%    | 2.37    |
|          |                  | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 210      | Single           | Dwelling   | 9.57    | 10.08    | 8.77   | 100.00%    | 9.53    |
|          | Family           | Unit       |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Residence        |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 220      | Apartment/       | Dwelling   | 6.65    | 6.39     | 5.86   | 100.00%    | 6.5     |
|          | Multi-Family/    | Unit       |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Condominiums     |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 240      | Mobile           | Dwelling   | 4.99    | 5        | 4.36   | 100.00%    | 4.9     |
|          | Home Park        | Unit       |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 251      | Senior           | Dwelling   | 3.71    | 2.77     | 2.33   | 100.00%    | 3.38    |
|          | Adult            | Unit       |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Housing          |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 320      | Motel            | Room       | 5.63    | 5.63     | 5.63   | 100.00%    | 5.63    |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 495      | Recreational     | 1,000 Sq.  | 22.88   | 9.1      | 13.6   | 100.00%    | 19.59   |
|          | Community        | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Center           |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 460      | Church           | 1,000 Sq.  | 9.11    | 10.37    | 36.63  | 100.00%    | 13.22   |
|          |                  | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 565      | Day Care         | 1,000 Sq.  | 79.26   | 6.21     | 5.83   | 100.00%    | 58.33   |
|          | Center           | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 710      | General          | 1,000 Sq.  | 11.01   | 2.37     | 0.98   | 100.00%    | 8.34    |
|          | Office           | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Building         |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 720      | Medical-Dental   | 1,000 Sq.  | 36.13   | 8.96     | 1.55   | 100.00%    | 27.31   |
|          | Office           | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 813      | Free Standing    | 1,000 Sq.  | 53.13   | 64.07    | 56.12  | 72.00%     | 39.69   |
|          | Discount         | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Superstore       |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 814      | Specialty        | 1,000 Sq.  | 44.32   | 42.04    | 20.43  | 100.00%    | 40.58   |
|          | Retail           | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Center           |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 848      | Tire Store       | 1,000 Sq.  | 24.87   | 40.8     | 19.83  | 72.00%     | 19.03   |
|          |                  | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 851      | Convenience      | 1,000 Sq.  | 737.99  | 863.1    | 758.45 | 27.00%     | 204.87  |
|          | Market           | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 862      | Home Improvement | 1,000 Sq.  | 29.8    | 56.72    | 55.8   | 52.00%     | 19.43   |
|          | Superstore       | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 875      | Department       | 1,000 Sq.  | 22.88   | 25.4     | 12.34  | 100.00%    | 21.73   |
|          | Store            | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 932      | High-turnover    | 1,000 Sq.  | 127.15  | 158.37   | 131.84 | 57.00%     | 75.4    |
|          | Restaurant       | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 934      | Fast Food        | 1,000 Sq.  | 496.12  | 722.03   | 542.72 | 50.00%     | 267.53  |
|          | Restaurant       | Ft         |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+
| 945      | Gasoline         | Fueling    | 162.78  | 190.38   | 167.29 | 41.00%     | 68.62   |
|          | Station          | Position   |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | with Convenience |            |         |          |        |            |         |
|          | Market           |            |         |          |        |            |         |
+----------+------------------+------------+---------+----------+--------+------------+---------+

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:
15.04        State Building Codes Adopted
15.08        Design Review Procedures
15.12        Moving of Buildings
15.16        Trailer Coaches and Manufactured Home Parks
15.20        Flood Hazard Protection Regulations
15.24        Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff Control

Chapter 15.04 STATE BUILDING CODES ADOPTED

Sections:
15.04.010    Standards applicable to building.
15.04.020    Adoption of state codes.
15.04.030    City administration of codes.
15.04.040    Local interpretation.
15.04.050    Violation—Penalty.

15.04.010 Standards applicable to building.
In addition to compliance with the ordinance codified in this chapter and other pertinent ordinances of the city, building and related activities shall comply with state building code standards adopted by the Manager of the Building Codes Agency as these codes apply at the time of the building or related activity. No person may undertake building or related activities without compliance with these standards. (Ord. 5-1990 § 1, 1990)

15.04.020 Adoption of state codes.
A. The City hereby adopts and enforces the most current edition of the State of Oregon Specialty Codes per ORS 455 and the rules and statutes adopted thereunder.
B. The City adopts and enforces all Appendices of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.
C. Building and related activities shall comply with the most recently adopted State of Oregon Specialty Codes, including the Building, Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical Codes, adopted by the Director of the Oregon Department of Commerce and the Fire and Life Safety Code Standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal, as these codes apply at the time of the building or related activity. No person may undertake building or related activities without compliance with these codes.
D. The City also adopts the 1997 International Conference of Building Officials Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. (Ord. 3-2012 §1, 2012; Ord. 7-2009, 2009; Ord. 6-2005 § 1, 2005; Ord. 4-2004 § 1, 2004)

15.04.030 City administration of codes.
The City shall provide for specialty code administration, including plan checking, permit issuance and inspection for structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical work. Administrative provisions adopted by the City for such purpose shall at all times be consistent with the intent of pertinent state statutes relating to Code enforcement and shall be approved and adopted by Council resolution. Such administrative provisions may, from time to time, be modified as required in the same manner. (Ord. 5-1990 § 3, 1990)

15.04.040 Local interpretation.
In addition to the provisions of Section 106 of the Structural Specialty Code and similar provisions of other Specialty Codes, the building official of the city may approve a material or a method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material, method or work offered is for the purpose intended, and is at least the equivalent of that specifically prescribed by this chapter in quality, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety, and energy conservation, and that the Manager of the Building Codes Agency has not issued a report disapproving the material or method for the purpose. The building official of the city may refer the proposed design to the Structural Code Advisory Board within thirty (30) days of the date of the ruling. The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to preclude a person from requesting a ruling from the Manager of the Building Codes Agency prior to submitting an application to the city for a permit or after withdrawing a previously submitted application. (Ord. 5-1990 § 4, 1990)

15.04.050 Violation—Penalty.
The violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 23, 2006; Ord. 2-2001 § 2, 2001)

Chapter 15.08 DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:
15.08.010    Findings.
15.08.020    Purpose.
15.08.030    Design Review Board established.
15.08.040    Membership, officers.
15.08.050    Meetings, quorum, offices.
15.08.060    Commission records.

15.08.010 Findings.
The Wood Village City Council finds that excessive dissimilarity or uniformity, or inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of structures and signs, and the lack of proper attention to site characteristics, including compatibility with and the effect upon the surrounding environment and neighborhood and general landscaping in those areas of the city provided for business, commercial and industrial development, as well as certain multiple residential areas, hinders the harmonious development of the city and impairs the desirability of residence, occupation or investment in the city, and limits the opportunity to obtain the optimum use and value of the concerned land and improvements thereupon, which adversely affects the stability and value of property, produces a degeneration thereof in such areas, with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the peace, health, safety and welfare of the city, its residents and inhabitants, and limits the development of a proper relationship between the taxable value of such properties and the cost of municipal services therefor. (Ord. 4-1981 § 1, 1981)

15.08.020 Purpose.
It is the Council's intent and purpose and objective as expressed by this chapter and the creation of a Design Review Board for the city, to promote functional, safe, innovative and attractive site development compatible with the natural and man-made environment appertaining thereto, and to encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development, including the architecture, landscaping and graphic design thereof, and to discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious developments, and to conserve the city's natural beauty and visual character and charm by insuring that structures, signs and other improvements in the areas of concern are properly related to their sites and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the quality of the natural terrain and landscaping, and to promote the stabilization and improvement of property values, prevent blighted areas and thus increase tax revenues, and finally to sustain the comfort, health, tranquility and contentment of residents and attract new residents by reason of the city's favorable environment and thus promote and protect the peace, health, safety and welfare of the city, while fostering civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality and quantity of citizen participation in local government and community growth. (Ord. 4-1981 § 2, 1981)

15.08.030 Design Review Board established.
There is established for the city a Design Review Board. (Ord. 4-1981 § 3, 1981)

15.08.040 Membership, officers.
Membership of the Wood Village Design Review Board shall consist of the members of the city Planning Commission, who shall serve during their term of office as Planning Commission members. The Board of review shall select from among its members, a chairman who shall be counted to determine a quorum and have a voting right. The City Recorder or the city planning director shall serve as secretary to the Board, and also in an advisory capacity. (Ord. 4-1981 § 4, 1981)

15.08.050 Meetings, quorum, offices.
The Board shall make and establish rules and regulations necessary to carry out its designated functions. Meetings shall be held as required, either mandated before or after Planning Commission meetings at the same location; meeting notices shall be given in the same manner as required of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 4-1981 § 5, 1981)

15.08.060 Commission records.
Complete records shall be kept of all actions of the Design Review Board, including minutes of all formal, executive or other meetings. Records of the Commission shall be kept and maintained at appropriate location within the City Hall and all such records shall be open to Council inspection at all times and may, if appropriate, be audited annually by the city treasurer or auditor. (Ord. 4-1981 § 15, 1981)

Chapter 15.12 MOVING OF BUILDINGS

Sections:
15.12.010    Permit required.
15.12.020    Application—Contents.
15.12.030    Application—Attachments.
15.12.040    Application—Statement of agreement not to damage property.
15.12.050    Notification of nearby property owners—Public hearing when.
15.12.060    Notification of public hearing—Decision of Council.
15.12.070    Permit fee.
15.12.080    Bond or insurance policy.
15.12.090    Approval of permit by chief of police, building inspector and City Council.
15.12.100    City engineer—Approval of equipment and route.
15.12.110    Moving to be continuous—Exceptions.
15.12.120    Special requirements for hours of darkness.
15.12.130    Permit contents—Mode, route, expiration date, restrictions.
15.12.140    Building permit required.
15.12.150    Failure to remove building—Separate violation.
15.12.160    Violation—Penalty.

15.12.010 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to move any building or structure upon, over or along any public street, alley or public way within the city without first obtaining a permit from the City Recorder. (Ord. 4-1974 § 1, 1974)

15.12.020 Application—Contents.
Application for permit to move any building or structure upon, over or along any public street, alley or public way within the city shall be made in writing to the office of the City Recorder upon form provided by said office. The application shall be signed by the owner of the building or structure to be moved and by the person, firm or corporation engaged to move the same and shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of owner of building or structure;
B. Location of building before moving;
C. Proposed location where building is proposed to be moved, including a plot and so far as is necessary, a structural plan showing where upon the proposed plot the structure or building will be located and that it will conform to the building code, plumbing requirements, fire code and other restrictions or regulations governing structures in said proposed location;
D. The type, age, width, length and height of the building;
E. The use or purpose for which building will be put and that for which building was in the past used for;
F. Name and address of person, firm or corporation engaged to move the building;
G. The means or manner the building is to be moved and type of equipment to be used therefor;
H. Route over and along which the building is proposed to be moved;
I. The time required to move the building, including the day and hour every part of the building will be off every street, alley or public way;
J. Such other information as the City Recorder, city building inspector or city engineer may deem necessary.
Where the building or structure is to be moved outside the corporate limits of the city, the information required by subsections C and E of this section may be omitted. (Ord. 4-1974 § 2, 1974)

15.12.030 Application—Attachments.
There shall be attached to every completed application as above provided, written statements from each person, firm or corporation operating any public utility maintaining any wires, conduits, cables, poles or other appliances or appurtenances thereto, along, over or across any street, alley or public way along the route over which the building or structure is to be moved by or for the applicant, stating that the moving of such building will not molest, damage or interfere with or interrupt the service thereof or that the applicant has made appropriate arrangements for clearing the same at the time the building is to be moved; in such instance as tracks laid in any street a similar statement from the operator of said railroad or his duly authorized agent shall be furnished. (Ord. 4-1974 § 3, 1974)

15.12.040 Application—Statement of agreement not to damage property.
Any such application as above indicated shall also contain a statement of agreement to the effect that the applicant shall not damage any real or personal property upon, along or adjacent to any street, alley or public way while moving any building and that in case any damage is so caused, that the applicant will pay therefor. (Ord. 4-1974 § 4, 1974)

15.12.050 Notification of nearby property owners—Public hearing when.
Upon receipt of application for moving a building or structure into a residential zone of the city, the City Recorder shall advise, in writing, property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the property upon which said structure or building is to be moved of said application, which notice shall be given the affected property owners within seven days of receipt of such application. If within ten days of notification to the affected property owners of such application by the City Recorder, the owners of at least twenty-five (25) percent of the affected property, which shall be deemed that lying within two hundred (200) feet of the applicant property, shall in writing, filed with the City Recorder, object to such moving or request the right to be heard concerning said application, public hearing shall be had thereon before the City Council at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting unless said meeting shall be scheduled within ten days of the expiration of said ten-day “protest or hearing request,” in which case public hearing shall be held at the next following, regularly scheduled Council meeting; provided further, that the Council may, whenever it believes public interest warrants, call a public hearing upon said application whether the twenty-five (25) percent requirement be met or not. (Ord. 4-1974 § 5, 1974)

15.12.060 Notification of public hearing—Decision of Council.
When public hearing shall be required or called as hereinabove provided, the City Recorder shall within five days of the expiration of said ten-day “protest or hearing demand period,” notify in writing, the affected property owners and post notice thereof in two public places in the property area affected and also post notice thereof at the City Hall, which notice shall state the purpose, time and place of said hearing. In all instances, the applicant requesting the moving permit shall be notified and his presence requested at said public hearing. That the purpose of said public hearing shall be to permit the City Council to obtain all pertinent information, facts and material relating to said application and the effect thereof upon the public interest of the “affected” area and the city as a whole. Following said public hearing, the City Council may, if in its discretion the granting of such application would be adverse to the best interests of the public and the city, deny such application. The City Council may also request various public officials, the applicant or others to furnish such additional information as it may feel necessary to reach an appropriate decision. In the event that said application is denied, the City Recorder shall, within seven days of such denial, notify the applicant of such denial and the reasons therefor. (Ord. 4-1974 § 6, 1974)

15.12.070 Permit fee.
Each application for moving a building or structure within the city as above indicated, shall be accompanied by a permit fee as follows:
A. For buildings or structures having less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in floor area, fifty dollars ($50.00);
B. For buildings in floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more, fifty dollars ($50.00) plus five cents ($.05) for each additional square foot in excess of one thousand (1,000).
The area of the several floors shall be counted; in case of story and a half buildings, only one-half of the second floor area shall be used in calculation of the permit fee. All fees collected shall be credited to the street repair fund. (Ord. 4-1974 § 7, 1974)

15.12.080 Bond or insurance policy.
No permit shall be issued to move a building or structure as above indicated unless the mover shall furnish a bond or insurance policy, approved by the City, as follows:
The mover shall furnish a public liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance in the sum of not less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) covering such truck with respect to injuries to or death of any person or persons and in a sum of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) covering such truck with respect to damage to the property of any person, including damages to any street, bridge or other public property of the city or any other public corporation and the above limits shall be the minimum required for each truck or motor vehicle towing any building while moving over or upon any public street, alley or way; provided further, that such mover shall also furnish an insurance policy or bond in a sum not less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) conditioned that the mover will pay any injuries to or for the death of any person or persons, or any other public property owned or maintained by the city or other public corporation on account or by reason of any of the operations of the mover while engaged in moving any building or structure, including injuries or damages occasioned by the falling or collapsing of, or the weight of, or collisions with any such building or structure while any part thereof is upon any part of a public street; provided that the City Council may require a greater or additional bond or insurance policy if in their just determination conditions so require. Evidence of the above requirement being met must be furnished the City Recorder upon his request and before issuance of permit. (Ord. 4-1974 § 8, 1974)

15.12.090 Approval of permit by chief of police, building inspector and City Council.
A. No permit shall be issued until the application shall be approved by the chief of police, the building inspector, and in case of a structure other than wood frame or in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the City Council.
B. The chief of police shall consider the probable effect of the proposed moving on the public safety and he shall approve the application for moving only where such moving will not jeopardize the public safety and the route proposed or finally adopted is the one least dangerous to the citizens of the city and the general public.
C. The building inspector shall inspect the building to be moved and if he finds that the building is of substantial construction and in condition that it may be moved without collapsing or falling apart and without endangering any person upon, along or adjacent to any public street, and further finds that the building is designed and adaptable for the purpose, use or occupancy to which it is proposed to be put the same at the new location and that it conforms to the requirements of the building code and fire zones of the new location, he shall approve the application. (Ord. 4-1974 §§ 9-11, 1974)

15.12.100 City engineer—Approval of equipment and route.
Before permit is granted as herein provided, the city engineer or other responsible official shall determine that the mover has safe and sufficient equipment and facilities for moving, adequate barricades, lights, flags and personnel for warning the public both day and night and for the safe direction of traffic; that the streets and bridges along the route to be traversed by the moving are of sufficient width and strength and in condition to bear the moving of the building or structure described in the application and that said moving will not endanger any trees, shrubs or improvements in, upon or adjacent to any street. (Ord. 4-1974 § 12, 1974)

15.12.110 Moving to be continuous—Exceptions.
The removal of a building or buildings under a permit herein granted when commenced shall be continuous during all hours of the day and night unless exception be granted by the City Recorder and such exception shall apply only to that provision requiring said moving to continue during hours of darkness, until such building reaches its destination or is removed from any and all streets, alleys or public ways. Other exceptions must be granted only by the City Council. (Ord. 4-1974 § 13, 1974)

15.12.120 Special requirements for hours of darkness.
In case any building is moved at night or left standing on a public street, alley or way during hours of darkness, the mover shall at all times provide such barricades, lights, flares and watchmen as may be necessary to safeguard the traffic and persons using said public street, alley or way. (Ord. 4-1974 § 14, 1974)

15.12.130 Permit contents—Mode, route, expiration date, restrictions.
Each permit shall prescribe thereon the mode and route for such moving and the date upon which the permit will expire, together with such restrictions as the public interests may require, which restrictions shall be sufficient to protect all sidewalks, street improvements and other public improvements and private property from injury or damage. (Ord. 4-1974 § 15, 1974)

15.12.140 Building permit required.
A building permit shall be required for all buildings moved to a location within the city. The building permit required is in addition to, not in lieu of, the moving permit herein required. In addition to all requirements set forth in the city's building codes, the following requirements must also be met to the satisfaction of the building official or of the City Recorder before a building permit may be issued:
A. The building to be moved shall be located and used in a manner consistent with all zoning and land use ordinances of the city, together with any other applicable ordinances, laws or governmental regulations.
B. The buildings shall be similar to the other buildings in the immediate vicinity in size, age, architectural style and structural condition so as to be compatible with other buildings in the areas and so as not to cause property in the areas to decrease in value.
Denial of a building permit application for failure to comply with subsection A of this section may be appealed to the City Council by written notice filed within ten days following such denial. In any event, the City Recorder may refer the application to the City Council for a determination of compliance with subsection B of this section. (Ord. 4-1974 § 17, 1974)

15.12.150 Failure to remove building—Separate violation.
Failure to remove said building or structure for which permit shall be herein granted from a public street, alley or way within the time specified in the permit shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter apart from any and all other violations which may occur hereunder. (Ord. 4-1974 § 16, 1974)

15.12.160 Violation—Penalty.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this chapter commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 24, 2006; Ord. 4-1974 § 18, 1974)

Chapter 15.16 TRAILER COACHES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS

Sections:
15.16.010    Definitions.
15.16.020    License.
15.16.030    License fees.
15.16.040    License application—How made.
15.16.050    Supervision.
15.16.060    Parking of recreational vehicle outside RV park prohibited.
15.16.070    Compliance with city, county and state regulations required.
15.16.080    Violation—Penalty.

15.16.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Manager” means the City Manager or his/her designee.
“Manufactured home” means a structure constructed for movement on public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction. “Manufactured home” does not mean any building or structure constructed to conform to the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code or the One and Two Family Dwelling Code adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100 to 455.450 and 455.61 to 455.630 or any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.
“Manufactured home or RV space” means a plot of ground within a manufactured home or RV park designed for the accommodation of one living unit.
“Manufactured home park” also “recreational vehicle park” referred to as “park” herein, means any lot or parcel of land upon which one or more mobile homes, used for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located for generally more than a 30 day period, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
“Person” means any natural individual, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation.
“Recreational vehicle” referred to as “RV” herein, means a vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes. (Ord. 11-2003, 2003; Ord. 4-1959 § 1, 1959)

15.16.020 License.
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the limits of the city any manufactured home or RV park unless such person shall first obtain a license therefore. (Ord. 11-2003, 2003; Ord. 4-1959 § 2, 1959)

15.16.030 License fees.
The annual license fee for each park shall be the amount set by resolution of the City Council. No license shall be issued for a period of less than one year and the license year shall be considered from January 1st through December 31st. Should application be first made and license issued during the period of October 1st to December 31st a charge of one-fourth of the annual fee shall be made and should license be issued during the period of July 1st to September 30th, one-half the annual fee shall be charged, and if issued during the period of April 1st to June 30th three-fourths the annual fee shall be charged. All licenses shall expire on December 1st of each year, and application for renewal must be made and the license fee paid on or before the fifteenth day of January or otherwise a violation of this chapter will be considered to exist. (Ord. 11-2003, 2003; Ord. 4-1959 § 3, 1959)

15.16.040 License application—How made.
Application for a park license shall be made to the City and be accompanied by the annual license fee. The application shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of applicant;
B. The location and legal description of the proposed or existing park;
C. The number of manufactured home or RV spaces to be provided in said park;
D. A complete plan of the park known as a plot plan showing the following (two copies):
    1. Boundaries of the park site,
    2. Location of each space sewer connection and electrical outlet,
    3. Each drinking water supply outlet (except those in buildings),
    4. Each lighting fixture for lighting the park, spaces and grounds,
    5. Driveways, and how connected with outside highways, streets or alleys, also indicating type of road surface,
    6. Water system,
    7. Sewage system,
    8. Complete floor plan of each building located within or serving the park, drawn to scale, showing type of construction, type and location of wiring, sanitary, water and other utilities located therein,
    9. Arrangements made for fire protection, recreation,
    10. Sufficient information to indicate compliance with all other requirements of this chapter and the State Board of Health.
The above requirements shall not apply to any person holding a license under the terms of this chapter for a park seeking a renewal thereof unless said park is not in operation for a period of three months or more or unless enlargement or improvements are contemplated. (Ord. 11-2003, 2003; Ord. 4-1959 § 4, 1959)

15.16.050 Supervision.
A responsible attendant, owner or operator shall be in charge at all times to keep the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and any failure on the part of the management and/or licensee to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be sufficient grounds for revocation or suspension of license by the manager. (Ord. 11-2003, 2003; Ord. 4-1959 § 9, 1959)

15.16.060 Parking of recreational vehicle outside RV park prohibited.
It is unlawful to park or place any RV in use for, but not limited to,sleeping or living purposes within the city for any period of time exceeding eight hours, except in an RV park, and no cooking shall be done in an RV outside an RV park. For more information regarding the regulation of recreational vehicles see Chapter 8.16, “Public Nuisances.”

15.16.070 Compliance with city, county and state regulations required.
Every court, park, court or park owner, attendant, manager, owner, operator and every person residing in a manufactured home or RV park shall comply with each and every rule and regulation of the Oregon State Board of Health, the City of Wood Village, the Multnomah County health department as now existing or hereafter amended and applicable to any or all of such persons. Every owner, manager or person in control of said park shall see that every person above named complies with said rules and regulations. (Ord. 11-2003, 2003; Ord. 4-1959 § 22, 1959)

15.16.080 Violation—Penalty.
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the applicable provisions of this chapter commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2011, 2011; Ord. 4-2006 § 25, 2006; Ord. 11-2003, 2003)

Chapter 15.20 FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION REGULATIONS

Sections:
15.20.010    Statement of purpose.
15.20.020    Definitions.
15.20.030    Determination of areas of special flood hazard and application.
15.20.040    Designation of program Manager.
15.20.050    Duties and responsibilities of the program Manager.
15.20.060    Development permit, application procedure and establishment.
15.20.070    General standards.
15.20.080    Specific standards.
15.20.090    Penalties for noncompliance.

15.20.010 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for appropriate use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. To encourage proper notification to concerned parties of the flood hazards relating to property in said areas;
H. To place appropriate responsibility upon the owners and occupants of properties located in special flood hazard areas for adherence to standards established for the preservation of life and property therein. (Ord. 1-1981 § 4, 1981)

15.20.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within the city of Wood Village subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
    1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
    2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)” means the official map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated Zone A.
“Habitable floor” means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor.
“Mobile home” means a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, a mobile home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. (This term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.) (Ord. 1-1981 § 5, 1981)

15.20.030 Determination of areas of special flood hazard and application.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas designated as areas of special flood hazard by the Federal Insurance Administration on its current Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM), applicable to and including all areas within the boundaries of the city.
B. The current Federal Insurance Administration (FHBM) No. 410185, dated October 31, 1975, marked Exhibit “A” and attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the City Recorder's office, is by this reference made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein at this point.
C. In recognition of the fact that the Federal Insurance Administration may from time to time revise the FHBM applicable to the city or that additional map or maps may be required for identification of flood hazard areas due to annexations or other land acquisitions by the city, the City Council shall have authority upon receipt of due notice by appropriate agency of the United States Government, to substitute, add and/or subtract appropriate FHBM maps by appropriate resolution, making the same applicable hereto.
D. In those concerned areas where base flood elevations are not shown on the FHBM, the Manager herein set forth, shall make reasonable effort to obtain, review and utilize other base flood elevation data that may be available and pertinent from the federal, state or other source, in order to provide the optimum degree of implementation of this chapter, and especially the specific standards hereinafter set forth in Section 15.20.080. (Ord. 1-1981 § 6, 1981)

15.20.040 Designation of program Manager.
The program Manager (PA) shall be designated by the City Council to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. Such program Manager shall be the chief building inspector, city engineer or public works superintendent. (Ord. 1-1981 § 7, 1981)

15.20.050 Duties and responsibilities of the program Manager.
A. The program Manager shall administer, implement and enforce the rules and regulations, intent and purposes of this chapter, which shall include the preparation and approval of appropriate forms and applications, and information and materials necessary to carry out the same.
B. The PA or his duly designated assistant shall review and consider, and in appropriate instances, approve all applications for development permit as herein provided.
C. The PA shall review all development permit applications to determine that the requirements and provisions of this chapter have been duly satisfied. Such review shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
    1. Determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local government agencies from which prior approval is required;
    2. Determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. (For the purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas).
        a. If by such review, the PA shall determine that there is no adverse affect or no adverse affect of consequence as addressed by this chapter, then a development permit may be granted consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
        b. If the PA determines that there is an adverse affect, of a material nature, then flood damage mitigation measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
D. The PA shall obtain and maintain as a requirement of this chapter, the following information:
    1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
    2. For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures (a) obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been flood-proofed, (b) maintain the flood-proofing certifications required in Section 15.20.060(B)(2);
    3. Maintain for public inspection all the records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
E. The PA shall notify adjacent communities (and the state coordinating agency, if any) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
F. The PA shall require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
G. The PA shall, where needed, make interpretations as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a map, boundary and actual field conditions). (Ord. 1-1981 § 8, 1981)

15.20.060 Development permit, application procedure and establishment.
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard as established in Section 15.20.030.
B. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the program Manager as herein designated, and may include, but not be limited to, the following information:
    1. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facility; and the location of the foregoing;
    2. The following specific information is required of applicant for a development permit: (a) elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures, (b) elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood-proofed, (c) certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria set forth in Section 15.20.070(B)(2);
    3. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. (Ord. 1-1981 § 9, 1981)

15.20.070 General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring. 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
    2. All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over the top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirement shall be that:
        a. Over the top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one additional tie per side;
        b. Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
        c. All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and
        d. Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
B. Construction Materials and Methods. 
    1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
    2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. Utilities. 
    1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
    2. New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
    3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision Proposals. 
    1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
    2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
    3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
    4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is less.
E. Encroachments. Any proposed development shall be analyzed to determine the effects on the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard as set forth under permit review, Section 15.20.050. (Ord. 1-1981 § 10, 1981)

15.20.080 Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 15.20.030D, use of other base flood data, the following standards are required:
A. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
    1. Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
    2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
    3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided the program Manager as herein defined. (Ord. 1-1981 § 11, 1981)

15.20.090 Penalties for noncompliance.
The following penalties are established for violation of the various provisions of this chapter and amendments thereto:
A. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations of the City. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) is a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 26, 2006)
B. In the event any building or structure is, or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, maintained or used, or any land is, or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the proper city officials or their duly authorized representatives or any person whose interest in real property in the city is or may be affected by the violation, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate proceeding to prevent temporarily or permanently enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use.
C. In accordance with the building code of the City and the subdivision ordinance of the City, the building official of the city shall, in addition to the remedies hereinabove set forth, have available to him such remedies as provided in said ordinances which shall include stop work orders. (Ord. 1-1981 § 13, 1981)

Chapter 15.24 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL

Sections:
15.24.010    General Provisions.
15.24.020    Definitions.
15.24.030    Permit Procedures and Requirements.
15.24.040    Waivers to Stormwater Management Requirements.
15.24.050    General Performance Criteria for Stormwater Management.
15.24.060    Basic Stormwater Management Design Criteria.
15.24.070    Requirements for Stormwater Management Plan Approval.
15.24.080    Construction Inspection.
15.24.090    Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater Facilities.
15.24.100    Enforcement and Penalties.

15.24.010 General Provisions.
A. Findings of Fact. It is hereby determined that land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition;
This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, and; stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites.
Therefore, the City establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
    1. minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
    2. minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
    3. minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;
    4. reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
C. Applicability. This ordinance shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the City under the specifications of Section 4 of this ordinance. The ordinance also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by local environmental protection officials to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans.
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the City has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing 1,000 or more square feet of land. The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria:
    1. Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the State, as applicable;
    2. Additions or modifications to existing single family structures;
    3. Developments that do not disturb more than 1,000square feet of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan;
    4. Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the City.
When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in Section 2 of this ordinance, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current stormwater design manual. This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the City.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
E. Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance.
F. Development of a Stormwater Design Manual. The City has adopted the City of Portland’s Stormwater Design Manual yet may furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance and may provide other such information. This manual will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the local review authority, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. Where the City’s policies and the Stormwater Design Manual are in conflict, the City’s policies will take precedence.

15.24.020 Definitions.
"Accelerated Erosion" means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action.
"Applicant" means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit.
"Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
“City” means the City of Wood Village, Oregon.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of Wood Village, Oregon, or the City Manager’s Designee.
"Dedication" means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use.
"Detention" means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
"Detention Facility" means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
"Developer" means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
"Drainage Easement" means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
"Erosion and Sediment Control Plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
"Fee in Lieu" means a payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the storm water performance standards required by this ordinance.
"Hotspot" means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
"Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG)" means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.
"Impervious Cover" means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
"Industrial Stormwater Permit" means an National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
"Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
"Infiltration Facility" means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade.
"Jurisdictional Wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
"Land Disturbance Activity" means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation,, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.
"Landowner" means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.
"Maintenance Agreement" means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices.
"Nonpoint Source Pollution" means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
"Offset Fee" means a monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets.
"Off-Site Facility" means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
"On-Site Facility" means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
"Recharge" means the replenishment of underground water reserves. "Redevelopment" means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding square feet in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
"Redevelopment" means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding square feet in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
"Stop Work Order" means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.
"Storm Water Management" means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
"Storm Water Retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site.
"Stormwater Runoff" means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.
"Stormwater Treatment Practices (STPs)" means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
"Water Quality Volume (WQv)" means the storage needed to capture and treat 90% of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQv) will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data.
"Watercourse" means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.

15.24.030 Permit Procedures and Requirements.
A. Permit Required. No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity.
B. Application Requirements. Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any land owner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit development a permit application on a form provided for that purpose.
Unless otherwise excepted by this ordinance, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application be considered: a stormwater management concept plan; a maintenance agreement; and a non-refundable permit review fee.
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Sec. 5 of this ordinance, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of Sec. 9 of this ordinance, and fees shall be those established by the City.
C. Application Review Fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the City. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development.
D. Application Procedure. 
    1. Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be filed with the City on any regular business day.
    2. A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to the City for review
    3. Permit applications shall include the following: two copies of the stormwater management concept plan, two copies of the maintenance agreement, and any required review fees.
    4. Within business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by this ordinance, the City shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved.
    5. If the permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the City shall have seven (7) business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved.
    6. If the permit application, final stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved by the City, all appropriate land disturbance activity permits shall be issued.
E. Permit Duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the City notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition.

15.24.040 Waivers to Stormwater Management Requirements.
A. Waivers for Providing Stormwater Management. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this ordinance, unless a written request is approved to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the ODEQ and the City for approval.
The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
    1. It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this ordinance.
    2. Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the ODEQ and the City and the implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance.
    3. Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
    4. The ODEQ and the City finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site.
    5. Non-structural practices will be used on sites that reduce: a) the generation of stormwater from the site, b) the size and cost of stormwater storage and c) the pollutants generated at the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the ODEQ and the City.
In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the ODEQ and the City may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the ODEQ and the City that the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
    •Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
    •Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
    •Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
    •Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the jurisdictional stormwater authority. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
    •The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat,
    •The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this ordinance,
B. Fee in Lieu of Stormwater Management Practices. Where the City waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the City. When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the City, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development.
C. Dedication of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the City for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the City prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit.

15.24.050 General Performance Criteria for Stormwater Management.
Unless judged by the ODEQ and the City to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites:
A. All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
B. All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the ODEQ and the City. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) or ODEQ responsible for natural resources.
C. Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods. At a minimum, annual recharge from the post development site shall mimic the annual recharge from pre-development site conditions.
D. For new development, structural stormwater treatment practices shall be designed to remove 70% of the average annual post development total suspended solids from 90% of the annual runoff.(TSS). It is presumed that a STP complies with this performance standard if it is:
    osized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQv).
    odesigned according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the local stormwater design manual,
    oconstructed properly, and
    omaintained regularly.
E. Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
F. Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
G. Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots", may require the use of specific structural STPs and pollution prevention practices.
H. Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the ODEQ and the City to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
I. The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the Stormwater Design Manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practices.

15.24.060 Basic Stormwater Management Design Criteria.
A. Minimum Control Requirements. All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, 10 year, 100 year) as identified in the current stormwater design manual are met, unless the City grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements.
In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
B. Site Design Feasibility. Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered:
    1. Topography
    2. Maximum Drainage Area
    3. Depth to Water Table
    4. Soils
    5. Slopes
    6. Terrain
    7. Head
    8. Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas
Applicants shall consult the Stormwater Design Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice.
C. Conveyance Issues. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
    1. Maximizing of flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points
    2. Protection of inlet and outfall structures
    3. Elimination of erosive flow velocities
    4. Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable
The Stormwater Design Manual shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices.
D. Pretreatment Requirements. Every stormwater treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the pretreatment requirements found in the current stormwater design manual. Certain stormwater treatment practices, as specified in the Stormwater Design Manual, are prohibited even with pretreatment in the following circumstances:
    1. Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known as "hotspots"
    2. Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, non- stormwater discharges
    3. Stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge area.
    4. Certain geologic conditions exist (e.g., karst) that prohibit the proper pretreatment of stormwater
E. Treatment/Geometry Conditions. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the Stormwater Design Manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice.
F. Landscaping Plans Required. All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or soil conservation district.
G. Maintenance Agreements. All stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities.
H. Non-Structural Stormwater Practices. The use of non-structural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current design manual and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.

15.24.070 Requirements for Stormwater Management Plan Approval.
A. Stormwater Management Plan Required for All Developments. No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an individual approved by the City and must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices. The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the Submittal Checklist found in the stormwater design manual. No building, grading, or sediment control permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the City after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this ordinance.
B. Stormwater Management Concept Plan Requirements. A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan:
    1. A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
    2. Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this ordinance and the specifications of the Stormwater Design Manual.
    3. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development.
    4. A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management facility.
    5. The City may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential.
For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance to the maximum extent practicable.
C. Final Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. After review of the stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the City, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required in the Final Stormwater Management Plan checklist found in the Stormwater Design Manual. This includes:
    1. Contact Information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected.
    2. Topographic Base Map. A 1" = 200' topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 100 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown.
    3. Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this ordinance. Such calculations shall include (i) description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration, (ii) time of concentration, (iii) Soil Curve Numbers or runoff coefficients, (iv) peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area, (v) infiltration rates, where applicable, (vi) culvert capacities, (vii) flow velocities, (viii) data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the Stormwater Design Manual, and (ix) documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
    4. Soils Information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil sits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure.
    5. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan.
    6. Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district.
    7. Maintenance Easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property.
    8. Maintenance Agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of this ordinance.
    9. Erosion and Sediment Control Plans for Construction of Stormwater Management Measures. The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on-site stormwater management practices.
    10. Other Environmental Permits. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
D. Performance Bond/Security. The City may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25%. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this ordinance. The City will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this ordinance. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the City.

15.24.080 Construction Inspection.
A. Notice of Construction Commencement. The applicant must notify the City in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the jurisdictional stormwater authority. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information:
    1. The date and location of the inspection;
    2. Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan
    3. Variations from the approved construction specifications
    4. Any violations that exist
If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the City
B. As Built Plans. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City is required before the release of any performance securities can occur.
C. Landscaping and Stabilization Requirements. Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be revegetated within ten (10) days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area.
Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion.
Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy-five percent (75%) survival for one (1) year is achieved.
In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district, and must be approved prior to receiving a permit.

15.24.090 Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater Facilities.
A. Maintenance Easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has an stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this ordinance. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the City in the land records.
B. Maintenance Covenants. Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the City and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. The City, in lieu of an maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
C. Requirements of Maintenance Covenants. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include; removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility.
D. Inspection of Stormwater Facilities. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices.
E. Right of Entry for Inspection. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the City the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this ordinance.
F. Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least ten (10) years. These records shall be made available to the City during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
G. Failure to Maintain Practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the City, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the City may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county.

15.24.100 Enforcement and Penalties.
A. Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this Ordinance, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
B. Notice of Violation. When the City determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain:
    1. the name and address of the owner or applicant;
    2. the address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
    3. a statement specifying the nature of the violation;
    4. a description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this Ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
    5. a statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
    6. a statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days of service of notice of violation.
C. Stop Work Orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in effect until the City confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this ordinance.
D. Civil Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than 1,000 Dollars pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Wood Village Municipal Code. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues.
E. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the City may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
F. Holds on Occupancy Permits. Occupancy permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the City. (Ord. 3-2011, 2011)

Title 16 ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE
(Reserved)Click to view the Development Code.

Tables
 Statutory References
 State Code Citation Table
 Ordinance Table

Statutory References
for Oregon Cities
The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Oregon cities. They are current through April 2015.

General Provisions
Boundary changes. ORS 222.005 et seq.
Charter amendments. ORS 221.210
City charters. Oregon Const. Art. XI § 2
Elections. ORS 221.160 – 221.200 and 221.230
Enforcement of ordinances. ORS 30.315 and 221.315
Incorporation of cities. ORS 221.005 – 221.106
Initiative and referendum. ORS 221.210 and 250.255 et seq.
Ordinances. ORS 221.275 – 221.333
Procedures for infractions, violations and traffic offenses. ORS Chapter 153

Administration and Personnel
City officers. ORS 221.110 – 221.200
Emergency management and services. ORS Chapter 401
Municipal courts. ORS 221.140 and 221.336 – 221.357
Planning commissions. ORS 227.010 et seq.

Revenue and Finance
Assessments for local improvements. ORS 223.387 – 223.401
Financial administration. ORS Chapter 294
Limitations on powers of city to assist corporations. Oregon Const. Art. XI § 9
Public contracts and purchasing (“Public Contracting Code”). ORS 279.835 – 279.855, ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C

Business Licenses and Regulations
Licensing and taxation. ORS 221.410 et seq.
Liquor licenses. ORS 471.155 et seq.
Taxation of liquor prohibited. ORS 473.190

Animals
Animal control. ORS 609.015 et seq.
Rabies control. ORS 433.340 – 433.390

Health and Safety
Camping by homeless. ORS 203.077 – 203.082
General authority. ORS 221.410 et seq.
State and local enforcement of health laws. ORS Chapter 431

Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Curfew. ORS 419C.680
Firearms regulation. ORS 166.170 et seq.
General authority. ORS 221.410 et seq.
Noise control. ORS 467.100
Obscenity and indecency. ORS 167.060 – 167.100
Prohibitions on local governments as to crimes involving use of alcohol and drugs. ORS 430.402
State penal code (“Oregon Criminal Code of 1971”). ORS Chapters 161 – 169

Vehicles and Traffic
Abandoned vehicles. ORS 819.100 – 819.215
Bicycles. ORS 814.400 et seq.
Local authority. ORS 801.040
Oregon vehicle code. ORS Chapters 801 – 826
Parking offenses. ORS 221.275 – 221.290 and 221.333
Procedures for traffic infractions. ORS 153.530 et seq.

Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
City improvements and works. ORS Chapter 223
City parks, memorials and cemeteries. ORS Chapter 226

Water and Sewers
City sewers and sanitation. ORS Chapter 224
Municipal utilities. ORS Chapter 225
System development charges. ORS 223.297 – 223.314

Buildings and Construction
Adoption of codes by reference. ORS 221.330
Radio antennas. ORS 221.295
Municipal Regulation. ORS 455.148 et seq.
Municipal Review and inspection. ORS 455.675 et seq.
State building code. ORS Chapter 455

Subdivisions
Subdivisions and partitions. ORS Chapter 92

Zoning
City planning and zoning. ORS Chapter 227
Mobile and manufactured dwelling parks. ORS 446.003 et seq.

State Code Citation Table
This table lists Oregon Revised Statutes and Oregon Administrative Rules sections that are cited in the Wood Village Municipal Code. Thus, ORS Chapter 82 is cited in WVMC 1.06.050.
+-----------------------------+--------------+
|       State Citation        | Code Section |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 30.265 et seq.          | 8.18.050     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 34.010                  | 3.16.070     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 34.010 – ORS 34.100     | 3.16.070     |
|                             | 8.12.100     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 34.100                  | 3.16.070     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 82              | 1.06.050     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 90.100                  | 8.16.290     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 105.420 – ORS 105.455   | 8.18.230     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 133.005(3)              | 12.08.300    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 153             | 10.08.010    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 190.010                 | 5.24.010     |
|                             | 6.04.010     |
|                             | 8.04.010     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 190.240                 | 5.26.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 203.040                 | 6.04.010     |
|                             | 8.04.010     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 206.345                 | 5.24.010     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 221.725                 | 13.24.010    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 221.727                 | 13.24.010    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 223.297 – ORS 223.314   | 3.16.070     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 223.309                 | 3.16.060     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 223.397                 | 3.12.110     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 223.505 – ORS 223.650   | 1.06.060     |
|                             | 8.16.300     |
|                             | 8.22.130     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 227.090                 | 2.24.080     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 279A.060                | 2.32.010     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 279B.080                | 1.10.050     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 283.140                 | 5.26.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 305.220                 | 3.22.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 305.620                 | 3.22.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 310.145                 | Section 4    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 314.400                 | 3.22.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 401.025                 | 5.26.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 403.105                 | 5.26.170     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 455             | 15.04.020    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 455.100 – ORS 455.450   | 15.16.010    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 459             | 8.24.060     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 459.386                 | 8.24.030     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 459A            | 8.24.150     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 466             | 8.24.060     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 466.005                 | 8.24.030     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 466.605                 | 1.10.020     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 475B.015                | 3.22.010     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 475B.345                | 3.22.020     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 475B.700 – ORS 475B.755 | 3.22.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 725.600                 | 5.10.020     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 757.005(1)              | 3.18.010     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 759.005(l)              | 5.26.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 759.010                 | 5.26.040     |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 801.110                 | 10.04.020    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 801.305                 | 10.04.020    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 801.450                 | 10.04.020    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 801.535                 | 10.04.020    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 809.725                 | 10.10.080    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 811             | 10.08.010    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 811.125                 | 10.10.020    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 819             | 10.10.080    |
+-----------------------------+--------------+

Ordinance Table
This table lists all ordinances. If an ordinance is codified, its location in the code is cited by chapter number at the end of the enactment description. Ordinances are codified if they are general, permanent, and/or include penalty provisions for noncompliance. “Not codified” indicates that the ordinance could have been codified but was not for some reason (e.g., superseded by a later ordinance, codified in a separate publication). “Special” means the ordinance was special in nature or for a specific period of time (e.g., budget, annexation, tax levy).
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4       | (3.04)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8       | (10.12)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 15      | (9.04, 9.16, 9.24)                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1959  | (15.16)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1961  | (3.12)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1963  | (10.24)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-1963  | (9.28)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1969  | (10.24)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1969  | (12.04)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-1971  | (13.08)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1973  | (13.20)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1974  | (2.24)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1974  | (2.16)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1974  | (15.12)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1975  |                                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-1975  | (3.08)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1976  | (2.32)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1977  | (5.20)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1977  | (5.08)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1979  | (2.36, 3.08)                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1981  | (15.20)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1981  | (5.16)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1981  | (15.08)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1982  | (13.04)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1983  | (5.16)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-1983  |                                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1986  | (8.04)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1987  | (13.16)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1988  | (10.04, 10.08, 10.12, 10.16, 10.20)                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1989  | (13.04)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1989  | (8.08)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1990  | (2.20)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1990  | (15.04)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1991  | (3.12)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1991  | (13.12)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1991  | (8.08)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-1992  | (13.20)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1993  | (13.16)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1993  | (8.24)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-1993  | (8.12)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-1993  | (1.08)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1995  | (12.08)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-1995  | (5.24)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1996  | (13.16)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1996  | (1.04)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1996  | (10.24)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1997  | ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF WOOD            |
|         | VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM OF THE              |
|         | STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS 221.770             |
|         | FOR FISCAL YEAR 1997-98.                            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1997  | ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL       |
|         | CODE.                                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1997  | GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE GAS UTILITY                |
|         | FRANCHISE TO NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS COMPANY,         |
|         | AND FIXING TERMS, CONDITIONS AND COMPENSATION       |
|         | OF SUCH FRANCHISE.                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1997  | AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCE 8-1996             |
|         | AND READOPTING, WITH MODIFICATION, AMENDING         |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE COMPREHENSIVE              |
|         | PLAN ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL MARCH              |
|         | 14, 1979 AS AMENDED TO DATE; AMENDING               |
|         | THE CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE PLAN LAND USE              |
|         | DESIGNATION MAP ACCORDINGLY; SETTING                |
|         | FORTH CERTAIN PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS,              |
|         | AND OTHER PERTINENT PROVISIONS.                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1997  | AN ORDINANCE REPEALING 9-1996 AND READOPTING,       |
|         | WITH MODIFICATIONS; AMENDING ORDINANCE              |
|         | 10-1993 ENTITLED THE “WOOD VILLAGE ZONING           |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE” ADOPTED BY THE                |
|         | CITY NOVEMBER 10, 1993 AS AMENDED TO                |
|         | DATE; AMENDING THE CITY’S ZONING MAP;               |
|         | REZONING CERTAIN SPECIFIED PROPERTIES;              |
|         | SETTING FORTH PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS               |
|         | AND OTHER PERTINENT PROVISIONS.                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-1997  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.24.060 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT        |
|         | TO EXEMPT DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION               |
|         | WASTE FROM SOLID WASTE HAULERS LICENSE.             |
|         | (8.24)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-1997  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 2.32.030(2) INCREASING                 |
|         | DOLLAR AMOUNT OF CONTRACTS FOR PURCHASES            |
|         | WHICH CAN BE EXEMPTED FROM FORMAL BIDDING           |
|         | PROCEDURES IN ACCORDANCE WITH AMENDMENT             |
|         | OF CITY CHARTER SECTION 44 “BID PROCEDURES”         |
|         | APPROVED BY THE VOTERS ON NOVEMBER 4,               |
|         | 1997.                                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1998  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 1998-1999, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | THE CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO                 |
|         | RECEIVE STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1998  | BETWEEN THE CITIES OF FAIRVIEW, GRESHAM,            |
|         | PORTLAND, TROUTDALE, WOOD VILLAGE AND               |
|         | MULTNOMAH COUNTY WHICH CREATED THE CONSOLIDATED     |
|         | CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION AND                 |
|         | DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1998  | AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING INTERGOVERNMENTAL          |
|         | AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF GRESHAM               |
|         | AND THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE, AUTHORIZING           |
|         | EXTENSION AND CONNECTIONS TO THE WOOD               |
|         | VILLAGE WATER SYSTEM UNDER STATED CIRCUMSTANCES     |
|         | AND CONDITIONS; SETTING FORTH ADMINISTRATIVE        |
|         | PROCEDURES AND METHODS FOR DETERMINING              |
|         | PAYMENT AND SUCH SERVICES AND RELATED               |
|         | PROVISIONS.                                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1998  | OF CERTAIN ANIMALS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS           |
|         | OF WOOD VILLAGE; SUSPENDING APPLICATION             |
|         | OF EXISTING CITY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE;          |
|         | SETTING FORTH EFFECTIVE DATE FOR APPLICATION;       |
|         | REPEALING ORDINANCE 7-1993; AND OTHER               |
|         | PERTINENT PROVISIONS. (6.04)                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1998  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 10-1993             |
|         | ENTITLED THE "WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND               |
|         | DEVELOPMENT CODE" ADOPTED ON NOVEMBER               |
|         | 10, 1993 AS AMENDED TO DATE RE: CERTAIN             |
|         | LAND USE ADJUSTMENTS PRIOR TO MASTER                |
|         | PLAN APPROVAL AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-1998  | ORDINANCE GRANTING SPECIAL PERMISSION               |
|         | TO SPECIFIED OWNERS OF CERTAIN REAL                 |
|         | PROPERTY TO DELAY CONNECTION OF EXISTING            |
|         | SANITARY FACILITIES THEREUPON TO THE                |
|         | CITY’S SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM AS REQUIRED            |
|         | BY ORDINANCE 6-1971(12), CITY CODE13.08.120;        |
|         | SETTING FORTH THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS              |
|         | FOR SUCH PERMISSION INCLUDING A TERMINATION         |
|         | THEREOF; OTHER PERTINENT PROVISIONS.                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-1998  | AN ORDINANCE ADDING CHAPTER 3.16 TO WOOD            |
|         | VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE ESTABLISHING                 |
|         | A SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE AND PROGRAM             |
|         | FOR THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE; PROVIDING             |
|         | PROVISIONS PERTINENT THERETO, INCLUDING             |
|         | APPEAL PROCEDURES; AND DECLARING AN                 |
|         | EMERGENCY. (3.16)                                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-1998  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 2.04.030 CONCERNING TIME               |
|         | AND DATE OF REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-1998  | MUNICIPAL CODE 13.04.030(E) AND DECLARING           |
|         | AN EMERGENCY. (13.04)                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-1998 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 3-1977              |
|         | WHICH AMENDED ORDINANCE 6-1971 ENTITLED             |
|         | “AN ORDINANCE GOVERNING SEWER CONNECTIONS           |
|         | TO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM OF THE                 |
|         | CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE, REQUIRING APPLICATIONS,       |
|         | PERMITS AND FEES THEREFOR, REGULATING               |
|         | SAID CONNECTION AND ITS CONSTRUCTION                |
|         | AND USE, OTHER PERTINENT PROVISIONS                 |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY” BY THE AMENDMENT        |
|         | OF SECTIONS 1 AND 2 THEREOF, AMENDING               |
|         | ORDINANCE 6-1971, SECTION 11 AND AMENDING           |
|         | THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE 13.08.030           |
|         | AND 13.08.110 AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.           |
|         | (13.08)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-1999  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 1999-2000, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-1999  | AN ORDINANCE CONSENTING TO TRANSFER OF              |
|         | CONTROL OF KBL MULTNOMAH CABLESYSTEMS,              |
|         | L.P., DBA PARAGON CABLE TO TCI CABLEVISION          |
|         | OF OHIO, INC. (AN AFFILIATE OF TELE-COMMUNICATIONS, |
|         | INC., AND AT&T CORP.), WITH CONDITIONS,             |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-1999  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PLAN, AND AMENDING            |
|         | THE CITY’S COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN              |
|         | TRANSPORTATION SECTION AND AMENDING                 |
|         | ORDINANCE 10-1993 (WOOD VILLAGE ZONING              |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE) AS AMENDED TO                 |
|         | DATE.                                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-1999  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AS ACKNOWLEDGED BY               |
|         | THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF LAND CONSERVATION           |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT ON DECEMBER 11, 1981                |
|         | AS AMENDED TO DATE, AND AMENDING ORDINANCE          |
|         | 10-1993, WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT        |
|         | CODE AS AMENDED TO DATE, IN COMPLIANCE              |
|         | WITH REQUIREMENTS OF PERIODIC REVIEW.               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-1999  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 3-1997,             |
|         | GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE GAS UTILITY                |
|         | FRANCHISE TO NORTHWEST NATURAL GAS COMPANY,         |
|         | AND FIXING TERMS, CONDITIONS AND COMPENSATION       |
|         | OF SUCH FRANCHISE.                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-1999  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 10-1993,            |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT                 |
|         | CODE AS AMENDED TO DATE, IN COMPLIANCE              |
|         | WITH REQUIREMENTS OF PERIODIC REVIEW,               |
|         | MODIFYING THE CITY'S PERFORMANCE AND                |
|         | PAYMENT BONDING REQUIREMENTS.                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-1999  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 8-1989,             |
|         | AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE 2-1990, OF THE              |
|         | CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE RELATING TO THE                |
|         | GTE NW, INC. FRANCHISE.                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2000  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 13 OF THE               |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE TO ADD A                |
|         | NEW CHAPTER 13.24 RELATING TO CONVEYANCE            |
|         | OF UNNEEDED, REPLACED, OR RELOCATED                 |
|         | PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS. (13.24)                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2000  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE  OF OREGON PURSUANT TO                 |
|         | ORS 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2000-2001,              |
|         | AUTHORIZING CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH                |
|         | AND TO RECEIVE STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2000  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 4-1997              |
|         | EXHIBIT A AND ORDINANCE 5-1997 EXHIBIT              |
|         | A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN               |
|         | THE CITIES OF WOOD VILLAGE, FAIRVIEW                |
|         | AND GRESHAM, AND MULTNOMAH KENNEL CLUB,             |
|         | INC.                                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2000  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 8-1989,             |
|         | AS AMENDED BY ORDINANCE 2-1990 AND ORDINANCE        |
|         | 7-1999, OF THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE                 |
|         | RELATING TO THE GTE NW, INC. FRANCHISE.             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2000  | AN ORDINANCE VACATING A CERTAIN SECTION             |
|         | OF UNIMPROVED PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY KNOWN             |
|         | AS "DUNBAR STREET" LOCATED BETWEEN THE              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE TOWN CENTER AND WOOD VILLAGE           |
|         | GREEN (TAX MAP IN E3 34B).                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2000  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 5-1990              |
|         | ENTITLED: “AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE              |
|         | CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REPAIR AND                |
|         | MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES            |
|         | WITHIN THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE; ADOPTING           |
|         | STATE SPECIALTY CODES; PROVIDING ADMINISTRATIVE     |
|         | PROVISIONS; PROVIDING PENALTIES; REPEALING          |
|         | ORDINANCE 2-1982; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY”       |
|         | BY THE AMENDMENT OF SECTION 2 THEREOF               |
|         | AND AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL                 |
|         | CODE SECTION 15.04.20 AND DECLARING                 |
|         | AN EMERGENCY.                                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2000  | AN ORDINANCE ASSESSING VARIOUS LOTS,                |
|         | PARCELS AND TRACTS OF LAND WITHIN THE               |
|         | CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF WOOD                |
|         | VILLAGE, OREGON, SPECIALLY BENEFITED                |
|         | BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE NE 240TH                 |
|         | PLACE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT, THEIR APPORTIONED        |
|         | SHARE OF THE COST OF SUCH IMPROVEMENT;              |
|         | DESCRIBING IN DETAIL THOSE VARIOUS                  |
|         | LOTS;  PARCELS AND TRACTS OF LAND SO                |
|         | ASSESSED; SPREADING THE ASSESSMENT;                 |
|         | DIRECTING THE CITY RECORDER TO ENTER                |
|         | THE RESPECTIVE AMOUNTS SO ASSESSED HEREIN           |
|         | IN THE CITY LIEN DOCKET;  AND DIRECTING             |
|         | THE CITY RECORDER'S COMPLIANCE WITH                 |
|         | THE APPROPRIATE CITY ORDINANCES AND                 |
|         | STATUTES OF THE STATE CONCERNING NOTICE             |
|         | TO THE OWNERS OF SAID PROPERTY SO ASSESSED;         |
|         | PROVIDING FOR BANCROFT "TYPE" BONDING               |
|         | APPLICATION OF SAID ASSESSMENT; OTHER               |
|         | PERTINENT PROVISIONS AND DECLARING AN               |
|         | EMERGENCY.                                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2000  | AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A NEW MUNICIPAL           |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 5.26 ENTITLED TELECOMMUNICATIONS       |
|         | INFRASTRUCTURE ORDINANCE. (5.26)                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2000  | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO GTE NORTHWEST              |
|         | INCORPORATED, A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE              |
|         | FOR THE PROVISION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS             |
|         | SERVICES WITHIN THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2000 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF WOOD              |
|         | VILLAGE STREET PLAN MAP AND CHANGING                |
|         | THE NAME OF NE SARA WAY TO NE 240TH                 |
|         | AVENUE                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2000 | AN ORDINANCE ASSESSING VARIOUS LOTS,                |
|         | PARCELS AND TRACTS OF LAND WITHIN THE               |
|         | CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF WOOD                |
|         | VILLAGE, OREGON, SPECIALLY BENEFITED                |
|         | BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE NE GLISAN                |
|         | STREET WATER IMPROVEMENT PROJECT, THEIR             |
|         | APPORTIONED SHARE OF THE COST OF SUCH               |
|         | IMPROVEMENT; DESCRIBING IN DETAIL THOSE             |
|         | VARIOUS LOTS; PARCELS AND TRACTS OF                 |
|         | LAND SO ASSESSED; SPREADING THE ASSESSMENT;         |
|         | DIRECTING THE CITY RECORDER TO ENTER                |
|         | THE RESPECTIVE AMOUNTS SO ASSESSED HEREIN           |
|         | IN THE CITY LIEN DOCKET;  AND DIRECTING             |
|         | THE CITY RECORDER'S COMPLIANCE WITH                 |
|         | THE APPROPRIATE CITY ORDINANCES AND                 |
|         | STATUTES OF THE STATE CONCERNING NOTICE             |
|         | TO THE OWNERS OF SAID PROPERTY SO ASSESSED;         |
|         | PROVIDING FOR BANCROFT "TYPE" BONDING               |
|         | APPLICATION OF SAID ASSESSMENT; OTHER               |
|         | PERTINENT PROVISIONS AND DECLARING AN               |
|         | EMERGENCY.                                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2000 | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE                |
|         | FRANCHISE TO RCN TELECOM SERVICES, INC.             |
|         | TO PROVIDE BROADBAND, CABLE, INSTITUTIONAL          |
|         | AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN THE              |
|         | CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13-2000 | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE                |
|         | FRANCHISE TO WESTERN INTEGRATED NETWORKS            |
|         | OF OREGON OPERATING, LLC TO PROVIDE                 |
|         | BROADBAND, CABLE, INSTITUTIONAL AND                 |
|         | TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN THE CITY             |
|         | OF WOOD VILLAGE                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 14-2000 | AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A NEW MUNICIPAL           |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 2.06 AUTHORIZING THE POSITION          |
|         | OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR, AND DEFINING                 |
|         | THE DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE              |
|         | POSITION. (2.06)                                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2001  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2001-2002, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2001  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 15.04 RELATED TO ADOPTION              |
|         | OF STATE BUILDING CODES. (15.04)                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2001  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8 RELATING TO PUBLIC NUISANCES.        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2001  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 2.04.030 CONCERNING TIME               |
|         | AND DATE OF REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2001  | AN ORDINANCE CONSENTING TO TRANSFER OF              |
|         | CONTROL OF KBL MULTNOMAH CABLESYSTEMS,              |
|         | L.P. (EAST MULTNOMAH FRANCHISE), FROM               |
|         | TCI CABLEVISION OF OHIO, INC. TO AT&T               |
|         | BROADBAND PF OHIO, LLC, WITH CONDITIONS,            |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2001  | AN ORDINANCE ADDING SECTION 5.28 TO WOOD            |
|         | VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE ESTABLISHING                 |
|         | CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS FOR CABLE                |
|         | TELEVISION FRANCHISES (5.28)                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2001  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.24 RELATING TO SOLID                 |
|         | WASTE MANAGEMENT (8.24)                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2001  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE ROADWAY ELEMENT           |
|         | OF THE WOOD VILLAGE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM           |
|         | PLAN                                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2001  | AN ORDINANCE REPEALING WASTEWATER INDUSTRIAL        |
|         | PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE 3-1987 AS AMENDED            |
|         | AND MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 13.16 AND                |
|         | READOPTING WITH MODIFICATIONS, CODIFIED             |
|         | IN WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER              |
|         | 13.16 SEWAGE PRETREATMENT PROGRAM (13.16)           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2001 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF WOOD              |
|         | VILLAGE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONE                 |
|         | MAP                                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2002  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2001-2002, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2002  | AN ORDINANCE APPROVING THE ANNEXATION               |
|         | AND REZONING OF TAX LOT 800, A TRACT                |
|         | OF LAND SITUATED IN THE NORTHWEST ONE-QUARTER       |
|         | OF ASSESSOR’S MAP 1N3E27AC, FROM MULTNOMAH          |
|         | COUNTY TO THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE,                 |
|         | COUNTY OF MULTNOMAH, STATE OF OREGON.               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2002  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE TITLE 10 TO ADD A NEW CHAPTER 10.10            |
|         | TO PROHIBIT SPEED RACING. (10.10)                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2002  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE TITLE 8 TO ESTABLISH PROPERTY MAINTENANCE      |
|         | REGULATIONS                                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2002  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE “CITY OF WOOD             |
|         | VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE”                |
|         | ADOPTED NOVEMBER 10, 1993 AS AMENDED                |
|         | TO DATE; EXPANDING THE CITY’S NEIGHBORHOOD          |
|         | COMMERCIAL (NC) ZONE; APPLYING BUILDING             |
|         | DESIGN STANDARDS AND AMENDMENTS TO THE              |
|         | USES AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS OF THE               |
|         | NC ZONE AND SETTING FORTH FINDINGS PERTINENT        |
|         | TO SAID AMENDMENTS.                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2002  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF WOOD              |
|         | VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE                 |
|         | TO CLARIFY THE CITY’S PROCEDURES AND                |
|         | REGULATIONS RELATING TO TEMPORARY USE               |
|         | PERMITS; SIGNS; CLEAR VISION STANDARD;              |
|         | DISPOSAL OF SOLID OR LIQUID WASTE; EROSION          |
|         | CONTROL; AND REQUIRING PUBLIC FACILITIES            |
|         | TO EXTEND TO ADJOINING PROPERTIES.                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2002  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 8.18.070 RELATING TO GARBAGE           |
|         | COLLECTION                                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2002  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 2.32 RELATING TO PUBLIC                |
|         | CONTRACTS (2.32)                                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2003  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2003-2004, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.24 (SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT)          |
|         | (8.24, 13.16)                                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 2.04.030 CONCERNING TIME               |
|         | AND DATE OF REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WASTEWATER INDUSTRIAL         |
|         | PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE 9-2001 WHICH                 |
|         | AMENDED ORDINANCE 3-1987 AND WOOD VILLAGE           |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 13.16 SEWAGE                 |
|         | PRETREATMENT PROGRAM (13.16)                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE “CITY OF WOOD             |
|         | VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE”                |
|         | ADOPTED NOVEMBER 10, 1993 AS AMENDED                |
|         | TO DATE; REDUCING LOT SIZES, SETBACKS,              |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT AVERAGE LOT SIZE FOR                |
|         | DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING IN THE               |
|         | TOWN CENTER (TC) ZONE; LIMITING TYPES               |
|         | OF HOUSEHOLD USES LIVING AND CHANGING               |
|         | GROUP LIVING FROM A PERMITTED TO CONDITIONAL        |
|         | USE                                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 6-1992              |
|         | ENTITLED: ADOPTING A FIRE CODE FOR THE              |
|         | CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE; PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS       |
|         | TO GOVERN CONDITIONS HAZARDOUS TO LIFE              |
|         | AND PROPERTY FROM FIRE OR EXPLOSION;                |
|         | AND ADOPTING OTHER PERTINENT PROVISIONS,            |
|         | INCLUDING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN APPEALS           |
|         | BOARD; FEES AS REQUIRED; AND PENALTIES              |
|         | FOR VIOLATION THEREOF AND AMENDING WOOD             |
|         | VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 8.28                 |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2003  | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO                |
|         | THE CITY OWNED WATER AND SEWER UTILITY              |
|         | SERVICES PROVIDED WITHIN THE CITY OF                |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 2.04.030 CONCERNING TIME               |
|         | AND DATE OF REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2003  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 5.04 (BUSINESS LICENSES                |
|         | GENERALLY) TO ESTABLISH BUSINESS LICENSE            |
|         | FEES BY RESOLUTION, INCREASE PENALTIES              |
|         | FOR VIOLATION, AND CHANGE THE DUE DATE              |
|         | FOR PAYMENT FROM JULY OF THE FISCAL                 |
|         | YEAR TO JANUARY OF THE CALENDAR YEAR.               |
|         | (5.04)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2003 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 5.20 “RENTAL LICENSE FEE”,             |
|         | PROVIDING FOR RENTAL LICENSE FEES TO                |
|         | BE ESTABLISHED BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION,               |
|         | AND APPLYING THE FEE TO ALL RESIDENTIAL             |
|         | RENTAL UNITS. (5.20)                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2003 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 15.16 “TRAILER COACHES                 |
|         | AND TRAILER PARKS” BY UPDATING ARCHAIC              |
|         | LANGUAGE AND PROVIDING FOR PARK LICENSE             |
|         | FEES TO BE ESTABLISHED BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION.       |
|         | (15.16)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2003 | AN ORDINANCE TERMINATING THE FRANCHISE              |
|         | OF WESTERN INTEGRATED NETWORKS OF OREGON            |
|         | OPERATING, LLC, AND RELEASING THE COMPANY           |
|         | FROM ITS OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE FRANCHISE            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13-2003 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.28 (UNIFORM FIRE CODE)               |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY (8.28)                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2004  | AN EMERGENCY ORDINANCE GRANTING PORTLAND            |
|         | GENERAL ELECTRIC A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE          |
|         | FOR TEN YEARS TO ERECT, CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN         |
|         | AND OPERATE WITHIN THE CITY OF WOOD                 |
|         | VILLAGE AN ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER                 |
|         | SYSTEM AND FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2004  | AN EMERGENCY ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD            |
|         | VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE TITLE 3 TO ADD               |
|         | A NEW CHAPTER 3.18 ENACTING AN ELECTRIC             |
|         | PUBLIC UTILITY PRIVILEGE TAX OF ONE                 |
|         | AND ONE HALF PERCENT ON THE GROSS REVENUES          |
|         | OF ANY ELECTRIC UTILITY PROVIDING ELECTRIC          |
|         | SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS OR USERS WITHIN               |
|         | THE CITY LIMITS. (3.18)                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2004  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2004-2005, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2004  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 15.04 RELATED TO ADOPTION              |
|         | OF STATE BUILDING CODES. (15.04)                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2004  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 8.16.210 CONCERNING PUBLIC             |
|         | NUISANCE ABATEMENT; ADDING A PROVISION              |
|         | TO ALLOW EXPEDIENT ENFORCEMENT OF NUISANCE          |
|         | ISSUES IN THE CASE OF REPEAT OFFENSES               |
|         | ON THE SAME PROPERTY WITH THE SAME OWNER.           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2004  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 9.28 CURFEW BY ADDING DAYTIME          |
|         | CURFEW REGULATIONS FOR MINORS. (9.28)               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2004  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.24 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT            |
|         | BY ADDING REQUIREMENT FOR LICENSEE PARTICIPATION    |
|         | IN ANNUAL SPECIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION            |
|         | EVENTS (8.24)                                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2004  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 5-1989              |
|         | AS AMENDED, “THE BURGLARY AND ROBBERY               |
|         | ALARM ORDINANCE” WITH REVISIONS TO PROCEDURES       |
|         | AND FINES AND UPDATING THE WOOD VILLAGE             |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 8.08 “ALARM SYSTEMS”;        |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. (8.08)                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2004  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 3.08 CONCERNING TRANSIENT              |
|         | OCCUPANCY TAX; INCREASING THE AMOUNT                |
|         | OF INTEREST DUE ON DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS              |
|         | AND INCREASING FINES FOR VIOLATIONS                 |
|         | OF THIS CHAPTER. (3.08)                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2004 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE TITLE 3 (REVENUE AND FINANCE) TO               |
|         | ADD A NEW CHAPTER 3.20 AUTHORIZING THE              |
|         | CREATION OF REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS                 |
|         | TO PROVIDE AN ADDITIONAL METHOD TO FINANCE          |
|         | NEEDED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2004 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.28 AND RENAMING THIS                 |
|         | CHAPTER AS “FIRE PREVENTION CODE.” (8.28)           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2004 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 5.26 ENACTING A PRIVILEGE              |
|         | TAX OF SEVEN PERCENT (7%) ON THE GROSS              |
|         | REVENUES OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS             |
|         | OPERATING WITHOUT A FRANCHISE FOR USE               |
|         | OF THE CITY'S STREETS, ALLEYS AND HIGHWAYS.         |
|         | (5.26)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13-2004 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 5.16 CONCERNING AMUSEMENT              |
|         | DEVICES; CHANGING LICENSING SYSTEM FROM             |
|         | FISCAL YEAR BASIS TO CALENDAR YEAR BASIS.           |
|         | (5.16)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 14-2004 | AN ORDINANCE APPROVING EXECUTION OF A               |
|         | DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT PURSUANT TO ORS               |
|         | 94.508 BETWEEN THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE             |
|         | AND CENTEX HOMES.                                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 15-2004 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE “CITY OF WOOD             |
|         | VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE”                |
|         | TOWN CENTER SECTION 235.295 “FAIRVIEW-WOOD          |
|         | VILLAGE TOWN CENTER NON-RETAIL EMPLOYMENT           |
|         | USES” TO ALLOW ONE ADDITIONAL RETAIL                |
|         | USE OF MORE THAN 60,000 SQUARE FEET                 |
|         | ON THE WOOD VILLAGE TOWN CENTER SITE.               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 16-2004 | AN ORDINANCE ADDING A NEW SECTION 2.40              |
|         | TO THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE TO               |
|         | PROVIDE A PROCESS FOR CONSIDERATION                 |
|         | OF CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION UNDER 2004               |
|         | BALLOT MEASURE 37.                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2005  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2005-2006, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2005  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 9.12.060 BY DELETING “GAMBLING”        |
|         | FROM THE DEFINITION OF “DISORDERLY HOUSE.”          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2005  | AN ORDINANCE ADDING A NEW CHAPTER 3.09              |
|         | TO THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE IMPOSING         |
|         | A 1% RETAIL GOODS TAX AND ADOPTING IMPLEMENTING     |
|         | REGULATIONS.                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2005  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MUNICIPAL CODE                |
|         | SECTION 13.20 “SENIOR CITIZEN WATER                 |
|         | AND SEWER RATES” BY REDEFINING ELIGIBILITY          |
|         | FOR DISCOUNTED CITY UTILITY USER RATES.             |
|         | (13.20)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2005  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 1.08.020 TO REQUIRE CHIEF              |
|         | PETITIONERS OF A PROSPECTIVE PETITION               |
|         | TO BE REGISTERED VOTERS IN THE CITY                 |
|         | OF WOOD VILLAGE (1.08)                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2005  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 15.04 RELATED TO ADOPTION              |
|         | OF STATE BUILDING CODES. (15.04)                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2005  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE 7-2003              |
|         | ENTITLED “AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE         |
|         | TO THE CITY OWNED WATER AND SEWER UTILITY           |
|         | SERVICES PROVIDED WITHIN THE CITY OF                |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE” TO MODIFY THE FEE REQUIREMENT         |
|         | AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2005  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 5.16 CONCERNING AMUSEMENT              |
|         | DEVICES; LICENSE FEES TO BE SET BY CITY             |
|         | COUNCIL RESOLUTION AND CHANGING PENALTY             |
|         | PROVISIONS. (5.16)                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2006  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM                |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2006-2007, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2006  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 12.08.320 CONCERNING PARK              |
|         | AND RECREATIONAL AREA USE REGULATIONS;              |
|         | CHANGING THE VIOLATION PENALTY. (12.08)             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2006  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW CHAPTER 5.10            |
|         | OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE REGULATING       |
|         | PAYDAY LENDING (5.10)                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2006  | AN ORDINANCE ADDING A NEW CHAPTER 1.06              |
|         | (CODE ENFORCEMENT) TO THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE, AMENDING OTHER PROVISIONS           |
|         | TO CONFORM WITH NEW CHAPTER 1.06, AND               |
|         | REPEALING CERTAIN OUTDATED OR UNNECESSARY           |
|         | PROVISIONS (1.08, 3.08, 3.20, 5.04,                 |
|         | 5.16, 5.20, 8.08, 8.12, 8.24, 9.04,                 |
|         | 9.28, 10.08, 10.12, 10.16, 10.20, 10.24,            |
|         | 12.08, 13.04, 13.08, 13.12, 13.16, 15.04,           |
|         | 15.12, 15.16, 15.20)                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2006  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW CHAPTER 8.20            |
|         | OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE RELATING         |
|         | TO GRAFFITI NUISANCE ABATEMENT (8.20)               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2007  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS.221.770      |
|         | FOR FISCAL YEAR 2007-2008, AUTHORIZING              |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2007  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTION 2.204.030 CONCERNING TIME              |
|         | AND DATE OF REGULAR CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2007  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICPAL CODE: ADOPTING FIRE CODE AND               |
|         | FIRE LIFE SAFETY REGULATIONS FOR THE                |
|         | CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE KNOWN AS THE OREGON            |
|         | FIRE CODE 2007. (8.28)                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2007  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A COMPETITIVE FRANCHISE       |
|         | APPLICATION PROCESS IN CONNECTION WITH              |
|         | ANY FRANCHISE APPLICATION SUBMITTED                 |
|         | PURSUANT TO § 76.41 OF TITLE 47 OF THE              |
|         | CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS AND DECLARING           |
|         | AN EMERGENCY                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2007  | CLAIMS (THIS ORDINANCE WAS NOT ADOPTED-THE          |
|         | ISSUE IS TABLED UNTIL THE NOVEMBER 2008             |
|         | GENERAL ELECTION)                                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2007  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY OF WOOD              |
|         | VILLAGE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS           |
|         | FOR PUBLIC WORKS FACILITIES                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2007  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 12.04 AND             |
|         | 12.08 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL                 |
|         | CODE CONCERNING SIDEWALK, PATHWAY AND               |
|         | CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR, AND ADDING            |
|         | PROVISIONS FOR LIMITING PARK SIDEWALK               |
|         | AND PATHWAY USE AND CLOSURE AUTHORITY               |
|         | (12.04, 12.08)                                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2007  | CRIME INSURANCE COVERAGAE IN LIEU OF                |
|         | SURETY BONDS (2.06)                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2007  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 8.18 OF               |
|         | THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE CONCERNING          |
|         | PROPERTY MAINTENANCE BY AMENDING A PROVISION        |
|         | TO PROHIBIT THE PARKING OF VEHICLES                 |
|         | ON UNPAVED AREAS OF PROPERTIES (8.18)               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2007 | CONCERNING OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE            |
|         | AND DECENCY AND ADOPTING A NEW CHAPTER              |
|         | 9.12 CONCERNING UNREASONABLE NOISES                 |
|         | (9.12)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2007 | AN ORDINANCE ADDING SECTION 13.06 INFLOW            |
|         | AND INFILTRATION REDUCTION PROGRAM TO               |
|         | THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE REQUIRING           |
|         | PROPERTY OWNERS TO MAINTAIN PLUMBING                |
|         | AND BUILDING SEWERS INCLUDING LATERALS              |
|         | SERVING THEIR PROPERTY (13.06)                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2007 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 13.06 RELATED TO THE INFLOW            |
|         | AND INFILTRATION REDUCTION PROGRAM (13.06)          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13-2007 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 8.28.100              |
|         | OF THE FIRE PREVENTION CODE AS IT RELATES           |
|         | TO UNLAWFUL BURNING (8.28)                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 14-2007 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 2.40 OF               |
|         | THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE TO EXTEND           |
|         | THE TIME PERIOD TO 540 DAYS FOR PROCESSING          |
|         | MEASURE 37 CLAIMS THAT WERE FILED AFTER             |
|         | NOVEMBER 1, 2006 PURSUANT TO HB 3546                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2008  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FISCAL YEAR 2008-2009, AUTHORIZING          |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER                            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2008  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 10.08.070             |
|         | OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE CONCERNING       |
|         | THE STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON STREETS,           |
|         | BY ADDING A PROVISION THAT MOTOR VEHICLES           |
|         | MUST BE MOVED AT LEAST 500 FEET. (10.08)            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2009  | ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF WOOD            |
|         | VILLAGE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM OF THE              |
|         | STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS 221.770             |
|         | FOR FISCAL YEAR 2009-2010.                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2009  | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING VERIZON NORTHWEST             |
|         | INC. A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE FOR THE               |
|         | PROVISION OF CABLE COMMUNICATION SERVICES           |
|         | WITHIN THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE.                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2009  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WASTEWATER INDUSTRIAL         |
|         | PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE 4-2003 WHICH                 |
|         | AMENDS ORDINANCE 3-1987 AND WOOD VILLAGE            |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 13.16 SEWAGE                 |
|         | PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. (13.16)                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2009  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE TO ESTABLISH A BUSINESS              |
|         | RECYCLING REQUIREMENT (8.24)                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2009  | ADDING A CHAPTER FOR EMERGENCY OPERATIONS           |
|         | (1.10)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2009  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 1.10 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT              |
|         | ADDING DIRECTION TO FILE DECLARATION                |
|         | WITH APPROPRIATE AUTHORITIES (1.10)                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2009  | CHAPTER 15.04 RELATED TO ADOPTION OF                |
|         | STATE BUILDING CODES. (15.04)                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2009  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING FINDINGS AND AMENDING         |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND                 |
|         | DEVELOPMENT CODE AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2009  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE AS IT RELATES TO ADDING              |
|         | OR REVISING CERTAIN CODE ENFORCEMENT                |
|         | AND PUBLIC NUISANCE STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES        |
|         | (1.06, 8.16, 9.12)                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2009 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY OF WOOD              |
|         | VILLAGE ZONING  DEVELOPMENT COE ADOPTED             |
|         | NOVEMBER 10, 1993 AS AMENDED TO DATE;               |
|         | EXPANDING USES WITHIN THE CITY’S MULTI-RESIDENTIAL  |
|         | ZONES (MR2) AND (MR4) AND TO CREATE                 |
|         | COTTAGE HOUSING PROVISIONS AND DESIGN               |
|         | STANDARDS, SETTING FORTH FINDINGS PERTINENT         |
|         | TO SAID AMENDMENTS                                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2009 | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE               |
|         | GAS UTILITY FRANCHISE TO NORTHWEST NATURAL          |
|         | GAS COMPANY, AND FIXING TERMS, CONDITIONS           |
|         | AND COMPENSATION OF SUCH FRANCHISE                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2010  | AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING A CHANGE IN                |
|         | CONTROL OF THE GRANTEE AND OF THE CABLE             |
|         | FRANCHISE HELD BY VERIZON NORTHWEST,                |
|         | INC. TO FRONTIER COMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2010  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2010-2011, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER                            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2010  | AN ORDINANCE DECLARING THAT BLIGHTED                |
|         | AREAS EXIST IN THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE,            |
|         | OREGON, ESTABLISHING THE NEED FOR AN                |
|         | URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY IN THE CITY AND                |
|         | ELECTING A METHOD FOR EXERCISE OF THE               |
|         | POWERS OF AN URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY WITHIN            |
|         | THE CITY                                            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2010  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MUNICIPAL CODE                |
|         | SECTION 1.06 ADDING PROVISIONS FOR CIVIL            |
|         | VIOLATIONS AND PROCEDURES                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2010  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE WOOD VILLAGE CITY               |
|         | COUNCIL INCREASING THE MEMBERSHIP IN                |
|         | THE PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION                 |
|         | (2.20)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2010  | ORDINANCE 6-2010:  AN ORDINANCE MAKING              |
|         | CERTAIN DETERMINATIONS AND FINDINGS                 |
|         | RELATING TO AND APPROVING THE WOOD VILLAGE          |
|         | URBAN RENEWAL PLAN (2.38, 8.16)                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2010  | ORDINANCE 7-2010:  AN ORDINANCE AMENDING            |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION                 |
|         | 8.16.200(A)(14) DELETING “BEES, BEEHIVES,           |
|         | AND COLONIES.”                                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2010  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.08 ALARM SYSTEM (8.08)               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2010  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE WOOD VILLAGE CITY               |
|         | COUNCIL REVISING MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER             |
|         | 8.28 FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY (8.28)                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2010 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MUNICIPAL CODE                |
|         | SECTION 12.08.150 ADDING A PROVISION                |
|         | TO ALLOW ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN THE                 |
|         | PARK FOR CITY-SPONSORED EVENTS (12.08)              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2010 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MUNICIPAL CODE                |
|         | SECTION 13.04.240 CLARIFYING WHEN UTILITY           |
|         | PAYMENTS ARE ASSESSED A LATE FEE (13.04)            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2010 | AN ORDINANCE OF THE WOOD VILLAGE CITY               |
|         | COUNCIL ESTABLISHING A RIGHT-OF-WAY                 |
|         | ENCROACHMENT ORDINANCE (12.06)                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13-2010 | AN ORDINANCE OF THE WOOD VILLAGE CITY               |
|         | COUNCIL REVISING THE NON-CONFORMING                 |
|         | USE SECTION 640                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 14-2010 | AN ORDINANCE OF THE WOOD VILLAGE CITY               |
|         | COUNCIL ESTABLISHING UNEXCUSED ABSENCE              |
|         | LIMITS FOR CITY COMMISSIONERS (2.20,                |
|         | 2.24)                                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 15-2010 | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING FINDINGS AND AMENDING         |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND                 |
|         | DEVELOPMENT CODE                                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2011  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011-2012, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE BY ADDING NEW SECTION                |
|         | 13.26 ILLICIT STORMWATER DISCHARGE AND              |
|         | CONNECTIONS                                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE BY ADDING SECTION 15.26              |
|         | ENTITLED POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER               |
|         | RUNOFF CONTROL (15.24)                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING VILLAGE MUNICIPAL             |
|         | CODE SECTION 15.16.060 PERTAINING TO                |
|         | MOBILE HOME PARKS (15.16)                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE AS IT RELATES TO RESIDENTIAL         |
|         | RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION AND LICENSING            |
|         | AND ADDING OR REVISING CERTAIN STANDARDS            |
|         | AND PROVISIONS (5.20, 8.16, 8.18, 8.22)             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 2.04 TO PROVIDE FOR ADOPTION           |
|         | OF CITY COUNCIL RULES OF PROCEDURE BY               |
|         | RESOLUTION (2.04)                                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES FOR              |
|         | TALL GRASS                                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2011  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 8.16 AND ADDING CHAPTER                |
|         | 6.06 TO PROVIDE FOR THE KEEPING OF CHICKENS         |
|         | (6.06)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2011  | AN ORDINANCE REPEALING SECTION 8.18.050             |
|         | (7) OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2011 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT      |
|         | CODE CHAPTERS 370.020; 370.030 E; AND               |
|         | 720.030 DEFINITIONS; TO PROVIDE FOR                 |
|         | MODIFICATIONS TO ENABLE THE USE OF ELECTRONIC       |
|         | MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER IN DESIGNATED                |
|         | AREAS.                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2011 | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING FINDINGS AND AMENDING         |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE             |
|         | AMENDING AND READOPTING PORTIONS OF                 |
|         | CHAPTER 13.12 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL         |
|         | CODE SPECIFICALLY PROVIDING FOR CREDIT              |
|         | FOR WATER NOT RETURNED TO THE SANITARY              |
|         | SEWER SYSTEM (13.12)                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2012  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2012-2013, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2012  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE STORM WATER               |
|         | FACILITY PLAN, REPEALING ALL PRIOR PLANS            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2012  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 10.12 PROVIDING FOR THE                |
|         | CREATION OF PERMIT PARKING AREAS, FEES              |
|         | AND ENFORCEMENT (10.12, 15.04)                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2012  | AN ORDINANCE ADDING SECTION 12.08.155               |
|         | TO THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE PROHIBITING      |
|         | THE SMOKING OR USE OF TOBACCO IN PARKS              |
|         | OR AT THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING GROUNDS                |
|         | (12.08)                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2012  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | SECTION 430, 450 AND 630 OF THE WOOD                |
|         | VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT CODE REGARDING WATER            |
|         | QUALITY RESOURCE PROTECTION                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2012  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE UPDATED TRANSPORTATION    |
|         | SYSTEM PLAN AND AMENDING AND READOPTING             |
|         | THE TRANSPORTATION GOAL SECTION OF THE              |
|         | COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR THE CITY OF WOOD             |
|         | VILLAGE                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2012  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | SECTIONS OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING                 |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE, REPEALING SECTIONS            |
|         | IN CONFLICT, AND PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION         |
|         | OF THE MODIFICATIONS                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2012  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE TO INCLUDE              |
|         | LIMITED CONDITIONAL USES FOR INDUSTRIAL             |
|         | SERVICE IN THE ZONE                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2012  | AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A TRANSPORTATION          |
|         | AND STORMWATER UTILITY FEE (13.30)                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2012 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REVISING SECTION          |
|         | 13.04, AND 13.12 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE                |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE ENABLING MONTHLY UTILITY             |
|         | BILLING (13.04, 13.08, 13.12)                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2012 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REENACTING                |
|         | CHAPTER 13.20 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL         |
|         | CODE CONCERNING RETIRED CITIZEN DISCOUNT            |
|         | RATES (13.20)                                       |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2012 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REENACTING                |
|         | CHAPTER 13.16 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL         |
|         | CODE CONCERNING SEWAGE PRETREATMENT                 |
|         | REQUIREMENTS (13.16)                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2013  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013-2014, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTIONS 13.04.240 AND 13.12.080               |
|         | PROVIDING FOR DELINQUENCIES AND SHUT                |
|         | OFF FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICES (13.04,            |
|         | 13.12)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 15.04 RELATED TO ADOPTION              |
|         | OF STATE BUILDING CODES                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 10.12.030 FOR THE PURPOSE              |
|         | OF PROHIBITING SLEEPING, CAMPING OR                 |
|         | LIVING IN VEHICLES PARKED ON THE STREET             |
|         | OR PUBLIC PLACES (10.12)                            |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE SECTIONS 8.24.090 PROVIDING FOR                |
|         | THE TERM OF SOLID WASTE LICENSE AGREEMENTS          |
|         | (8.24)                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE TO AMEND                |
|         | AND LIMIT CONDITIONAL USES FOR INDUSTRIAL           |
|         | SERVICE IN THE COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL                |
|         | ZONE                                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL        |
|         | CODE CHAPTER 1.10.050 REMOVING THE PROHIBITION      |
|         | OF CARRYING, SELLING OR POSSESSION OF               |
|         | WEAPONS DURING AN EMERGENCY (1.10)                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE TRANSPORTATION            |
|         | SYSTEM PLAN DATED MAY 2012, MODIFYING               |
|         | THE TEMPLATE FOR ARATA ROAD                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2013  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REENACTING                |
|         | SECTIONS 710.210 AND SECTIONS 710.240               |
|         | OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT          |
|         | CODE AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE                 |
|         | DATE                                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2014  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014-2015, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2014  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING FINDINGS AND AMENDING         |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE             |
|         | AMENDING AND READOPTING PORTIONS OF                 |
|         | CHAPTER 13.04 and 13.30 OF THE WOOD                 |
|         | VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE SPECIFICALLY                 |
|         | PROVIDING BACK BILLING LIMITATIONS AND              |
|         | CREDIT/REBATE LIMITATIONS. (13.04, 13.30)           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2014  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE            |
|         | DECLARING A MORATORIUM ON MEDICAL MARIJUANA         |
|         | FACILITIES                                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2014  | AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO                |
|         | PORTLAND GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY TO                |
|         | PROVIDE ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER SERVICE            |
|         | WITHIN THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2014  | NOT ADOPTED: AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT                 |
|         | CODE TO MODIFY THE REQUIREMENTS FOR                 |
|         | NON-RETAIL USES IN THE ZONE; RETAINING              |
|         | LIMITATIONS FOR LARGE STORE RETAIL IN               |
|         | EXCESS OF 60,000 SQUARE FEET                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2015  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REVISING THE              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT                 |
|         | CODE TO PERMIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES       |
|         | AND RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA SALES AS                 |
|         | A CONDITIONAL USE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD               |
|         | COMMERCIAL ZONE                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2015  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ADOPTING               |
|         | SEGMENTS OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL              |
|         | CODE DEALING WITH PARKS (12.08)                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2015  | NOT ADOPTED AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY                |
|         | OF WOOD VILLAGE DECLARING A BAN ON THE              |
|         | SALE OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA BY MEDICAL           |
|         | MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES, AND DECLARING               |
|         | AN EMERGENCY                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2015  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ADOPTING               |
|         | SEGMENTS OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL              |
|         | CODE DEALING WITH ADMINISTRATION OF                 |
|         | THE CITY, NAMED OFFICIALS, AND CERTAIN              |
|         | COMMITTEE STRUCTURES. (2.06, 2.24)                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2016  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ADOPTING               |
|         | SEGMENTS OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING                 |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE PROVIDING FOR ACCOMMODATION    |
|         | OF MARIJUANA PERMIT CATEGORIES                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2016  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2016-2017, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2016  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | PORTIONS OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING                 |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE, SPECIFICALLY PORTIONS         |
|         | OF CHAPTER 235 OF THE SUBJECT CODE PERTAINING       |
|         | TO THE TOWN CENTER.                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2016  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE            |
|         | IMPOSING A THREE PERCENT (3%) TAX ON                |
|         | THE SALE OF MARIJUANA ITEMS BY A MARIJUANA          |
|         | RETAILER AND REFERRING ORDINANCE (3.22)             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2016  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | MUNICIPAL CODE FOR NUISANCE, NOISE,                 |
|         | AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE PROVISIONS                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2016  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | CHAPTER 3.16 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL          |
|         | CODE PERTAINING TO SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT               |
|         | CHARGES                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2016  | AN ORDINANCE MODIFYING THE WASTE WATER              |
|         | DISCHARGE LIMIT                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2017  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE            |
|         | AMENDING ORDINANCE NUMBER 4-2016 INSERTING          |
|         | SECTIONS 3.22.040 AUTHORIZING INTEREST              |
|         | AND PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX                |
|         | AUTHORIZED BY VOTERS. (3.22)                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2017  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017-2018, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2017  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF               |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE ADOPTING FINDINGS          |
|         | AND AMENDING AND READOPTING THE COMPREHENSIVE       |
|         | PLAN FOR THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE.                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2017  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | CHAPTER 370 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING              |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE REGULATING SIGNS               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 5-2017  | AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF               |
|         | THE CITY OF WOOD VILLAGE ADOPTING FINDINGS          |
|         | AND AMENDING AND READOPTING THE IDENTIFIED          |
|         | SEGMENTS OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING                 |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE AND ADOPTING A                 |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE VISION STATEMENT, VISION               |
|         | 2030.                                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 6-2017  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE UPDATED TRANSPORTATION    |
|         | SYSTEM PLAN, ESTABLISHING ROADWAY AND               |
|         | TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM PRIORITIES FOR                |
|         | ALL MODES, AND ADOPTING PERFORMANCE                 |
|         | MEASUREMENTS                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 7-2017  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | CHAPTER 370 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING              |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE REGULATING SIGNS               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 8-2017  | AN ORDINANCE REVISING AND REENACTING                |
|         | PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 13 OF THE WOOD                |
|         | VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE REGULATING SANITARY          |
|         | SEWER. (13.08, 13.12)                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 9-2017  | AN ORDINANCE ADDING SECTION 13.04.237               |
|         | TO THE WOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE ENABLING         |
|         | A WATER LEAK POLICY (13.04)                         |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 10-2017 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP FOR THE CITY             |
|         | OF WOOD VILLAGE                                     |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 11-2017 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | THE ZONING MAP FOR THE CITY OF WOOD                 |
|         | VILLAGE                                             |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 12-2017 | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND READOPTING                |
|         | THE PARKING STANDARDS FOR RESTAURANT                |
|         | USES                                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 13-2017 | AN ORDINANCE CREATING SECTION 345 OF                |
|         | THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT             |
|         | CODE PROVIDING FOR MOBILE FOOD UNITS                |
|         | AND FOOD PODS, AND AMENDING USE TABLES              |
|         | THROUGHOUT THE CODE                                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2018  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018-2019, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO RECEIVE             |
|         | STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                           |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2018  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOOD VILLAGE              |
|         | COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND CREATING SECTION             |
|         | 425 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT      |
|         | CODE PROVIDING FOR FLOODPLAIN HAZARD                |
|         | AREAS                                               |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2018  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 720.030               |
|         | and 230.310 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE ZONING              |
|         | AND DEVELOPMENT CODE PROVIDING FOR DEFINITION       |
|         | OF MULTIFAMILY AND ESTABLISHING STANDARDS           |
|         | FOR MIXED USE IN NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL            |
|         | ZONING                                              |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2019  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2019-2020, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | THE CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO                 |
|         | RECEIVE STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2019  | NOT ADOPTED - AN ORDINANCE BANNING SINGLE           |
|         | USE PLASTIC BAGS                                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2019  | AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A MANDATORY COMMERCIAL        |
|         | FOOD WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM (8.24)                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2019  | AN ORDINANCE UPDATING THE BUILDING PERMIT           |
|         | FEE SCHEDULE, AND STATING AN EFFECTIVE              |
|         | DATE                                                |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 1-2020  | AN ORDINANCE ACCEPTING FOR THE CITY OF              |
|         | WOOD VILLAGE THE REVENUE SHARING PROGRAM            |
|         | OF THE STATE OF OREGON PURSUANT TO ORS              |
|         | 221.770 FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020-2021, AUTHORIZING      |
|         | THE CITY TO COMPLY THEREWITH AND TO                 |
|         | RECEIVE STATE REVENUE THEREUNDER.                   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 2-2020  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTIONS 260, 310.020,        |
|         | 395.020 AND 720.030 OF THE WOOD VILLAGE             |
|         | ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE ESTABLISHING            |
|         | USES AND STANDARDS FOR THE OPEN SPACE               |
|         | (OS) ZONE, PROVIDING FOR A NEW SHORT                |
|         | TERM RENTAL USE, AMENDING THE STANDARDS             |
|         | FOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (STATE                 |
|         | MANDATED).                                          |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 3-2020  | AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTIONS 2.20.020             |
|         | AND 2.24.030 ESTABLISHING ADDITIONAL                |
|         | QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE                |
|         | PARKS COMMISSION AND PLANNING COMMISSION.           |
|         | (2.20, 2.24)                                        |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| 4-2020  | Adds § 710.260; amends §§ 230.310, 380.010,         |
|         | 380.020, and 380.030; amends and renumbers          |
|         | § 710.260 to 710.270, automotive and                |
|         | temporary uses                                      |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------+


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wood Village Development Code

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Section 100 GENERAL PROVISIONS & ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ENFORCEMENT

General Provisions

100.010 Title.
The official name of this document is the Wood Village Zoning and Development Code. It may be referred to as the "Zoning Code" or "this Code".

100.020 Purpose.
The Zoning Code is intended to set forth and coordinate City regulations regarding the use and development of land. It is further intended to:
A. serve as the principle means to implement the Wood Village Comprehensive Plan.
B. protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Wood Village.
C. provide for appropriate and prompt review of development and use proposals.
D. satisfy relevant federal law, state law, goals and administrative rules and regional government law, provided however, except where case law prohibits, when state law specifically authorizes uses that may be in conflict with federal law, the state provisions shall be acknowledged.

100.030 Scope and Compliance.
Any building, structure or land shall hereafter be used, possessed or occupied and any building, structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected, reconstructed, moved or altered only in accordance with the provisions of this Code and other applicable City ordinances and regulations. The requirements of this Code apply to the property owner(s), the person(s) undertaking a development, the user(s) of a building, structure or development, and to their successors in interest.

100.040 Consistency with Plan and Law.
Actions initiated under this Code shall be consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Wood Village, with applicable law, and the regulations of the Federal, State and Regional governments as these plans, laws or regulations may now or hereafter provide or require, provided however, except where case law prohibits, when state law specifically authorizes uses that may be in conflict with federal law, the state provisions shall be acknowledged.
Since the Wood Village Comprehensive Plan has been acknowledged by the State of Oregon as being in compliance with the Statewide Goals, any action taken in conformance with this Code shall be deemed also in compliance with Statewide Goals and the Comprehensive Plan. Unless otherwise stated in this Code, specific findings demonstrating compliance with the Comprehensive Plan are not required for land use or development application approval. This provision does not however, relieve the applicant or proponent of a use or development of the burden of responding to allegations that the action requested does not conform to one or more Comprehensive Plan policies.

100.050 Severability.
The provisions of this Code are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, that portion shall be considered severed. The decision shall in no way affect the validity of the remainder of the Zoning Code.

100.060 Interpretation.
The rules of this section apply to this Title and any conditions of a land use approval granted under this Title.
A. Reading and Applying the Code. Literal readings of the code language will be used. Regulations are no more or less strict than as stated. Applications of the regulations that are consistent with the rules of this section are non-discretionary actions of the City Administrator to implement the code. The action of the City Administrator is final.
B. Ambiguous or Unclear Language. Where the language is ambiguous or unclear, the Planning Commission may issue a statement of clarification processed through a Type III procedure, or initiate an amendment to this code.
C. Situations Where the Code is Silent. Proposals for uses where the code is silent or where the rules of this section do not provide a basis for concluding that the use is allowed are prohibited. The Planning Commission may initiate an amendment to this Code to add a new use category.
D. Terms. 
    (1) Defining Words. Words used in the zoning code have their dictionary meaning unless they are listed in Section 720.030 - Definitions. Words listed in that section have the specific meaning stated, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.
    (2) Tenses and Usage. 
        (a) Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true.
        (b) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true.
        (c) The words 'must', 'will', and 'may not' are mandatory.
        (d) 'May' is permissive.
        (e) 'Prohibited' means that an adjustment, conditional use, or other land use review may not be requested in order to allow an exception to the regulation in question. This does not preclude requests for zone changes or Comprehensive Plan map amendments.
    (3) Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following conjunctions have the following meanings:
        (a) "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply;
        (b) "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in combination;
        (c) "Either...or" indicates that the connected items or provisions apply singly, but not in combination.
    (4) Lists. Lists of items that state "including the following," "such as," or similar language are not limited to just those items. The lists are intended to provide examples, but not to be exhaustive of all possibilities.
E. Hierarchy of Regulations. 
    (1) Different Levels of Regulations. In general, an area with base zoning and overlay zoning, is subject to all of the regulations of each. When the regulations conflict, unless specifically indicated otherwise, the regulations in an overlay zone supersede regulations in base zones.
    (2) Regulations at the Same Level. When regulations at the same level conflict, those that are more specific to the situation apply. When the regulations are equally specific or when it is unclear which regulation to apply, the most restrictive applies. Regulations at the same level include such situations as two different standards in a base zone or regulations from separate sections of the Additional Regulations sections.
    (3) Figures, Tables, and Maps. Where there are differences of meaning between code text and figures or tables, the code text controls. Where there are differences between code text and maps, the maps control.
F. Applying the Code to Specific Situations. Generally, where the code cannot list every situation or be totally definitive, it provides guidance through the use of descriptions and examples. In situations where the code provides this guidance, the descriptions and examples are used to determine the applicable regulations for the situation. If the code regulations, descriptions, and examples do not provide adequate guidance to clearly address a specific situation, the stated intent of the regulation and its relationship to other regulations and situations are considered.
G. Determining whether a land use request is quasi-judicial or legislative. Quasi-judicial and legislative are terms describing two different types of land use actions. In general, legislative actions involve the adoption of law or policy applicable Citywide or to a broad geographical area of the City. Quasi-judicial actions involve the application of existing law or policy to a small area or a specific factual situation. There are different legal requirements for the processing of these two types of actions. In general, quasi-judicial actions require greater notice and procedural protections than do legislative actions. If there are questions as to whether
a specific request for a land use review is quasi-judicial or legislative, the decision will be made by the City Attorney. The decision will be based on current law and legal precedent. Requests for decisions on this issue must be in writing and must be filed with the City Administrator who will forward the request to the City Attorney.

100.070 When Land Use Application Permits Are Not Required.
Activities and development listed below are excluded from the requirement for a land use application, but are, nevertheless, subject to the provisions of the Code where applicable:
A. Detached single family dwelling, except manufactured homes.
B. Residential accessory structures and additions to residential structures.
C. Landscaping and routine property maintenance.
D. A change internal to a building or other structure or usage of land that does not constitute a change of use.
E. A change in use to another use category allowed in the zone.
F. An emergency measure necessary for the safety or protection of property when authorized by the City Administrator and Mayor with written notice to the City Council.
G. Any temporary use of land of up to a 14-day duration (such as a promotional event, festival, carnival, or outdoor sale) which conforms with all other requirements of this Code and other applicable city regulations and public health and safety requirements, some of which may further limit such uses in terms of location, scope, and duration.
H. The establishment, construction, alteration, or maintenance of a public facility authorized by the Director of Public Works including streets, highways, traffic control devices, drainage ways, sanitary and storm sewers, pump stations, water lines, electrical power or gas distribution lines, or telephone or television cable systems. This includes construction of staging areas of less than a six month duration, but does not include major substations, treatment facilities, storage tanks, reservoirs, and towers.
I. Excavation and fill for foundations and all other excavations or filling of land involving 50 cubic yards or less which does not adversely affect drainage patterns and is not located within a floodplain or slope area.
J. The following transportation facilities, services and improvements need not be subject to land use regulations except as necessary to implement the Wood Village Transportation System Plan (TSP) and, under ordinary circumstances do not have a significant impact on land use:
    (1) Operation, maintenance and repair of existing transportation facilities identified in the TSP, such as roads, bicycle, pedestrian, airport and rail facilities, and major regional pipelines and terminals;
    (2) Dedication of right-of-way, authorization of construction and the construction of facilities and improvements, where the improvements are consistent with clear and objective dimensional standards;
    (3) Uses permitted outright under ORS 215.213(1)(m) through  (p) and 215.283(1)(k) through (n), consistent with the provision of OAR 660-12-065; and
    (4) Changes in the frequency of transit, rail and airport services.

100.075 When Land Use Applications Are Required.
A. Except as excluded by 100.070 no person shall engage in or cause to occur a development for which a land use application has not been approved.
B. Whenever this Code requires a land use application, no other permit issued by the City shall be approved until the land use application has first been approved by the City Administrator or Planning Commission.
C. Land use applications shall be approved by the City Administrator, the Planning Commission, or the City Council pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
D. No action may be taken in reliance upon a decision approving a land use application until all applicable appeal periods have expired or while an appeal to City Council is pending. However the action allowed by the decision may be initiated if:
    (1) There were no objections to the decision or if all objections were resolved at a hearing or in writing prior to the hearing; and
    (2) The applicant has executed a release and indemnity agreement in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney which protects the City from all claims of the applicant resulting from the approval of the land use application or issuance of a building permit.
E. All land use approvals shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless:
    (1) Substantial construction or operation of the development has begun within that time and has continued toward final completion; or
    (2) Development proceeds in accordance with an approved phasing plan; or
    (3) An extension has been granted by the Planning Commission upon request of the applicant.
    (4) Stated otherwise in a specific section of this Code.
F. Requests for extension must be filed with the City Administrator prior to the expiration date of the original approval or subsequent extension. No single extension of time shall exceed a one (1) year period. Extension of time shall not be approved where the effect of doing so would violate any provisions of this Code including any amendments made following the effective expiration date. In no instance shall the extension(s) of time exceed a total of 36 months from the effective date of project approval.

100.080 Building Permit Required.
Building permits shall be required within the boundaries of the area affected by this Code for the erection or the alteration of all structures or land uses.

100.090 Design Review Required.
All new development and changes to existing development, except detached single family dwellings in LR zones, are subject to Design Review as described in Section 630.

100.100 Land Use Review Required.
All new development and uses and changes to existing uses which do not comply with all applicable use and development standards are subject to a land use review as described in Sections 500 and 600.

100.110 Fees.
The City Council shall establish application and review fees and fee policies by separate resolution for the performance of the actions and reviews required by this Code.

100.120 Validity of Prior Approval.
A. The following actions initiated prior to the adoption of this Code, or prior to the adoption of any amendment which would otherwise restrict the activity, may be continued and completed according to prior approvals granted by the City and in accordance with requirements in effect at the time approval was granted:
    (1) Completion of any construction activity for which a building permit has been issued provided that such work continues to be in conformance with the requirements under which it was issued. Such work shall progress in a timely manner and not be discontinued for a period of more than one year after which time a new land use application shall be required.
    (2) Completion of final subdivision plat, final manufactured home park plan, and final PUD plan for which preliminary or interim approval has been granted, provided such plats and plans are submitted within one year of previous approval or are submitted in accordance with a previously approved phasing plan under which construction has begun and has progressed in a timely manner on at least one phase.
    (3) Construction of any subdivision, PUD, or manufactured home park, which: i) has received final approval (provided that such work is commenced within one year of final approval and is completed within two years of final approval); or ii) wherein substantial construction activity has not been discontinued for more than 24 consecutive months.
    (4) Construction of any structure or facility for which a Conditional Use Permit, Variance, or Design Review approval has been granted provided such work is begun within one year of approval and is completed within two years of approval.
B. Extension of time under Sections (1)-(4) above may be granted by the Planning Commission for up to two additional years provided there are no requirements in effect which would otherwise restrict project development and provided further that no extensions shall be granted which extend beyond 36 months from the effective date of project approval.

100.130 Official Action.
All officials, departments, and employees of the City vested with authority to issue permits, certificates, or licenses shall adhere to and require conformance with the zoning regulations.

100.140 Certificate of Occupancy.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any new building or premises until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the designated building official stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, this Code, and any other City conditions attached to the development or use of the building or land.

Enforcement

100.200 General.
It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to enforce the provisions of this Code. The term “this Code”, means not only the provisions expressed herein but also the conditions or terms of any permit, certificate, license or approval granted pursuant to this Code. The City Administrator may use the resources of any City department to assist in carrying out the City’s responsibilities under this section.

100.210 Official Action.
All officials, departments and employees of the City vested with authority to issue permits, certificates, licenses, or grant approvals, shall adhere to and require conformance with this Code and shall issue no permit, certificate, license or grant approval for any use, building or purpose which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed by this Code. Any permit, certificate, license or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this Code, intentionally or otherwise, shall be void.

100.220 Inspection and Right of Entry.
Whenever they shall have reasonable cause to suspect a violation of any provision of this Code, or when necessary to investigate an application for or revocation of any approval under any of the procedures prescribed in this Code, officials responsible for enforcement or administration of this Code, or their duly authorized representatives, may enter on any site or structure for the purpose of investigation, provided they shall do so in a reasonable manner. No premises shall be entered without first attempting to obtain the consent of the owner or occupant. If consent cannot be obtained, the responsible official shall secure a search warrant from the court of competent jurisdiction before further attempts to gain entry and shall have recourse to every other remedy provided by law to secure entry.

100.230 Abatement.
Any use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged, painted, or maintained contrary to this Code shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated as provided in Wood Village Municipal Code Section 8.18.120 – 8.18.160.

100.240 Injunctive Relief.
Upon request of the City Council, the City Attorney may institute a suit in equity in the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon to enjoin the maintenance of any use, occupation, building or structure or any activity being conducted or proposed to be conducted in violation of any provision of this Code.

100.250 Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating, or causing the violation of any provision of this Code or of any permit or approval issued pursuant to this Code, commits a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Code. (Ord. 4-2006 § 24)

100.260 Evidence.
Proof of a violation of this Code shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such violation is that of the owner of the property upon which the unlawful activity, use, condition, or structure exists. Prosecution or lack thereof of the owner of the property, the occupant, or other person in possession or control of property shall not be deemed to relieve any other responsible person.

100.270 Cumulative Remedies.
The right, remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and not mutually exclusive and are in addition to any other rights, remedies and penalties available to the City under any other ordinance or law.

Section 200 ZONING DISTRICTS
            LIST OF ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 210  LIGHT RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION 220  MULTI-RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION 230  COMMERCIAL ZONES & DESIGN GUIDELINES
SECTION 235  TOWN CENTER ZONE
SECTION 240  MANUFACTURING ZONES
SECTION 250  COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL MIXED USE ZONE
SECTION 260  OPEN SPACE ZONE

List of Zoning Districts

200.100 List of Zones.
All areas within the City of Wood Village are divided into the following zoning districts. The full name and map symbol is indicated below:
+---------------------------------+------------+
|          District Name          | Map Symbol |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Light Residential - 12,000      | LR12       |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Light Residential - 7,500       | LR7.5      |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Multi Residential - 4,000       | MR4        |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Multi Residential - 2,000       | MR2        |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Neighborhood Commercial         | NC         |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Town Center                     | TC         |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Light Manufacturing             | LM         |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| General Manufacturing           | GM         |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Commercial/Industrial Mixed Use | C/I        |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Overlays                        |            |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Aircraft Landing Overlay        | a          |
+---------------------------------+------------+
| Soil Constraint Overlay         | s          |
+---------------------------------+------------+

Section 210 Light Residential Zones

General Provisions

210.100 Purpose.
The light residential zones are intended to preserve land primarily for individual households in a low density residential neighborhood environment. While some non- household living uses are allowed, they are regulated such that the overall character of the zones is not sacrificed.

210.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this chapter state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. The official zoning map indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below.

Use Regulations

210.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the light residential zones are shown in Table 210-1 by the letter "Y". Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 210-1 with the letters "CU". These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 210-1 with the letter "N" are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses & development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in article 640 Nonconforming situations.

210.210 Accessory Uses.
Uses which are accessory to the permitted or conditional uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 - Use Categories. Detached radio and television antenna and towers for non-commercial use are a conditional accessory use in light residential zones subject to conditional use review.
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
|                                      | LR 12 | LR 7.5 |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY                 |       |        |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Household Living                     | Y     | Y      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Group Living                         | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES                |       |        |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Retail Sales and Service             | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Marijuana Sales other than Medical   | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Office                               | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Quick Vehicle Servicing              | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Vehicle Repair                       | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Self-Service Storage                 | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Commercial Recreation                | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Major Event Entertainment            | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES                |       |        |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Manufacturing and Production         | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Warehouse and Freight Movement       | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Wholesale Sales                      | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Industrial Service                   | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Waste Related                        | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Marijuana Processor                  | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Marijuana Wholesaler                 | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Marijuana Producer                   | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES             |       |        |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Basic Utilities                      | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Community Service                    | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Parks and Open Space                 | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Schools                              | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Colleges                             | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Medical Centers                      | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Medical Marijuana Dispensary         | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Religious Institutions               | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Daycare                              | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Essential Service Provider           | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| OTHER CATEGORIES                     |       |        |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Detention Facilities                 | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Mining                               | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities    | N     | N      |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
| Railroad Lines and Utility Corridors | CU    | CU     |
+--------------------------------------+-------+--------+
Y = Yes, Permitted Use, CU = Conditional Use Review Required
N = No, Prohibited Use, L = Permitted, but Subject to Limitations

Development Standards

210.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design which will ensure that new land divisions and development will:
- Maintain the character of the built-up area through required dimensional standards.
- Provide for needed privacy.
- Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection and access for fire fighting.
- Maintain and enhance the building scale & relationship between structures of the existing built-up area.
- Provide adequate flexibility to allow development which is compatible with the existing neighborhood, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity.

210.310 Housing Types Allowed.
 Housing types are limited in the light residential zones in order to maintain and enhance the overall character of single dwelling neighborhoods. The housing types allowed are shown in Table 210-2, along with references to the additional regulations which are stated in Section 300.

210.320 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
 The minimum lot size and dimensions are shown in Table 210-3. All new lots created must comply with these standards. Lots larger than the minimum may not be divided without appropriate land use review if any of the resulting lots fail to meet the minimum standards. [See Section 300 for regulations which apply to Flag Lots, Partitions and Subdivision, and Planned Unit Developments.]
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
|                          |  LR 12  | LR 7.5  |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Detached House           | Y       | Y       |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Attached House           | N       | N       |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Duplex                   | N       | N       |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Manufactured Home        | Y       | Y       |
| (See Section 340.010)    |         |         |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Manufactured Home Park   | N       | N       |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Multi-Dwelling Structure | Only in Planned   |
|                          | Unit Development  |
|                          | (See Section 360) |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+
| Accessory Dwelling Unit  | Y       | Y       |
| (See Section 395)        |         |         |
+--------------------------+---------+---------+

Zone standards
|                 Standard                 |    LR 12     |   LR 7.5    |
|Min. lot area                          | 12,000 sq ft | 7,500 sq ft |
|Min. lot width                         | 80 ft        | 60 ft       |
|Min. lot depth                         | 120 ft       | 100 ft      |
| (See 210.320)                            |              |             |
| Minimum Number of Dwellings Per net acre | .9 (25%)     | 4.6 (80%)   |
| Maximum Height                           | 35 ft        | 35 ft       |
| (See 210.340)                            |              |             |
| Minimum Setbacks                         |              |             |
| – Front setback                          | 30 ft (1)    | 20 ft (1)   |
| – Garage setback (1)                     | 22 ft        | 22 ft       |
| – Side setback                           | 10 ft        | 5 ft        |
| – Rear setback                           | 30 ft        | 25 ft       |
| Corner lots                              |              |             |
| – Front setback                          | 20 ft        | 10 ft       |
| – Street side setback                    | 20 ft        | 10 ft       |
| – Side setback                           | 10 ft        | 10 ft       |
| – Rear setback                           | 30 ft        | 25 ft       |
| (See 210.330)                            |              |             |
| Maximum Site Coverage                    | 35%          | 40%         |
| (See 210.350)                            |              |             |
(1) Garages shall not be closer to the street than the plane of the street-facing façade. Porches shall be considered as part of the street-facing façade.

210.330 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 210-3.
B. Corner Lots. The minimum setback for front, side and rear yards for corner lots is stated in Table 210-3. For the purposes of this regulation, the property owner or developer can designate either street as the front yard with the opposite side designated as the rear yard.
C. Extensions into required building setbacks.
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, open fire escapes, bay windows up to 12 feet in length, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required front building setback by no more than 5' and into a side setback or rear building setback no more than 2 ½ feet.
    (2) Projections Not Allowed. Attached mechanical structures such as heat pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps may not project into any building setback.
    (3) Exceptions to required building setbacks. If a front building setback on an abutting lot to the subject site has been established, the setback will be:
        (a) The average of the setbacks to the existing primary buildings on the abutting lots on either side if both lots are occupied; or
        (b) If only one abutting lot is occupied, the setback shall be the distance to the existing primary building on the abutting lot plus one half the remaining distance to the required setback for the zone.

210.340 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 210-3.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height. 
    (1) Projections allowed. Projections extending vertically from permitted buildings and uses such as skylights, chimneys, small-scale residential energy equipment, and radio and television aerials may be erected above the height limitations herein prescribed. Such structures shall not project more than 5 feet above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility poles are exempt from the height limit.

210.350 Site Coverage.
A. Building Coverage. The maximum combined building coverage on a site for all covered structures is stated in Table 210-3.
B. Hard Surface Coverage. The maximum front or rear yard area which may be in hard surface is 40%.

210.360 Accessory Structures.
Structures which are incidental to the primary building such as garages, greenhouses, decks, wood sheds, porches, small-scale residential energy equipment, and recreational structures are considered accessory structures. These structures are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
1. Attached Accessory Structures. If attached to the primary building or separated by a breezeway, accessory structures shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks of the primary building. These standards are stated in Table 210-3.
2. Detached Accessory Structures. If detached and located behind the rear-most line of the main building, or a minimum of 50 feet from the front lot line, whichever is greater, any structure in compliance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code for residential may be located adjacent to or on the rear and/or side lot line not fronting on a street.

210.370 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences, and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to 3 ½ feet are allowed in the required front building setback and in the required side building set back to the depth of the required front setback.
    (2) Fences up to 6 feet are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks, except for corner lot side setback which is limited to 3 ½ feet.

210.380 Additional Regulations.
A. Accessory Home Occupations. See Section 310.
B. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
C. Design Review. Design review is required for all uses and developments except for single-family detached dwellings in light residential zones. See Section 630.
    (1) Design Review is required for garages and storage buildings whether attached or detached.
D. Parking and Loading. See Section 350.
E. Planned Unit Development. See Section 360.
F. Public Access. All lots in the district shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before construction shall be permitted.
G. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum lot or setback requirements of the zone.
H. Signs. See Section 370.

Section 220 Multi-Residential Zones

General Provisions

220.100 Purpose.
The multi-residential zones are intended to preserve land primarily for multi- dwelling housing in a higher-density residential neighborhood environment. While some non-household living uses are allowed, they are regulated such that the overall character of the zones is not sacrificed.

220.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this chapter state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. The official zoning map indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below.

Use Regulations

220.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the multi-residential zones are shown in Table 220-1 by the letter "Y". Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 220-1 with the letters "CU". These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 220-1 with the letter "N" are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses & development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in Section 640 - Non-conforming situations.
D. Limited Uses. Uses shown in Table 220-1 with the letter "L" are allowed subject to the following limitation.
    (1) This regulation applies to all parts of Table 220-1 marked with a (1). Office uses in the Multi-Residential - 2,000 zone are limited to sites within 300 feet of a commercial zone. Otherwise office uses in the Multi-Residential - 2,000 zone are prohibited.
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    |                                      | MR 4 | MR 2  |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY                 |      |       |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Household Living                     | Y    | Y     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Group Living                         | CU   | Y     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Cottage Housing1                     | Y    | Y     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES                |      |       |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Retail Sales and Service             | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Marijuana Sales other than Medical   | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Office                               | N    | L(1)  |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Quick Vehicle Servicing              | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Vehicle Repair                       | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Self-Service Storage                 | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Commercial Recreation                | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Major Event Entertainment            | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES                |      |       |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Manufacturing and Production         | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Warehouse and Freight Movement       | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Wholesale Sales                      | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Industrial Service                   | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Waste Related                        | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Marijuana Processor                  | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Marijuana Wholesaler                 | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Marijuana Producer                   | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES             |      |       |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Basic Utilities                      | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Community Service                    | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Parks and Open Space                 | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Schools                              | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Colleges                             | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Medical Centers                      | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Medical Marijuana Dispensaries       | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Religious Institutions               | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Daycare                              | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Essential Service Provider           | N    | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | OTHER CATEGORIES                     |      |       |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Detention Facilities                 | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Mining                               | N    | N     |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities    | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    | Railroad Lines and Utility Corridors | CU   | CU    |
    +--------------------------------------+------+-------+
    Y = Yes, Permitted Use CU = Conditional Use Review Required
    N = No, Prohibited Use L = Permitted, But Subject to Limitations
    1See section 220.400 for Cottage Housing Development Standards

220.210 Accessory Uses.
 Uses which are accessory to the permitted or conditional uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 - Use Categories. Detached radio and television antennas and towers are conditional accessory uses in the Multi-Residential zones subject to conditional use review.

Development Standards

220.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design which will ensure that new land divisions and development will:
- Maintain the character of the built-up area through required dimensional standards.
- Promote options for privacy for neighboring properties.
- Maintain light, air, separation for fire protection and access for fire fighting.
- Maintain and enhance the building scale & relationship between structures of the existing built-up area.
- Provide adequate flexibility to allow development which is compatible with the existing neighborhood, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity.

220.310 Housing Types Allowed.
Housing types are limited in the multi-residential zones in order to maintain and enhance the overall character of multi-dwelling neighborhoods. The housing types allowed are shown in Table 220-2, along with references to the additional regulations which are stated in Section 220.400 and Section 300.

220.320 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
A. Minimum Lot Size & Dimension. 2,000 sq. ft.
The minimum lot size and dimensions are shown in Table 220-3 and Table 220-4. All new lots created must comply with these standards. Lots larger than the minimum may not be divided without appropriate land use review if any of the resulting lots fail to meet the minimum standards. [See Section 300 for regulations which apply to Flag Lots, Partitions and Subdivisions, and Planned Unit Developments and Section 220.400 for Cottage Housing.]
B. Exceptions to Minimum Lot Size & Dimension. In the MR4 & MR2 zones reductions to the minimum lot size & dimensions for detached single dwelling units may be approved through the variance process (see Section 660).
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
|                                         | MR 4 | MR 2 |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Detached House                          | Y    | Y    |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Attached House (See Section 220.355)    | Y    | Y    |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Duplex                                  | Y    | Y    |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Manufactured Home (See Section 340.010) | Y    | Y    |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Manufactured Home Park (See Section     | N    | Y    |
| 340.020)                                |      |      |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Multi Dwelling Structure                | Y    | Y    |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Cottage Style Housing                   | Y    | Y    |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
| Accessory Dwelling Unit (See Section    | Y    | Y    |
| 395)                                    |      |      |
+-----------------------------------------+------+------+
Y = Yes, Permitted Type
N = No, Prohibited Type
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
|   Standard    |               MR 4               |          |               MR 2               |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
|               |  Attached  | Detached |  Duplex  | Cottage  |  Attached  | Detached |  Duplex  |
|               |   Single   |  Single  |          | Housing  |   Single   |  Single  |          |
|               |  Dwelling  | Dwelling |          |          |  Dwelling  | Dwelling |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| Minimum       | 8,000 sq   | 7,500 sq | 8,000 sq | 2,000 sq | 8,000 sq   | 7,500 sq | 8,000 sq |
| Lot Size      | ft         | ft       | ft       | ft per   | ft         | ft       | ft       |
|               |            |          |          | unit     |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Min.        | 4,000/unit |          |          |          | 4,000/unit |          |          |
| lot area      |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Min.        | 60 ft      | 60 ft    | 60 ft    |          | 60 ft      | 60 ft    |          |
| lot width     |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Min.        | 80 ft      | 80 ft    | 80 ft    |          | 80 ft      | 80 ft    |          |
| lot depth     |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| (See 220.320) |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| Maximum       | 35 ft      | 35 ft    | 35 ft    | 30ft     | 35 ft      | 35 ft    | 35 ft    |
| Height        |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| (See 220.340) |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| Minimum       |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
| setbacks      |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Front       | 20 ft      | 20 ft    | 20 ft    | 5-20 ft  | 20 ft      | 20 ft    | 20 ft    |
| setback       |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Garage      | 22 ft      | 22 ft    | 22 ft    | 5-20 ft  | 22 ft      | 22 ft    | 22 ft    |
| setback       |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Side        | 5 ft       | 5 ft     | 5 ft     |          | 5 ft       | 5 ft     | 5 ft     |
| setback       |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| - Rear        | 25 ft      | 25 ft    | 25 ft    |          | 15 ft      | 15 ft    | 15 ft    |
| setback       |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| (See 220.330) |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| Maximum       | 40%        | 40%      | 40%      | 40%      | 40%        | 40%      | 40%      |
| Site Coverage |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| (See 220.350) |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
| Minimum       | 8.7        | 4.6      | 8.7      | 9.2      | 8.7        | 4.6      | 8.7      |
| No. of        |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
| Dwellings     |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
| Per Net       |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
| Acre (.80)    |            |          |          |          |            |          |          |
+---------------+------------+----------+----------+----------+------------+----------+----------+
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
|  Number  |  Minimum Lot Size (See   |  Maximu   |  Minimum Building Setbacks   | Maximum  | Minimum  |
| of Units |         220.320)         | Building  |        (See 220.330)         |   Site   | Landscap |
|          |                          | Height(1) |                              | Coverage | Required |
|          |                          |   (See    |                              |   (See   |   (2)    |
|          |                          | 220.340)  |                              | 220.350) |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
|          | Minimum | Min.  |  Min.  |           |  Front  |   Side   |  Rear   |          |          |
|          |   Lot   | Width | Depth  |           |  Bldg   |   Bldg   |  Bldg   |          |          |
|          |  Area   |       |        |           | Setback | Setback1 | Setback |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
| 3        | 11,000  | 60 ft | 100 ft | 35 ft     | 20 ft   | 5 ft     | 15 ft   | 40%      | 25%/L1   |
|          | sq ft   |       |        |           |         | or 10    |         |          |          |
|          |         |       |        |           |         | ft       |         |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
| 4        | 14,000  | 60 ft | 100 ft | 35 ft     | 20 ft   | 5 ft     | 15 ft   | 45%      | 25%/L1   |
|          | sq ft   |       |        |           |         | or 10    |         |          |          |
|          |         |       |        |           |         | ft       |         |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
| 5        | 16,500  | 60 ft | 100 ft | 35 ft     | 20 ft   | 5 ft     | 15 ft   | 45%      | 25%/L1   |
|          | sq ft   |       |        |           |         | or 10    |         |          |          |
|          |         |       |        |           |         | ft       |         |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
| 6        | 19,000  | 60 ft | 100 ft | 35 ft     | 20 ft   | 5 ft     | 15 ft   | 45%      | 25%/L1   |
|          | sq ft   |       |        |           |         | or 10    |         |          |          |
|          |         |       |        |           |         | ft       |         |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
| 7-10     | 21,500  | 60 ft | 100 ft | 35 ft     | 20 ft   | 5 ft     | 15 ft   | 45%      | 25%/L1   |
|          | sq ft+  |       |        |           |         | or 10    |         |          |          |
|          | 2,250   |       |        |           |         | ft       |         |          |          |
|          | sq ft   |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
|          | unit    |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
|          | over    |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
|          | 7       |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
| 11 and   | 30,500  | 60 ft | 100 ft | 35 ft     | 20 ft   | 5 ft     | 15 ft   | 50%      | 25%/L1   |
| more     | sq ft+  |       |        |           |         | or 10    |         |          |          |
|          | 2,000   |       |        |           |         | ft       |         |          |          |
|          | sq ft   |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
|          | unit    |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
|          | over    |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
|          | 11      |       |        |           |         |          |         |          |          |
+----------+---------+-------+--------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+----------+
(1)For multi family structures on sites which abut a MR, C or M zones the minimum side setback shall be 5 feet. For multi-unit structures on sites which abut LR zones the minimum side setback shall be 10 feet.
Minimum lot size per unit 2,000 sq. ft.
(2)Percent site area. See Section 330 - Landscaping & Screening for landscape standards.
(3)The minimum number of multi-family dwellings per net acre (.80) in the MR2 Zone is thirteen (13) dwellings.


220.330 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 220-3 & Table 220-4. Specific setbacks in Cottage Housing developments are described in Section 220-400. In addition, for new retail, office and institutional buildings, the provisions set forth in Section 235.345 Pedestrian Standards shall apply.
B. Extensions into required building setbacks.
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, open fire escapes, bay windows up to 12 feet in length, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required front building setback by no more than 5' and into a side setback or rear building setback no more than 2 ½ feet.
    (2) Projections Not Allowed. Attached mechanical structures such as heat pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps may not project into any building setback.
    (3) Exceptions to required building setbacks. If a front building setback on an abutting lot to the subject site has been established, the setback will be:
        (a) The average of the setbacks to the existing primary buildings on the abutting lots on either side if both lots are occupied; or
        (b) If only one abutting lot is occupied, the setback shall be the distance to the existing primary building on the abutting lot plus one half the remaining distance to the required setback for the zone.

220.340 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 220-3 & Table 220-4.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height. 
    (1) Projections allowed. Projections extending vertically for permitted buildings and uses such as skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, small-scale residential energy equipment, and radio and television aerials may be erected above the height limitations herein proscribed. Such structures shall not project more than 5 feet above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility poles are exempt from the height limit.

220.350 Site Coverage.
A. Building Coverage. The maximum combined building coverage on a site for all covered structures is stated in Table 220-3 & Table 220-4.
B. Hard Surface Coverage for one and two family dwellings. The maximum front or rear yard areas which may be in hard surface is 40%. (Ord. 15-2010)

220.355 Attached Houses.
Zero lot line attached single-family dwellings (two abutting dwelling units on separate lots) shall be allowed on minimum lot size provided for two unit dwellings in this zone district, providing the abutting or common wall to such units is located upon the common property line with each dwelling situated on its own lot of record, which shall be not less than 4,000 sq. ft. in area.
In such event, the minimum lot size and yard requirements of this zone district shall apply to each abutting dwelling unit on each lot except that no yard or set-back shall be required to the common property line.
The following conditions and requirements shall apply to all zero lot line attached single- family dwellings:
A. Separate sewer service shall be provided for each family unit.
B. Separate water service shall be provided for each family unit.
C. Set-back requirements of the zone district shall apply except for the abutting common wall.
D. Common walls shall comply with building code requirements therefore and meet a two-hour fire wall standard.
E. That a separate ownership agreement reflecting a separate deed of record for each abutting unit be executed and placed of record prior to the issuance of building or occupancy permit, as the case may be.
F. That the aforesaid separate ownership agreement include an easement understanding or "declaration of restrictions" containing the same, setting forth in form acceptable to the City, permission for entry by concerned parties upon all abutting properties and structures for the purpose of maintaining, servicing and repairing the common wall, with appropriate provisions for the enforcement of such right thereof in the event of a lack of understanding between the parties, which agreement shall provide that the same shall be legally binding in interest to said property. Such agreement will be executed by all parties in interest and placed of record prior to the issuance of building permit and/or occupancy permit for said property, as the case may be, by the City.
G. That in all cases where application is made to the City for a building permit for zero lot line construction of two abutting single-family dwellings with common wall or in the event of application to the City for conversion of an existing structure to provide for two attached single-family dwellings with abutting common wall in place of a present multiple unit or duplex structure, public hearing shall be required before the Planning Commission and approval thereof obtained, provided, however, that the Planning Commission may delegate such hearing responsibility to the Design Review Board, which shall then make its recommendations to the Planning Commission which shall indicate its approval or disapproval thereof.

220.360 Required Outdoor Area.
A. Outdoor Area. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of recreation area shall be provided for each living unit for structures with 5 or more units. The recreation area may be in one or more locations on the site. Recreation buildings may be considered as a part of this requirement. Recreation areas shall not be located in required yards.

220.365 Minimum Landscaping Required.
A minimum of 25% of the site area which is not in use as parking or walkways shall be landscaped to the L1 standards of Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening for all multi-residential developments of 3 or more units and shall satisfy the following requirements:
A. The minimum site area devoted to landscaping may be computed to include any required landscaping imposed by Section 350 - Parking and Loading.
B. Provisions shall be made for watering planting areas where such care is required for survival.
C. Maximum height of selected tree species shall be considered when planting under utility lines.

220.370 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences, and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to 3 ½ feet are allowed in required front building setback and in the required side building setback to the depth of the required front setback.
    (2) Fences up to 8 feet are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks, except for a corner lot side setback which is limited to 3 ½ feet.

220.380 Accessory Structures.
Structures which are incidental to the primary building such as garages, greenhouses, decks, wood sheds, porches, small-scale residential energy equipment, and recreational structures are considered accessory structures. These structures are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
1. Attached Accessory Structures. If attached to the primary building or separated by a breezeway, accessory structures shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks of the primary building. These standards are stated in Table 210-3.
2. Detached Accessory Structures. If detached and located behind the rear-most line of the main building, or a minimum of 50 feet from the front lot line, whichever is greater, any structure in compliance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code for residential may be located adjacent to or on the rear and/or side lot line not fronting on a street.

220.390 Additional Regulations.
A. Accessory Home Occupation. See Section 310.
B. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
C. Design Review. Design Review is required for all uses & developments except detached single-dwelling units in light residential zones. See Section 630.
D. Parking and Loading. See Section 350.
E. Planned Unit Development. See Section 360.
F. Public Access. All lots in the district shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before construction shall be permitted.
G. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum lot or setback requirements of the zone.
H. Signs. See Section 370.
I. Solid Waste, Mixed and Recyclables Storage is required for new multi-unit residential buildings containing five or more units. See Section 390.

220.400 Cottage Housing.
A. Purpose. 
    (1) To support more efficient use of urban residential land;
    (2) To support development of diverse housing in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan;
    (3) To increase the variety of housing types available to smaller households;
    (4) To provide opportunity for small, detached housing within existing neighborhoods;
    (5) To provide opportunity for creative, diverse and high quality infill development that is compatible with existing neighborhoods.
B. Definition of Cottage Housing Development. A development of detached dwellings which has the following characteristics:
    (1) Each unit is of a size and function suitable for a single person or small family;
    (2) Each unit has the construction characteristics of a single-family house;
    (3) The density of the development is typically 7 to 14 units per acre;
    (4) All units may be located on a commonly owned piece of property, or on individual lots;
    (5) The development is designed with a coherent concept and includes: private and shared usable open space; off-street parking, access within the site and from the site, amenities such as a multipurpose room, workshop, garden, and a coordinated landscape plan.
    (6) Cottage design incorporates classic cottage features or northwest style using quality materials.
    (7) Common area maintenance is shared equally and assured by a recorded agreement of Codes, Covenants and Restrictions (C.C.& R.’s).
    (8) Cottage Housing developments shall be separate from each other by at least 1,000 feet.
C. Applicability and Review Procedure. 
    (1) Cottage Housing is a permitted use in the Multi-Residential zones MR2 and MR4 zones. Except that land zoned MR2 on NE Sandy Blvd. will not permit cottage housing because of the heavy commercial and industrial character of this area. A Cottage Housing development proposal is reviewed in accordance with the Design Review Standards of Section 630. If the proposal includes a land division, applicable land division standards of Section 450 also apply. These permits may be requested simultaneously.
    (2) Review Criteria: Approval of a Cottage Housing Development shall be based upon evidence that the proposal meets the Purpose and Definition of Cottage Housing described above in Sections A and B.
D. Ownership: Cottage Housing developments are sited on one commonly owned parcel, or individual parcels may be created by subdividing the land with shared amenities owned in common. Cottages are for residential use only and may not be operated as transient accommodations.
E. Size of Unit: The maximum square footage of each dwelling may not exceed 1,200 square feet.
F. Number of Cottages Allowed: Two cottage housing units shall be allowed in place of each single-family home allowed by the base density of the zone.
G. Maximum number of Cottages in a development: Cottage housing units shall be developed in clusters of a minimum of 4 units to a maximum of 12 units.
H. Maximum Height: The height limit for all structures shall not exceed 18 feet. Cottage or amenity buildings having pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 6:12 may extend up to 30 feet at the ridge of the roof.
I. Common Space: Cottage units shall be oriented around a central common space. The common open space must be at least 400 square feet per cottage housing unit. The common open space shall have cottage units facing at least two sides. Open space with a dimension of less than 20 feet shall not be included in the calculated common open space.
J. Useable Porches: Each unit shall have a covered porch with an area of at least 80 square feet and a minimum dimension of 5 feet. The porches on at least half of the units shall face the common space.
K. Architectural Elements and Materials: Cottages fronting on a street shall avoid blank walls by including at least one of the following:
    (1) Changes in exterior siding material and paint color;
    (2) Windows which may include bay windows; and/or
    (3) Building modulation with a depth measuring at least one foot.
Structures shall be provided with substantial exterior trim elements consistent with traditional northwest cottage design and small home craftsmanship. Roofs shall have eaves to efficiently shed rain. Alternative trim and eave designs shall demonstrate coherent cottage design based upon traditional design principles and weather protection. Window and door trim shall be a minimum width of 3 ½ inches. Eaves of at least 12 inches shall be provided on at least two sides of each building, located on the longest parallel walls when the structure is not square.
L. Private Ground Space: Each cottage housing unit shall be provided with a private use open space on the ground of at least 300 square feet with no dimension of less than 10 feet on one side. It should be contiguous to each cottage, for exclusive use of the cottage resident, and oriented toward the common open space.
M. Separation of Structures: All structures shall maintain no less than 10 feet of separation within the cluster. However, a zero lot line on one side of each structure may be considered as long as the entire development uses the same zero lot line pattern. Eaves may project into the required separation up to 12 inches.
N. Parking Requirements: There shall be at least one (1) off street parking space per dwelling unit.
O. Parking Design: Parking lots or structures shall be:
    (1) Setback a minimum of 5 – 20 feet from the street, depending on the orientation of the structure or lot. If the structure or lot is perpendicular to the street, that narrow dimension may be within 5 feet of the street. If parallel to the street the lot or structure must be at least 20 feet from the street.
    (2) Clustered and separated from the common areas by landscaping and/or an architectural screen. Solid board fencing shall not be allowed as an architectural screen.
    (3) Screened from public streets and adjacent residential uses by a landscaping and/or architectural screen, which shall not include a solid board fence.
    (4) Parking structures should be limited in size to maintain the single-family building scale, with a maximum of six spaces per structure.
P. Garages: Individual garages shall be located on the sides or rear of a cottage, or on an alley, and shall not be located in a front yard unless it is the only option. The face of a garage may only face a street if it has at least a five (5) foot increase in setback from that of the house foundation. Detached garages shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least 6:12.
Q. Setbacks: Setbacks for all structures from the property line shall be an average of 10 feet, but shall not be less than 5 feet, and not less than 15 feet from a public street. Zero lot line setbacks on one side of each unit may be considered.
R. Maximum Lot Coverage: The total footprint of all structures shall not exceed 40% of the site area. Impervious surfaces shall not exceed 60% of the site area.
S. Fences: All fences on the interior of the development shall be no more than 3.5 in height. Fences along the exterior of the development may be up to 8 feet in height, except as restricted by intersection clear vision standards. Chain link fences shall not be allowed.

Section 230 Commercial Zones & Design Guidelines

General Provisions

230.100 Purpose.
The commercial zones are intended to promote uses and development which improve the economic vitality of the commercial districts and the city as a whole. Limits on the intensity of uses combined with the development standards provide flexibility while enhancing the desired character of the commercial area.
A. Neighborhood Commercial. This zone is intended for convenience retail and service establishments of limited scale to serve primarily the needs of local residents. Such uses shall be physically and visually compatible with adjacent residential development through appropriate use of landscaping, access, parking, signs and architectural design.
This zone is intended to promote a compatible combination of small-scale retail commercial uses and medium to high-density residential uses along Halsey Street and Wood Village Blvd (between Arata Road and Halsey Street) where there is frequent transit service and a pedestrian-oriented streetscape. Uses are restricted in size to promote a local orientation and to limit adverse impacts on nearby residential areas. Housing options are expanded to encourage upstairs residences over storefront commercial, townhouses, and rowhouses with quality pedestrian access to transit and services.

230.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this Section state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. The official zoning map indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below.

Use Regulations

230.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the commercial zones are shown in Table 230-1 by the letter "Y". Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300. Development in the NC Zone shall comply with the Neighborhood Commercial Design Standards in Section 230.390.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 230-1 with the letters "CU". These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Development in the NC Zone shall comply with the Neighborhood Commercial Design Standards in Section 230.390.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 230-1 with the letter "N" are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses & development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in Section 640 - Non-conforming Situations.
D. Limited Uses. Uses shown in Table 230-1 with the letter "L" are allowed subject to the following limitations.
    (1) This regulation applies to all parts of Table 230-1 marked with a (1). Manufacturing and Production and Wholesale Sales uses in the General Commercial zone are limited to 12,000 square feet. In addition, exterior storage and exterior work activities are prohibited.
    (2) Where commercial uses adjoin a residential zone, the hours of operation of the commercial use may be limited by the Planning Commission or Design Review Board.

230.210 Accessory Uses.
Uses which are accessory to the permitted uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone, specific regulations for the accessory use and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 - Use Categories.

Development Standards

230.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design, which will ensure that new land divisions and development will:
- Maintain the character of the built-up area through required dimensional standards.
- Maintain and enhance the building scale & relationship between structures of the existing built-up area.
- Provide adequate flexibility to allow development, which is compatible with the existing area, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity.
- Orient buildings close to streets to promote human-scale development, slow traffic, increase safety and encourage walking in neighborhoods.
- In the NC Zone comply with the Neighborhood Commercial Design Standards of Section 230.390.

230.310 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
A. Minimum Lot Size and Dimension. There is no minimum lot size or dimension for development of land or creation of new lots in commercial zones. Creation of new lots is subject to the regulations of Section 450 – Subdivisions and Partitions. The lot size for all permitted or conditional uses shall be adequate to fulfill the applicable requirements stated below.
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
|                                                      | NC |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| RESIDENTIAL CATEGORIES                                    |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Household Living                                     | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Mixed-Use Residential and Commercial (1)             | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Group Living                                         | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES                                     |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Retail Sales and Service (prohibits drive-up/thru/in | Y  |
| commercial uses and any single user that exceeds     |    |
| 10,000 sq. ft.)                                      |    |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Marijuana Sales other than Medical                   | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Lodging                                              | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Mobile Food Carts and Food Pods                      | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Office                                               | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Quick Vehicle Servicing, including gas stations      | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Vehicle Repair                                       | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Vehicle Maintenance                                  | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Self Service Storage                                 | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Commercial Recreation                                | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Major Event Entertainment                            | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Museums, galleries, art, dance and photo studios     | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES                                     |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Manufacturing and Production                         | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Warehouse and Freight Movement                       | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Wholesale Sales                                      | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Industrial Service                                   | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Waste Related                                        | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Marijuana Processor                                  | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Marijuana Wholesaler                                 | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Marijuana Producer                                   | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES                                  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Basic Utilities                                      | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Community Service                                    | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Parks and Open Space                                 | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Schools                                              | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Colleges                                             | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Medical Centers                                      | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Medical Marijuana Dispensary                         | CU |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Religious Institutions                               | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Daycare                                              | Y  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Essential Service Provider                           | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| OTHER CATEGORIES                                          |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Detention Facilities                                 | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Mining                                               | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities                    | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Railroad Lines and Utility Corridors                 | N  |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+
| Street furniture, art, seating, transit stops        | Y  |
| and pedestrian amenities                             |    |
+------------------------------------------------------+----+

+------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Y = Yes, Permitted Use | CU = Conditional Use Review Required      |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| N = No, Prohibited Use | L = Permitted, but Subject to Limitations |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
(1)Mixed-Use Residential Commercial: Must be a compatibly designed combination of multifamily residential and ground floor commercial uses. Multifamily in mixed use shall include any quantity of multi-dwelling structures, or not more than ten (10) separate buildings with fewer than three (3) dwelling units per building. Buildings that are not multi-dwelling structures shall have ground floor commercial fronting Halsey or the adjacent collector roadway. Number of units permitted is determined by required building and fire codes, setbacks, parking, building height, landscaping and other site requirements.
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
|           Standard           |             NC             |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Size (1)         |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Min. lot area              | None                       |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Min. lot width             | None                       |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Min. lot depth             | None                       |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| (See Section 230.310)        |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Maximum Height               | 45 feet(2)                 |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Minimum Height               | 18 feet                    |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| (See Section 230.330)        |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks             |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Front setback              | 3 feet min. – 10 feet max. |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Side setback               | none(2)                    |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Rear setback               | none(2)                    |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| (See Section 230.320)        |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Minimum Landscape            |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Site area                  | 5%(3)                      |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Landscape Buffer             |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Street frontage(4)         | 3 – 10 feet                |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| – Side or rear yard          | (2)/L3 or F2(5)            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| (See Sections 230.340 & 330) |                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------+
(1)For commercial or residential uses there is no minimum lot area, lot width or lot depth.
(2)Sites which adjoin a residentially zoned lot shall have side and or rear setbacks as prescribed in Section 335 – Height Transition Standards.
(3)Within boundaries of the development, a minimum of five (5) percent of the site area shall be landscaped.
(4)All street-facing elevations must have landscaping along their foundations including a three (3) foot wide bed with one three (3) gallon shrub every three (3) lineal feet, with ground cover over the remaining area. The minimum number of street trees required shall provide for there to be at least one (1) tree every 30 lineal feet along the entire length of the street, subject to other City regulations effecting placement. Trees shall be chosen from the City’s approved street tree list.
(5)See Section 330 – Landscaping and Screening for a description of the landscape standards (i.e., L1, F2, etc.).
(Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 3-2018 § 2 (Att. A))

230.315 Marijuana Facilities Conditional Uses.
A. Marijuana Facilities may be allowed, subject to a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Article 620 of this Code, in the Neighborhood Commercial Zone. No Marijuana facility may be located within the City unless it satisfies all the requirements of this Code and provides evidence of all licensing required by State law.
Marijuana facilities legally established pursuant to this Code shall not be found in conflict with the provision of this Code in the event that a conflicting land use locates in the vicinity of a facility subsequent to the facility obtaining land use approval from the City. Should such conflict arise, the marijuana facility shall be considered a legal nonconforming use and subject to provision set for in Section 640 of this Code.
B. Marijuana Facilities may not be located and a Conditional Use Permit as provided in this zone shall not be issued for any facility that is:
    (1) At the same address as a registered grow site.
    (2) Within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a:
        (a) Public or private preschool, elementary, secondary or career school attended primarily by minors; or,
        (b) Public park; or,
        (c) Within 1,000 feet of another marijuana facility.

230.320 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 230-2.
B. Extensions into required building setbacks.
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, bay windows, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required building setback In addition, awnings, arcades and other architectural features, as well as benches, kiosks, service counters, tables and chairs, newspaper stands, flower and planter boxes are permitted to protrude into the front yard building setback area as long as they do not interfere with pedestrians or safety features on the sidewalk.
    (2) Projections Not Allowed. Attached mechanical structures such as heat pumps, air conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps may not project into any building setback.
    (3) Exceptions to required building setbacks. If a front building setback on an abutting lot to the subject site has been established, the setback will be:
        (a) The average of the setbacks to the existing primary buildings on the abutting lots on either side if both lots are occupied; or
        (b) If only one abutting lot is occupied, the setback shall be the distance to the existing primary building on the abutting lot plus one half the remaining distance to the required setback for the zone.

230.330 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 230-2. In addition, there is a minimum height of 18 feet or 1.5 stories for all new buildings on Halsey Street.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height. 
    (1) Projections allowed. Projections extending vertically for permitted buildings and uses, such as skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, and radio and television aerials, may be erected above the height limitations herein proscribed. Such structures shall not project more than 5 feet above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility power poles are exempt from the height limit.
C. Exemption to the Minimum Height. 
    (1) Sheds and accessory structures are exempt from the minimum height limit.

230.340 Landscape and Buffer.
A. Required landscaping. The minimum landscaping requirements are stated in Table 230-2 and shall satisfy the following requirements:
    (1) The minimum site area devoted to landscaping may be computed to include any required landscaping imposed by Section 350 - Parking and Loading.
    (2) Provisions shall be made for watering planting areas where such care is required for survival.
    (3) Maximum height of selected tree species shall be considered when planting under overhead utility lines.
    (4) Street trees shall be planted on all street frontages in accordance with City street tree guidelines.
B. Landscape Buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be established and maintained in accordance with the dimensions stated in Table 230-2, the standards of Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening, as applicable, and the Neighborhood Commercial Design Standards. The requirements of 230.340(A)(2) & (3) apply to the landscape buffer as well.

230.350 Accessory Structures.
Structures which are incidental to the primary building are considered accessory structures and are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
1. Covered Accessory Structures. All covered accessory structures, whether attached to the primary building or separated by a breezeway, shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks and lot coverage requirements. These standards are stated in Table 230-2.
2. Uncovered Accessory Structures. Uncovered, detached accessory structures such as signs, flag poles and lamp posts are allowed in the front building setback but not in a required setback from an abutting residential zone. All utility installations shall be located underground whenever feasible.

230.360 Exterior Display, Storage and Work Activities.
A. Exterior Display. Exterior display of goods is allowed in the General Commercial zone and Neighborhood Commercial zone. The setback and landscaping standards for exterior display are stated in Table 230-3.
B. Exterior Storage. Exterior storage is allowed in the General Commercial zone and prohibited in the Neighborhood Commercial zone. The setback and landscape standards for exterior storage stated in Table 230-3.
C. Exterior Work Activities. Exterior work activities are prohibited in both the General and Neighborhood Commercial zones.
+------------------------------+--------+
|           Standard           |   NC   |
+------------------------------+--------+
| Exterior Display             |        |
+------------------------------+--------+
| – Abutting a street          | 3’     |
+------------------------------+--------+
| – Abutting NC, LM or GM zone | 5’/L1  |
+------------------------------+--------+
| – Abutting an R zone         | 10’/L1 |
+------------------------------+--------+
| Exterior Storage             |        |
+------------------------------+--------+
| – Abutting a street          | NA     |
+------------------------------+--------+
| – Abutting NC, LM or GM zone | Na     |
+------------------------------+--------+
| – Abutting an R zone         | NA     |
+------------------------------+--------+
| (See Section 230.360)        |        |
+------------------------------+--------+
Note: See Section 330 - Landscaping & Screening for a description of the landscape requirements (i.e., L3, F2, etc.)

230.370 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences, and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to 3 ½ feet are allowed in required front building setback and in the required side building set back to the depth of the required front setback.
    (2) Fences up to 6 feet in the NC zone are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks, except for a corner lot side setback which is limited to 3 ½ feet.

230.380 Additional Regulations.
A. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
B. Design Review. Design Review is required for all uses and developments in commercial zones. See Section 630. In addition, the Neighborhood Commercial Design Standards of Section 230.390 shall apply to all new development and significant remodeling of existing development in the NC Zone, except for single family housing. “Significant remodeling” is any development which requires a building permit and exhibits one or more of the following:
    •The activity alters the exterior appearance of a structure, building or property.
    •The activity involves changes in the use of a structure, building or property from residential to commercial or industrial.
    •The activity involves a non-conforming use as defined in Section 640.
    •The activity constitutes a change in a city-approved plan.
    •The activity is subject to design review by other requirements of this Code.
C. Parking and Loading. See Section 350 for parking requirements. On-street spaces adjoining the site may count towards the commercial off-street parking requirement (assuming parallel parking is permitted on Halsey in the future).
D. Public Access. All lots shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before development is allowed. Access to commercial sites shall be from the highest classified or capacity street.
E. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum setback requirements of the zone.
F. Signs. See Section 370 and the Neighborhood Commercial sign design standards in Section 230-390.
G. Solid Waste, Mixed and Recyclable Storage. See Section 390.
H. Uncontained hazardous materials are prohibited.
I. Commercial Requirements in the NC Zone. Except for institutional uses all ground floor uses in the NC Zone shall be designated for commercial use.

230.390 Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zone.
Applications for new development or significant remodeling of existing development in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) zone shall demonstrate compliance with design standards contained in this section or demonstrate why a particular standard or standards do not apply.
Standards:
A. Enhance the sense of place and identity of Wood Village by incorporating site and building design features that respond to the area’s unique characteristics and traditions.
    (1) Protect the heritage of Wood Village’s original worker cottages in the Original Village neighborhood. Remodel and redevelop using architectural details found in the original homes.
    (2) In the Original Village neighborhood, continue the alignment of the roof ridge parallel to the street where it is the predominant roof form.
    (3) Protect and plant groupings of Douglas Fir and other conifers and tall trees to help preserve the memory of the forest and enhance this special characteristic of Wood Village.
    (4) Preserve and plant large trees to visually break up and screen large parking lots of 100 spaces or more.
    (5) Respect the topography of the hills and ravines of Wood Village in the development of buildings and pathways.
    (6) Keep streams above ground and not in culverts to preserve the viability of stream corridors and to protect surrounding vegetation, where feasible.
B. Create an efficient, pleasant and safe network of sidewalks and paths for pedestrians that link destination points and nearby residential areas while visually and physically buffering pedestrians from vehicle areas.
    (1) Provide safe, attractive, and convenient pedestrian connections and transitions from sidewalks to building entrances.
    (2) Develop pedestrian connections in areas with constrained topography. It is particularly important to connect residential areas to commercial areas and transit areas.
    (3) Provide space for the different activities that take place along sidewalks and walkways, such as outdoor dining, benches, kiosks and outdoor art.
    (4) Use a variety of paving textures and patterns to separate motor vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles.
    (5) Plant parking strips with shrubs and trees to buffer the sidewalk from the street.
    (6) Place landscape features and street furniture between pedestrians and moving vehicles.
    (7) Install bollards along pedestrian paths to protect pedestrians from moving vehicles.
C. Create a sense of enclosure and visual interest to buildings along sidewalks and pedestrian areas by incorporating small scale building design features, creating effective gathering places and differentiating street level facades.
    (1) Differentiate between the building façade at the sidewalk level and the floors above in nonresidential and mixed-use developments. This acknowledges the varying uses in a building and allows treatment of the ground floor that is more scaled to pedestrians.
    (2) Incorporate interesting details in residential buildings, such as porches and large street facing windows.
    (3) Place building walls, columns, porches, balconies and trees to create a sense of enclosure within the pedestrian path.
    (4) Locate active indoor uses in areas with ground floor windows adjacent to sidewalks and public places. Provide wind resistant awnings at building entrances and over sidewalks adjacent to storefront windows.
    (5) Place display windows along pedestrian paths to invite window-shopping.
    (6) Incorporate interesting outdoor displays that are visible from the pedestrian path such as fruit and vegetable stands.
    (7) Incorporate interesting building details and art features on the sidewalk level of buildings.
    (8) Reduce building setbacks in the front yard to 3 – 10 feet to promote enclosure and visual interest.
D. New large-scale projects should provide comfortable places along pedestrian circulation routes where people may stop, visit, meet and rest.
    (1) Provide outdoor seating adjacent to restaurants and near takeout food places and sidewalk vendors.
    (2) Incorporate seating opportunities in the design of planters and walls along pedestrian paths.
    (3) Provide benches that are durable and impart a sense of permanence.
    (4) Provide seating opportunities along pedestrian paths and near kiosks and other points of interest.
E. Create intersections that are active, unified and have a clear identity through careful scaling detail and location of buildings, outdoor areas and entrances.
    (1) Provide access to the interior of the building at the corner.
    (2) Reinforce the intersection by placing the highest or most interesting portion of the building near the corner.
    (3) Locate parking to the side or rear of the site and bring the building up to the corner. Parking lots on corner lots weaken the structure of the intersection.
    (4) Connect the corners of an intersection with special paving material.
    (5) Extend curbs to shorten the distance across the street and create larger sidewalk area.
    (6) Create spaces that promote sidewalk activities, such as small corner plazas oriented to receive maximum sunlight with places to sit and room for kiosks and street vendors.
    (7) Provide seating, newspaper stands and other amenities near the corner.
F. Enhance the comfort of pedestrians by locating and designing buildings and outdoor areas to control the adverse effects of sun, shadow, glare, reflection, wind and rain.
    (1) Provide wind resistant weather protection for pedestrians at building entrances and over pedestrian paths such as arcades, canopies, porches and overhangs.
    (2) Plant large trees along and near pedestrian paths to provide shade and reduce wind and rain.
    (3) Use exterior materials and colors that prevent glare.
    (4) Design paths that protect pedestrians while still allowing light to reach covered areas.
G. Make the main entrances to houses and buildings prominent, interesting, pedestrian-accessible and transit-oriented.
    (1) Provide a front porch to shelter the front entrance and provide a transition from outdoor to indoor space.
    (2) Emphasize the front entrance with an architectural element such as a portico, trellis or arch.
    (3) Consider using elevation changes to make a more prominent entrance.
    (4) Use architectural elements, massing and landscaping to accentuate the front entry.
    (5) Provide a plaza or open area adjacent to the front entrance to mark the entrance and allow activities to happen in the transition from outdoors to indoor, if feasible.
    (6) Connect the building’s main entrance to the sidewalk with a well-defined pedestrian way.
    (7) Orient the main entrance toward the corner to increase visibility and access.
    (8) Consider placing art or sculpture to frame the main entrance.
H. Enhance site and building design through appropriate placement, scale and variety of landscape features.
    (1) Preserve existing trees and incorporate them into the project design.
    (2) Use plant materials to create transitions between urban development and adjacent natural areas and open spaces.
    (3) Protect and plant street trees for shade, interest and to enclose the street and sidewalks.
    (4) Use plant materials along sidewalks and walkways to define routes, buffer pedestrians from moving vehicles, create gateways and provide interest, color and texture.
    (5) Use plant materials to soften and screen parking lots on both the perimeter and interior of the lot.
    (6) Use a variety of plant materials visible to the public.
    (7) Maintain existing grades and use grade treatments that are compatible with neighboring properties.
    (8) Use plant materials to screen mechanical equipment.
I. Use site design and building orientation to reduce the likelihood of crime through the design and placement of windows, entries, active ground level uses and outdoor areas.
    (1) Provide a lighting system that includes pedestrian scale lights along walkways, energy-efficient porch and backyard lights that can be left on over time, and motion sensor lights that do not shine in rooms.
    (2) Locate windows in active rooms and entrances to promote “eyes” on streets, plazas, and other shared outdoor areas.
    (3) Keep front yard fences low and transparent, and eliminate barriers to visibility, such as high opaque fences, hedges or protruding attached garages.
    (4) Orient entrances to public streets or to shared courtyards.
J. All parts of a building should be interesting to view, of long lasting quality, and designed to form a cohesive composition.
    (1) Use cast stone, brick, terra cotta, wood or like material, and other long lasting quality materials. T1-11, plain concrete or concrete block, corrugated metal, full- sheet plywood, sheet pressboard, synthetic stucco and prefabricated tilt-up concrete materials are prohibited, except as a secondary finish on up to 10% of the façade surface area.
    (2) Use a variety of textures and colors in exterior finish materials.
    (3) Incorporate details that add interest to buildings such as window treatments, brick detailing and ornamental banners.
    (4) Use architectural details that embellish the design of buildings, such as decorative columns, cornices, full-length porches and partial basement garages.
    (5) Use architectural details that embellish the design of buildings such as ornamental columns, decorative brackets and extensive use of trim to mark building edges and windows.
    (6) Use windows that embellish the character of buildings. Use multi-paned vertical windows with wide trim to add interest.
    (7) Incorporate architectural details found in historic northwest structures such as large porch columns, decorative brackets, multi-panes windows and narrow horizontal siding
    (8) Divide large wall areas into distinct smaller planes that are more in keeping with the pedestrian scale. Incorporate varied roof lines and varied façade articulation to reduce monotonous building mass and roof lines and to increase architectural interest.
    (9) Use materials and design features that promote quality and interest.
    (10) Place signs that integrate with the scale, color and style of the building.
    (11) Use monument signs, wall signs, window signs, neon signs, canopy and projecting signs attached to the building. The use of freestanding signs, electronic/video message center signs, backlit signs, roof signs and plastic face signs are prohibited. Signs that are permitted are subject to the City sign code.
K. Integrate parking in a manner that is attractive and complimentary to the site and its surroundings. Locate parking in a manner that minimizes negative impacts on the community and its pedestrians. Design parking garage exteriors to visually respect and integrate with adjacent buildings and environment.
    (1) Screen parking areas with landscaping, fences, walls or a combination.
    (2) Use broad-spreading trees in parking lots. Install an adequate irrigation system to minimize the damage to parking surface caused by shallow roots.
    (3) Encourage shared driveways to individual garages or parking pads. With shared driveways there is more space for landscaping and street trees along the sidewalk.
    (4) Provide a clear pedestrian path that connects parking areas with destination points.
    (5) Locate parking to the side or rear so that the front yard is not dominated by the automobile and the resulting space allows people to participate with activities on the street.
    (6) Use plant materials to break up large areas of parking.
    (7) Locate parking where it has the least amount of impact on an area.
    (8) Screen indoor parking from pedestrians with landscaping and decorative ironwork.

Section 235 Town Center Zone

General Provisions

235.100 Purpose.
This mixed use zone is specifically designed to encourage convenient living, working and shopping through a well-designed mixture of commercial, residential and employment uses. It is the policy of Wood Village that housing be built as part of the mix of uses within the Town Center and that open spaces and frequent pedestrian connections will be provided. The development standards provide flexibility while ensuring compatibility of adjacent uses. The zone encourages more dense housing within walking distance of commercial areas.

235.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this section state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. Section 400 indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below.

Use Regulations

235.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the Town Center zone are shown in Table 235-1 by the letter "Y". Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 235-1 with the letters "CU". These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 235-1 with the letter "N" are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses and development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in Section 640 Non-conforming Situations.
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY                           |       |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Household Living                               | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Group Living                                   | CU    |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial               | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES                          |       |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Retail Sales and Service                       | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Marijuana Sales other than Medical             | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Lodging                                        | Y/CU¹ |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Office                                         | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Quick Vehicle Servicing                        | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Vehicle Repair                                 | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Self Service Storage                           | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Commercial Recreation                          | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Major Event Entertainment                      | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Restricted Access Commercial Entertainment and |  N    |
| Recreation                                     |       |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES                          |       |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Manufacturing and Production                   | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Light Industrial                               | CU    |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Warehouse and Freight Movement                 | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Wholesale Sales                                | CU    |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Industrial Service                             | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Waste Related                                  | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Marijuana Processor                            | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Marijuana Wholesaler                           | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Marijuana Producer                             | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES                       |       |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Basic Utilities                                | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Community Service                              | CU    |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Parks and Open Space                           | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Schools                                        | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Colleges                                       | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Medical Centers                                | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Medical Marijuana Dispensary                   | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Religious Institutions                         | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Daycare                                        | Y     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Essential Service Provider                     | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| OTHER CATEGORIES                               |       |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Detention Facilities                           | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Mining                                         | N     |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities              | CU    |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
| Rail Lines and Utility Corridors               | CU    |
+------------------------------------------------+-------+
Y = Yes, Permitted Use N = No, Prohibited Use CU = Conditional Use Review Required
1. Lodging Uses in excess of 10 acres, not including surface parking, shall be treated as a conditional use.

235.210 Accessory Uses.
Uses which are accessory to the permitted uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone, specific regulations for the accessory use and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 - Use Categories.

235.220 Limitations on Large Retail Uses.
A. Purpose. The Limitations on Large Retail Use requirement promotes inclusion of office, light industrial or other permitted non-retail employment uses, and to provide employment opportunities in addition to retail employment in the commercial component of development in the Town Center zone pursuant to the City of Wood Village Vision Statement for 2030 (updated June 2017).
B. Requirement. 
    (1) No more than three retail uses with a floor area of more than 60,000 square feet (“big box development”) are allowed in the Wood Village portion of the Fairview-Wood Village Town Center. Lodging and entertainment uses shall not be limited by this provision.
    (2) “Non-Retail Employment Uses” means Light Industrial, Medical Center uses, Office uses, Daycare, Personal Service-oriented uses, entertainment-oriented uses, lodging uses, and repair-oriented uses.

Development Standards

235.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design which will ensure that new land divisions and development will:
- Provide adequate flexibility to allow development which is compatible with the existing area, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity.
- Provide adequate assurance of compatibility of adjacent uses within the mixed-use context, and compatibility between mixed-use development and adjoining existing uses.
- Comply with the Transportation Planning Rule and Regional Land Use and Transportation Goals.
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
|        STANDARD         | RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES(1) |  NON-RESIDENTIAL AND   |
|                         |                               |       MIXED USE        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Lot size and dimensions | Same as MR2 zone              | No minimum lot size,   |
|                         | (see Tables 220-3 and         | long-term (phased)     |
|                         | 220-4)                        | capacity to achieve    |
|                         |                               | minimum 0.4 FAR        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Maximum lot coverage    | same as MR2 zone              | 85%                    |
|                         | (see Tables 220-3 and         |                        |
|                         | 220-4)                        |                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Maximum height          | 35 ft                         | 115 ft(2)              |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Front setback           | 10 ft(5)                      | 0-10 ft                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Garage setback          | 20 ft(5)                      | None(3), 22 ft minimum |
|                         |                               | when parallels street  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Side setback            | 5 ft                          | None(3)                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Rear setback            | 15 ft                         | None(3)                |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
| Minimum Landscaping     | Same as MR2 zone              | 15 %(4)                |
| (percent of site area)  | (see Table 220-4)             |                        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------+
(1)Residential uses included in the same structure as non-residential mixed uses are regulated as part of the mixed use for purposes of these development standards.
(2)For sites abutting a light residential zone or abutting right of way adjacent to a light residential zone, the maximum height is 25 feet within the first 25 feet from the lot line abutting the light residential zone. One additional foot in height is permitted above 25’ for each two (2’) feet in lateral distance up to the height limit for the zone. Lateral distance is measured from the light residential lot line and may include the right of way.
(3)Sites abutting a residential zone shall have a side or rear building setback of 15 feet from the residential zone.
(4)For sites abutting a residential zone, the entire depth of any required setback from the residential zone shall be landscaped.
(5)This note applies to detached single-family dwelling units: garages shall not be closer to the street than the plane of the street-facing façade. For the purpose of this subsection, porches may be considered as part of the street-facing façade.

235.310 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
A. Minimum Lot Size & Dimension. The minimum lot size standards are set forth in Table 235-2 Development Standards in Town Center Zone. Creation of new lots is subject to the regulations of Section 450 - Subdivisions and Partitions. The lot size for all permitted or conditional uses shall be adequate to fulfill the applicable requirements stated below.

235.320 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 235-2.
B. Extensions into required building setbacks.
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, open fire escapes, bay windows, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required building setback by no more than 20% of its depth. However, they may not be within 3' of a lotline.

235.330 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 235-2.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height. 
    (1) Projections allowed. Projections extending vertically for permitted buildings and uses, such as skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, and radio and television aerials, may be erected above the height limitations herein prescribed. Such structures shall not project more than 5' above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility power poles are exempt from the height limit.

235.340 Floor Area Ratios.
A. Purpose. Floor Area Ratios (FAR) provide a means to match the potential density of uses with the desired character of the area and provision of public services.
B. FAR Standard. Floor Area Ratio is defined as the amount of Floor Area in square feet divided by the amount of Net Land Area in square feet (see definitions in Section 720.030). A Development Plan in the Town Center zone shall show that a minimum 0.4 FAR can be achieved on the areas of the site to be developed with non-residential uses at full build-out. To do so, the development plan can rely on conceptual future phases of development.
C. Adequacy of Services. The Development Plan must demonstrate that the transportation system is adequate or can be made adequate for development proposed for implementation within a two year period.

235.350 Required Landscaping.
The minimum landscaping requirements are stated in Table 235-2 and shall satisfy the followingrequirements:
A. Computation. The minimum site area devoted to landscaping may be computed to include any required landscaping imposed by Section 350 - Parking and Loading.
B. Watering. Provisions shall be made for watering planting areas where such care is required for survival.
C. Maintenance. Required landscaping shall be continuallymaintained.
D. Height of Trees. Maximum height of selected tree species shall be considered when planting under overhead utility lines.

235.360 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to 3 ½ feet are allowed in required front building setback and required side building setbacks to the depth of the required front building setback.
    (2) Fences up to 8 feet are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks except for corner lot side setback which is limited to 3 ½ feet.
    (3) The location of fences shall not interfere with the pedestrian circulation system.

235.370 Accessory Structures.
Structures which are incidental to the primary building are considered accessory structures and are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
A. Covered Accessory Structures. All covered accessory structures, whether attached to the primary building or detached, shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks requirements, lot coverage and height restrictions. These standards are stated in Table 235-2.
B. Uncovered Accessory Structures. Uncovered, detached accessory structures such as signs, flag poles and lamp posts are allowed in the front building setback but not in a required setback from an abutting residential zone.

235.380 Exterior Display, Storage and Work Activities.
A. Exterior Display. Exterior display of goods is allowed for commercial uses only. The setback and landscape standards for exterior displayare stated in Table 235-3.
B. Exterior Storage. Exterior storage is prohibited.
C. Exterior Work Activities. Exterior work activities are prohibited except for restaurants, plant nurseries, entertainment and recreation uses and outdoormarkets.
D. Paving. All exterior display and work areas, except plant nurseries, shall be paved.
+------------------------------------+-----------+
|      Commercial Use Category       | Standards |
+------------------------------------+-----------+
| Exterior Display                   |           |
+------------------------------------+-----------+
| – Abutting a street                | 5 ft/L1   |
+------------------------------------+-----------+
| – Abutting Commercial Use Category | None      |
+------------------------------------+-----------+
| – Abutting Other Use Category      | 5 ft/L1   |
+------------------------------------+-----------+
| – Abutting any R zone              | 5 ft/L3   |
+------------------------------------+-----------+
Note: For description of the landscape requirements (i.e. L3, F2, etc.), see Section 330 - Landscaping & Screening.

235.390 Parking and Loading.
1. The requirements of Section 350 apply except as modified in an approved Development Plan.
2. Shared Parking. In addition, parking requirements in the Town Center zone may be met by blending parking rates. Calculating parking stalls for a use may include counting adjacent on-street spaces, nearby public parking, cross-patronage, and shared parking possibilities due to variation in hours of operation and as per Section 350.045(5). Designation on an approved Development Plan for shared parking shall satisfy the Joint Use Parking requirements of Section 350.045(5).
3. Interim Parking. In early development phases, portions of the property set aside for non-residential uses at full build-out may be used for parking associated with uses built in early phases. However, no restrictions shall be placed on the property set aside for future non-residential use that will prevent development of those future uses. Interim parking sites shall comply with design requirements at designated Required Landscape Building Frontages.

235.400 Additional Regulations.
A. Drive-up or Drive-Through Facilities. Drive-up and drive-through facilities are not allowed except on Lots 1 through 17, Wood Village Town Center, Wood Village, OR. (Ord. 15-2010)
B. Public Access. All lots shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before development is allowed. Vehicular access to commercial uses shall be as designated in Figure 235-1 and as provided in Table 235- 4.
C. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum setback requirements of the zone.
D. Signs. Signs in the Town Center shall be approved and constructed in accordance with Section 370 Signs, except that freestanding signs in the Town Center Zone must be either a Wood Village Town Center sign, or a center-wide directory-type freestanding sign. Individual building pads may not erect a freestanding sign that advertises only their business.
E. Solid Waste, Mixed and Recyclables Storage. See Section 390.
F. Uncontained hazardous materials are prohibited.
G. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
H. Design Review. Design Review is required for all uses in this mixed use zone. (See Section 630). In addition to the Design Review requirements, the Design Review Board shall review all specific development applications within a Development Plan to ensure that the site designs and building locations encourage safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access; are reasonably accessible to transit; and provide adequate pedestrian connections to exterior streets and to other uses within the Development Plan area through clustering of buildings, construction of accessways and walkways or other similar techniques.

235.410 Concept Plan Regulating Diagram.
A. Purpose. The Concept Plan Regulating Diagram organizes each street (both existing and future streets) into one of 5 street or path types: Town Center Main Street, Town Center Local Streets, Universal Streets, Service Streets and Multi-Use Paths or Trails. Note that their exact alignment may vary by up to 100 feet from the locations shown on the diagram, provided that they fully connect/intersect with each of the streets and intersections as shown. See Section 235.430 Town Center Street and Path Types for details regarding cross section designs for each street type.
B. Utilization of Diagram. The Building and Façade Standards by Street Type Table 235-5 outlines the building and façade standards applicable to individual parcels, and is organized by street type. Parcels must comply with the standards for the street type on which the parcel fronts. Parcels with multiple street frontages (corner parcels, for example) must prioritize compliance with the applicable frontage requirements as provided in Section 235.450. Table 235-5 addresses requirements for street frontage, ground floor heights, transparency, primary entry doors and weather protection.Figure 235-1. Concept Plan Regulating Diagram
[IMAGE: <Fig235-1_Concept-Plan-Regulating-Diagram.png>]

235.420 Concept Plan Regulating Diagram (Figure 235-1) Development Standards.
A. Required Intersections. 
    (1) Required Intersection Type 1. Required Intersection 1 and exact street locations of new Streets or Paths may vary by up to 50 feet from locations shown, provided they comply with the illustrated intersections and connections. See Section 235.430 Town Center Street and Path Types and Table 235-5 Building and Façade Standards by Street Type for requirements.
    (2) Required Intersection Type 2. Required Intersection 2 and exact street locations of new Streets or Paths may vary by up to 100 feet from locations shown, provided they comply with the illustrated intersections and connection. See Section 235.430 and Table 235-5 for requirements.
B. Required Frontages. The line representing the Required Building Frontage and Required Landscape Frontage is the same as the Public Street or Public Easement as defined by the requirements of Section 235.450.
    (1) See Table 235-5 for Building Frontage requirements.
    (2) See Table 235-5 for Landscape Frontage requirements.
C. Required Street and Path Types. 
    (1) See Section 235.430 for Town Center street and path type descriptions and street cross sections.
    (2) Where a Multi-use Path or Trail connects from the Town Center Main Street to NE Park Lane, a Universal Street type is permitted for any portion of its length.
    (3) All pathways not tied to designated intersection locations have flexible locations that may be relocated to accommodate topography, desired connection points and construction feasibility.
    (4) The Concept Plan Regulating Diagram lays out the basic requirements of streets and intersections but does not limit the ability of a developer to add additional streets, intersections, paths, plazas, driveways, or other features to complement the requirements set forth in the regulating diagram.
    (5) Where a street alignment extends to a property boundary but no existing street is present to which to connect at the time of development, a corridor of appropriate width shall be reserved to accommodate future construction of the street. Non-vehicular access may be provided in the interim period.
D. Required Gateways. 
    (1) Gateways are required as shown in Figure 235-1. See Section 235.470 for applicable requirements.
    (2) Gateways shall not be permitted within any Multnomah County right of way.
E. Public Plazas. Public Plazas are required as shown in Figure 235-1 subject to the provisions of Section 235.455.
F. Modifications. The requirements of this Section are subject to the Modification provisions in Section 235.490(C)(3).

235.430 Town Center Street and Path Types.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the street and path types in this section is to facilitate each street in creating an ordered and well-designed public realm, an inviting environment for pedestrians, and a functional environment that supports connectivity and development throughout the Town Center. The Street and Path Types reinforce the unique character of each street type of Figure 235-1.
B. Town Center Main Street. A traditional main street with on-street parking that prioritizes access to commercial activity for people on foot or bicycle as well as local vehicular trips. Main streets are an important component of the Town Center street and path network. It may accommodate high frequency bus service.
C. Town Center Local Street. Local streets are focused on bicycle, pedestrian and local vehicular connectivity and are an important component of the Town Center bicycle network.
D. Universal Street: Universal streets prioritize bicycle and pedestrian mobility and provide pedestrian and local internal vehicular connectivity. Universal streets are an important component of the Town Center bicycle network.
E. Service Street: These streets prioritize business access for freight and deliveries. As a minor role they provide bicycle, pedestrian and local vehicular connectivity.
F. Multi-use Path / Trail: Prioritizes access and connectivity for people on foot and on bicycles; the trail and multi-use path system is an important component of the Town Center bicycle network.
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
|  Street   | Target | Right-of-Way | Pavement | Vehicular  | Travel  | Parking |     Bike     | Sidewalk/ |   Planting   |
|   Type    | Speed1 | or Easement  |  Width   |   Travel   |  Lane   |  Lane   |  Facilities  |   Path    |    Strip     |
|           |        |    Width     |          |   Lanes    |  Width  |  Width  |              |   Width   |    Width     |
|           |        |              |          |  (number)  |         |         |              |           | / Furnishing |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           |     Zone     |
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
| Town      | Under  | 60 -         | 36 –     | 2 lanes    | 10 feet | 8 - 18  | Shared       | 12 feet   | 4 feet       |
| Center    | 20 mph | 80 feet      | 56 feet  | (one       | maximum | feet2   | street       | minimum   | minimum      |
| Main      |        |              |          | in each    |         |         |              |           | (included    |
| Street    |        |              |          | direction) |         |         |              |           | within       |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           | the          |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           | 12-foot      |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           | sidewalk     |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           | width)       |
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
| Town      | Under  | 56 feet      | 32 feet  | 2 lanes    | 16 feet | 8 feet  | Shared       | 12 feet   | 4 feet       |
| Center    | 20 mph |              |          | (one       | maximum |         | street       | minimum   | minimum      |
| Local     |        |              |          | in each    |         |         |              |           | (included    |
| Street    |        |              |          | direction) |         |         |              |           | within       |
|           |        |              |          | with       |         |         |              |           | the          |
|           |        |              |          | queuing    |         |         |              |           | 12-foot      |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           | sidewalk     |
|           |        |              |          |            |         |         |              |           | width)       |
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
| Universal | Under  | 42 feet      | 18 feet  | 1 lane     | 18 feet | 0 - 18  | Shared       | 12 feet   | NA           |
| Street    | 20 mph | minimum      | minimum  | (one       |         | feet3   | street       | minimum   |              |
|           |        |              |          | way        |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | street)    |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | or 2       |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | lanes      |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | (one       |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | in each    |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | direction) |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | with       |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | queuing    |         |         |              |           |              |
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
| Service   | Under  | 26 feet      | 18 feet  | 1 lane     | 18 feet | 0 - 18  | Shared       | 8 feet    | NA           |
| Street    | 20 mph | minimum      | minimum  | (one       |         | feet3   | street       | minimum   |              |
|           |        |              |          | way        |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | street)    |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | or 2       |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | lanes      |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | (one       |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | in each    |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | direction) |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | with       |         |         |              |           |              |
|           |        |              |          | queuing    |         |         |              |           |              |
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
| Multi-use | NA     | 10 –         | 6 -16    | NA         | NA      | NA      | Shared       | Varies    | 3 feet       |
| Path      |        | 24 feet      | feet     |            |         |         | or dedicated |           | minimum      |
| / Trail4  |        |              |          |            |         |         | path         |           |              |
+-----------+--------+--------------+----------+------------+---------+---------+--------------+-----------+--------------+
1Vehicular target speed as opposed to design speed, per CNU / ITE manual “Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach”
2Options for parking include parallel or diagonal or a combination
3Options for parking include none, parallel, diagonal or a combination
4Where a multi-use path or trail is required to connect the Town Center Main Street to NE Park Lane, any of the development standards for Universal Street type may be substituted for any portion of its lengthFigure 235-2: Town Center Main Street
[IMAGE: <Fig235-2_Town-Center-Main-Street.jpg>]Figure 235-3: Town Center Local Street
[IMAGE: <Fig235-3_Town-Center-Local-Street.png>]Figure 235-4: Universal Street
[IMAGE: <Fig235-4_Universal-Street.jpg>]Figure 235-5: Service Street
[IMAGE: <Fig235-5_Service-Street.png>]Figure 235-6: Multi-Use Path/Trail
[IMAGE: <Fig235-6_MultiUse-PathTrail.jpg>]

235.440 Building and Façade Standards.
A. Purpose. The building and facade standards encourage a safe, attractive and usable pedestrian circulation system, and ensure a direct and pleasant pedestrian connection between the street and buildings on the site. This section is intended to provide detailed, human-scale design that is characteristic of Wood Village, while affording flexibility to use a variety of architectural building styles.
B. General Standard. All new buildings and major remodels shall meet the standards of these subsections which are applied through Design Review. The applicant demonstrates that the standards are met by complying with the criteria under each standard, including the standards in Table 235-5, subject to the provisions for development sites with multiple street frontages in Section 235.450(A).
C. Transit Stops. New commercial, residential, lodging, entertainment, industrial or institutional uses adjoining a transit route shall provide a pedestrian connection to an existing transit stop, or to a new proposed transit stop with appropriate pedestrian amenities as required and approved by the City, in cooperation with Tri-Met.
    (1) On lots at major transit stops, as defined in the Transportation Planning Rule, buildings shall be located within 20 feet of the transit stop, a transit street or an intersecting street or provide a pedestrian plaza at the transit stop or street intersection.
D. Building Materials: Natural materials that promote a Pacific Northwest aesthetic such as heavy timber, wood or stone shall be the primary exterior siding materials. Developers are also encouraged to use reclaimed or new brick, cultured stone, or other rapidly renewable resources. Unfinished metal siding, corrugated sheet metal, vinyl siding, T1-11 siding or plywood, opaque or highly reflective glass (i.e. providing very low or no transparency from the building exterior side) are prohibited. Whenever possible, use energy efficient building materials in accordance with LEED Certification standard.
E. Roofs: Buildings must have either a sloped roof with a pitch no flatter than 4/12 or a flat roof with a cornice that meets the following:
    (1) There must be two parts to the cornice. The top part of the cornice must project at least 6 inches from the face of the building and be at least 2 inches further from the face of the building than the bottom part of the cornice; and
    (2) The height of the cornice is based on the height of the building asfollows:
        •Buildings 18 feet or less in height must have a cornice at least 12 inches high.
        •Buildings greater than 18 feet and less than 30 feet in height must have a cornice at least 18 inches high.
        •Buildings 30 feet or greater in height must have a cornice at least 24 inches high.
F. Roof-mounted Equipment: All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other communication equipment, must be screened in one of the following ways:
    (1) A parapet as tall as the tallest part of the equipment;
    (2) A screen around the equipment that is as tall as the tallest part of the equipment;
    (3) The equipment is set back from the street facing perimeters of the building four feet for each foot of height of the equipment; or,
    (4) If the equipment is a satellite dish or other communication device, it is added to the façade of a penthouse that contains mechanical equipment, is no higher than the top of the penthouse, is flush mounted, and is painted to match the façade of the penthouse.
    (5) Solar panels are exempt from this standard.
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    |   Development Standard    |    Town Center     |    Town Center    | Service Street | Multi-use Path |
    |                           |    Main Street     |   Local Street    |                |     /Trail     |
    |                           |     and Public     |   and Universal   |                |                |
    |                           |       Plaza        |      Street       |                |                |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Building          | 60%                | 60%               | 40%            | NA             |
    | Frontage Along            |                    |                   |                |                |
    | Required Building         |                    |                   |                |                |
    | Frontage Line             |                    |                   |                |                |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Landscape         | 60%                | 60%               | 60%            | 50%            |
    | Frontage Along            |                    |                   |                |                |
    | Required Landscape        |                    |                   |                |                |
    | Frontage Line             |                    |                   |                |                |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Minimum ground            | 16 feet            | 14 feet           | 14 feet        | 14 feet        |
    | floor height              |                    |                   |                |                |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Ground floor construction | 1 hour fire resistive                                                    |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Separation of             | Vertical distance from ground: Minimum 18 inches, Maximum                |
    | ground floor              | 3 feet. OR                                                               |
    | residential uses          | Horizontal distance from Build to line: Minimum 3 feet                   |
    |                           | / Maximum 15 feet                                                        |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Primary entry             | Shall face street; | Shall face street | No requirement | No requirement |
    | doors                     | 20% transparent,   |                   |                |                |
    |                           | minimum            |                   |                |                |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Weather protection        | Protected area: 20 square              | No requirement | No requirement |
    |                           | feet, minimum; 5 feet minimum          |                |                |
    |                           | horizontal dimension; 10               |                |                |
    |                           | foot vertical clearance,               |                |                |
    |                           | minimum                                |                |                |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Ground floor transparency | 60%                | 50%               | No requirement | No requirement |
    +---------------------------+--------------------+-------------------+----------------+----------------+

235.450 Required Building and Landscape Frontage.
A. The Required Building Frontage and Required Landscape Frontage is the same on the Public Street or Public Easement as defined by the requirements of Section 235.420.
B. Where specified, the applicable façade of a building (or landscape screening) is required to be located at the Required Building Frontage line for a percentage of the linear distance between the centerlines of the nearest perpendicular streets or paths. Where a Required Building Front Line occurs on a curved segment of a street, path or plaza, the required frontage shall be measured as the linear dimension of the chord.
C. See Figure 235-1 for further Building Frontage requirements.
    (1) Multiple Frontages. 
        (a) When a development fronts multiple street or paths, one of the Frontages shall be determined as the Primary Street or Frontage and the other frontage as the Secondary Street or Frontage, according to the following hierarchy:
        (b) Primary Street or Frontage: Main Street
        (c) Secondary Street or Frontage: Public Plaza and all other streets or paths, including NE Wood Village Boulevard, NE 223rd Avenue, NE Arata Road, and NE Glisan Street. The development shall meet the Required Building Frontage on the Primary Street. The remaining perimeter of the lot shall meet the applicable Required Landscape Frontage.
    (2) Sites bounded by Secondary Streets or Frontages. Where no Primary Frontage exists, then the Primary Frontage is defined as the edge adjacent to the Secondary Street.
    (3) Primary Street Frontage wraps the corner. On corner sites, the building shall meet the Required Building Frontage on the Primary Street. On the Secondary Street the same frontage requirement shall apply to 50 feet from the corner where the Primary Street meets the Secondary Street. The remaining perimeter of the lot shall meet the applicable Required Landscape Frontage.
    (4) Resolving Frontage Conflicts. At a proposed developed site or block that has more than one Required Building Frontage per Figure 235-1, if it is impractical to meet that requirement on all of the Required Building Frontages, building siting and public entrance locations shall be designed to prioritize compliance in the following sequence: Public Plaza, Town Center Main Street, Collector (Wood Village Boulevard), Town Center Local Street, Town Center Universal Street, Town Center Service Streets.
    (5) No Frontage on a Street or Path. Where development does not abut a Primary or Secondary Street or Path, the development shall meet the development standards for side and rear yards as applicable.
D. Landscape Frontage. The land between a building and a street shall be landscaped to at least the L1 level or hard-surfaced for use by pedestrians. This area may be counted towards any minimum landscaped area requirements. See Figure 235-1 for further Landscape Frontage requirements.
E. Ground Floor Residential. Where a dwelling is located on the ground floor, vertical or horizontal separation shall be provided to ensure privacy for residents and maintain quality of the public realm. The required separation applies to the distance between the street, path or plaza and the residential entryway (and any habitable rooms). Horizontal separation may take the form of a landscaped or hardscaped area such as a forecourt or dooryard. Vertical separation may take the form of several steps or a ramp to a porch, stoop or terrace.
F. Primary Entrance. All buildings shall have at least one primary building entrance (i.e., dwelling entrance, a tenant entrance, lobby entrance, or breezeway/courtyard entrance) facing an adjoining street (i.e., within 45 degrees property line), or if the building entrance is turned more than 45 degrees from the street (i.e., front door is on a side elevation), the primary entrance shall not be more than 20 feet from a street sidewalk, except to provide pedestrian amenities; a walkway shall connect the primary entrance to the sidewalk in this case. Every building shall have at least one primary entrance that does not require passage through a parking lot or garage.
G. Corner buildings (i.e., buildings within 20 feet of a corner as defined by the intersecting curbs) shall have corner entrances, or shall provide at least one entrance within 20 feet of the street corner or corner plaza.
H. Each entrance shall be covered, recessed, or treated with a permanent architectural feature in such a way that weather protection is provided.
I. Transparency is measured by total area of all ground floor windows divided by the overall lineal footage area of the ground floor façade. The majority (greater than 50% of the requirement) shall be between 2’ and 10’ above ground level.

235.455 Public Plaza.
A. Plazas shall be developed in accordance with Section 235.410 (Concept Plan Regulating Diagram). The purpose of a plaza is to provide a recognizable open space area accessible to the public at a prominent location within the Town Center.
B. Plaza locations may be proposed other than as illustrated conceptually in Figure 235-1. An alternative location adjacent to, visible from, and directly accessible from Wood Village Boulevard or a Town Center Main Street, a Town Center Local Street or a Universal Street, shall be processed through a Type 1 approval procedure.
C. A plaza should contain a minimum area of 14,500 square feet at full build out. For phased developments the plaza may be built in segments of not less than 4000 square feet.
D. A plaza should include human-scale comfort and interest features such as furniture, water fountains or other water features, landscape plantings, covers to provide shade and weather protection, art, play structures, or similar amenities.
E. Location and visibility. The surface of all pedestrian plazas must be visually and physically accessible from a designated street. Allowances may be made for sites with steep topography.
F. Surface. Paved walking surfaces must be provided.
G. Landscaping. 
    •At least ten percent of the plaza area must be landscaped.
    •The landscaping must be planted and maintained according to Section 330.
    •Landscaping shall not block visual access to the pedestrian plaza.
H. Seating. 
    (1) Seating shall be provided in all public plazas.
    (2) Tops of walls and steps may be considered seating if designed to accommodate this function.
I. Exposure to Sunlight. 
    (1) Southern locations are encouraged to allow direct sunlight to enter the space and strike the plaza floor.
    (2) Public plazas shall be designed to allow some direct sunlight to enter the plaza.
    (3) Public plaza landscaping shall be designed in a manner that does not block the entrance of direct sunlight.
J. Plaza Edges.
    (1) Plaza Enclosure. All public plaza edges must meet applicable development standards in Table 235-4.
K. Uses in Public Plazas.
    (1) Permitted Uses. Playground equipment, fountains, waterfalls, pools, sculptures, works of art, arbors, trellises, benches, trees, planting beds, trash receptacles, drinking fountains, bicycle racks, open air cafes, kiosks, vending carts, outdoor furniture, lighting, flagpoles, temporary exhibits, canopies, awnings, and similar uses which encourage pedestrian use of these spaces.
    (2) Allowed Motor Vehicle Use. Motor vehicle use of public plazas for passenger drop off and pick up at plaza edge. All other loading or motor vehicle access is prohibited.

235.460 Mobile Food Carts.
The Development Plan shall identify specific locations, such as public plazas, where mobile food carts or vendors will be allowed, not allowed, or allowed subject to certain limitations or restrictions set out in the Development Plan. Within a public plaza or other open space area, land areas in which mobile food carts or vendors are allowed shall be considered open spaces for the purpose of satisfying applicable open space area requirements, whether expressed as an area figure or a site percentage.

235.465 Open Space Requirement.
A Development Plan within the Town Center shall contain a minimum of 20 percent open space, which may be public, private, or a combination of public and private open space. This requirement may be satisfied by setting aside a portion of the property held by the applicant that is not contiguous to a specific Development Plan site. Such open space shall be integral to the Development Plan and the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram plan. Plans shall provide space for both active and passive recreational uses and may include, but are not limited to, neighborhood parks, pathways/trails, natural areas and plazas. All landscaping on a main street or local street that exceed the minimum standards identified in table 235-4 shall be included as open space. Required landscaping on roadways and parking areas shall not be included in the areas allowed to satisify this requirement. Open space areas shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the final plat or separate instrument; the open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:
A. By dedication to the City as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the City must be acceptable to the Planning Commission with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition (i.e., the applicant may be required to provide an environmental assessment), and approved by City Council based on budgetary, maintenance, and liability considerations; or
B. By entering into an agreement with the City that assures maintenance of the open space areas, or leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, homeowners’ association or other legal entity. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions for maintenance and property tax payment acceptable to the City. The City, through conditions of approval, may also require public access be provided where the open space is deemed necessary, based on impacts of the development and to meet public recreational needs pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan.

235.470 Town Center Gateways.
A. Purpose. “Gateways” refers both to entrances into the City or individual districts and to design techniques for public spaces that help people identify where they are in the community and how to get around. Gateways signify a change in development character and style, as well as help promote a sense of place and community identity. Gateways should be developed at key entrances into the Town Center as a way of establishing identity and to reinforce the unique character of the Wood Village Town Center, to greet visitors and welcome residents home. Wayfinding techniques such as landscaping, street design and special signage also help users establish where they are and where they are going.
B. Requirement. Each property adjacent to a Gateway, as identified in Figure 235-1, is required to comply with one of the following conceptual gateway design strategies:
    (1) Archway.
    (2) Central Monument.
    (3) Gateway Buildings.
    (4) Ground Plane Treatment.
    (5) Sidewalk Monument.
    (6) Wayfinding Signage and Functional Markers.
    (7) To encourage a flexible, creative response to the zoning code, gateway requirements are offered as a menu of options. Each property adjacent to a required gateway or upon which a required gateway is located, must provide, at a minimum, one of the following gateway structures or treatments.
The images included are provided for illustrative purposes only, and are not intended to be literally interpreted as standards or guidelines.
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Gateway Type and Description   |                           Examples                           |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Archway                         |                                                              |
| An overarching structure        | [IMAGE: <235.470_Archway1.png>]                              |
| which spans over the            | [IMAGE: <235.470_Archway2.jpg>]                              |
| street or path.                 | image credits: Urbsworks (top); RentonWa.gov (bottom)        |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Central Monument                |                                                              |
| An iconic vertical structure    | [IMAGE: <235.470_CentralMonument1.jpg>]                      |
| located within the center       | [IMAGE: <235.470_CentralMonument2.jpg>]                      |
| of the street or path           | image credits: CitrusHeights.net (top); Seattle Department   |
| right-of-way or easement.       | of Planning and Development (bottom)                         |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Gateway Building                |                                                              |
| Buildings that have a           | [IMAGE: <235.470_Gateway-Building1.jpg>]                     |
| distinctive architectural       | image credit: Urbsworks                                      |
| feature or form that            | [IMAGE: <235.470_Gateway-Building2.jpg>]                     |
| serve as an identifiable        | image credits: Urbsworks (top); Urbsworks (bottom)           |
| landmark for a neighborhood     |                                                              |
| or district. Gateway            |                                                              |
| buildings often have            |                                                              |
| distinctive forms focused       |                                                              |
| around intersections            |                                                              |
| and corners, such as            |                                                              |
| prominent corner entrances,     |                                                              |
| chamfered corner entrances,     |                                                              |
| cupolas, extensive transparency |                                                              |
| and overall height.             |                                                              |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Paving and Low-height           |                                                              |
| Features                        | [IMAGE: <235.470_Paving-and-Low-height-Features-1.jpg>]      |
| Gateways can be marked          | [IMAGE: <235.470_Paving-and-Low-height-Features-2.jpg>]      |
| at or close to the ground       | image credits: Urbsworks (top); Urbsworks (bottom)           |
| plane through distinctive       |                                                              |
| paving, bollards, and           |                                                              |
| low-height landscape            |                                                              |
| treatment (or a combination     |                                                              |
| of features) that marks         |                                                              |
| a cross path and establishes    |                                                              |
| a boundary.                     |                                                              |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sidewalk Monument               |                                                              |
| An iconic vertical structure    | [IMAGE: <235.470_Sidewalk-Monument-1.jpg>]                   |
| located at one or both          | [IMAGE: <235.470_Sidewalk-Monument-2.jpg>]                   |
| sides of the street or          | image credits: Urbsworks (top); Urbsworks (bottom)           |
| path right-of-way or            |                                                              |
| easement.                       |                                                              |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Wayfinding Signage and          |                                                              |
| Functional Markers              | [IMAGE: <235.470_Wayfinding-Signage-Functional-Markers.png>] |
| Wayfinding signage and          | image credits: University of Oregon Sustainable Cities       |
| functional markers contribute   | Initiative                                                   |
| to a well-designed streetscape, |                                                              |
| helping to orient, direct       |                                                              |
| and inform, as well as          |                                                              |
| add character to a particular   |                                                              |
| neighborhood or district.       |                                                              |
| Wayfinding signage and          |                                                              |
| functional markers include      |                                                              |
| words, graphics, or maps        |                                                              |
| that provide information        |                                                              |
| about a place and help          |                                                              |
| visitors navigate their         |                                                              |
| surroundings. Wayfinding        |                                                              |
| signage provides information    |                                                              |
| about nearby amenities          |                                                              |
| or points of interest,          |                                                              |
| and helps direct pedestrians    |                                                              |
| to places they are trying       |                                                              |
| to go.                          |                                                              |
+---------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
C. Signs. Any signs placed on gateways must meet the requirements of Section 235.400(H) and Section 370 of this Code.

235.480 Transportation System Standards.
A. Regional Transportation Plan Standards. After Metro adoption of Regional Transportation Plan amendments, applications for design review (or for land division for developments not requiring design review) must demonstrate compliance with any applicable requirements of the Regional Transportation System Plan or any applicable Transportation System Plan. Demonstration of compliance must include a showing that adopted level of service standards are met for each proposed phase of development.
B. Transportation Impact Analysis. For each development proposal that exceeds the Analysis Threshold or that may have an impact on the surrounding transportation system as described below under section (D)(a), the application for land use or design review approval shall include a Traffic Impact Analysis as required by this code. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall be based on the type and intensity of the proposed land use change or development and its estimated level of impact to the existing and future local and regional transportation systems. The scope of the study will be set by the jurisdiction with authority of the road in cooperation with the applicant and the City. Throughout 235.480, the phrase City Manager or designee is utilized to identify responsible parties. Throughout this section, Multnomah County is recognized to retain jurisdiction on all roadways under their ownership and maintenance.
C. Engineer Certification. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall be prepared and certified by a traffic engineer or civil engineer licensed in the State of Oregon.
D. Analysis Threshold. 
    (a) A Traffic Impact Analysis is required when the proposed development is projected to generate more than 1,000 average weekday vehicle trips (vpd), or the proposed development’s location, proposed site plan, or trip generation characteristics could affect traffic safety, access management, street capacity, or other known traffic deficiencies in the vicinity of the site.
    (b) A Traffic Impact Analysis or some elements of a Traffic Impact Analysis may be required when the volume threshold under subsection a. is not met, if a jurisdiction with authority over an abutting roadway provides written notice to the City identifying how its facilities would be significantly affected by the proposed development.
E. Study Area. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall evaluate the Area of Influence of the proposed development and segments of the surrounding transportation system where users are likely to experience a change in the quality of traffic flow, and may specifically include access ramps and facilities on Interstate 84 (I-84). Analysis of I-84 shall be provided to the Oregon Department of Transportation for review and comment. The City Manager or designee may identify additional locations for study if existing traffic operation, safety, or performance is marginal or substandard. Prior to report preparation, the applicant shall submit the proposed scope and analysis assumptions of the Traffic Impact Analysis. The City Manager or designee shall determine whether the scope and analysis assumptions are adequate, or on a County facility, Multnomah County or other qualified party will provide all scope and evaluation functions required in this section Traffic Impact Analysis.
F. Contents of the Traffic Impact Analysis Report. The Traffic Impact Analysis report shall contain the following information organized in a logical format:
    (a) Executive Summary. An Executive Summary of no more than three single-sided pages shall be included at the beginning of the Traffic Impact Analysis report. The Executive Summary shall summarize the analysis and conclusions and identify recommended transportation improvements.
    (b) Description of Proposed Development. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall provide a comprehensive project description including but not limited to the following:
        (1) Vicinity map.
        (2) Site plan.
        (3) Project phasing.
        (4) Time schedule.
        (5) Intended use of the site, including the range of uses allowed without additional land-use approvals.
        (6) Intensity of use.
    (c) Existing Conditions. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall provide a complete evaluation of existing conditions and include maps and/or tables displaying the following information for the Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Manager or designee:
        (1) Street system including street names and functional classifications.
        (2) Pavement and shoulder widths.
        (3) Striping and channelization.
        (4) Driveways.
        (5) Freight access and loading areas.
        (6) Intersections.
        (7) Traffic volumes.
            a. Existing traffic shall be measured within the previous twelve months.
            b. Traffic volumes shall be based on traffic data provided by the applicant to the extent required by the County. In addition, data shall be provided for weekends if weekends are the peak traffic period for either the existing street or the proposed development.
            c. Seasonal variations in traffic volumes shall be considered.
        (8) Existing intersection performance indicators including volume-to-capacity ratio and control delay.
        (9) Transit information including stop and shelter locations, route numbers, headways, passenger loading, pull outs, and times of service.
        (10) Bicycle ways, sidewalks, and accessways.
        (11) Collision data for the most recent three-year period for which collision data is available.
    (d) Traffic Forecasts. The Traffic Impact Analysis report shall provide forecasts of future traffic and I-84 interchange capacity within the Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Manager or designee. Traffic forecasts shall be provided for both the Buildout Year and the Long-Range Forecast Year. The report shall include complete documentation of trip generation calculations including Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation (latest published edition) use code(s) or an alternative basis of trip generation and the rationale for using the alternative.
        (1) Buildout Year Analysis. Buildout Year forecasts shall be Total Traffic at the time of anticipated completion and occupancy of each phase of the development and at the time of completion and occupancy of the entire development. The City shall provide traffic information on other developments to consider in the calculation of Added Traffic.
        (2) Long-Range Forecast Year Analysis. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall include a capacity analysis of the potential worst- case long-range impacts to the local transportation system. The forecast year shall be approved by the City Manager or designee.
        (3) Traffic Forecast Capacity Analysis Assumptions. 
            a. Trip generation. Estimates of the proposed development’s trip generation shall be made for peak period traffic. Selection of the peak period used in the analysis shall be justified and shall consider, at a minimum, the peak period for the proposed development and the peak period for surrounding streets. The City Manager or designee may require review of other time periods based on known or anticipated marginal or substandard traffic capacity or traffic safety. Trip generation estimates shall be based on ITE’s Trip Generation (latest published edition). The City Manager or designee may approve different trip generation rates when trip generation rates are not available in ITE’s Trip Generation or different rates are justified.
            b. Trip distribution and assignment. Traffic generated by the proposed development shall be logically distributed and assigned to the street system within the Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Manager or designee. Trip distribution and assignment shall be based on trip distribution information from Multnomah County, ODOT, or Metro, on analysis of local traffic patterns based on data less than 12 months old, or on alternative data approved by the City Manager or designee.
        (4) Intersection and Highway Interchange Analysis. Intersection and highway interchange analysis shall conform to the method for operations analysis described in the Highway Capacity Manual 2000 published by the Transportation Research Board.
        Analyses on ODOT facilities shall use ODOT’s Analysis Procedures Manual (https://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TP/pages/apm.aspx). The City Manager of designee may approve an alternative analysis method. The analysis shall document that the impacts of queuing from adjacent intersections or traffic restrictions has been addressed.
    (e) Traffic Impacts. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall evaluate access, safety, operation, capacity, circulation, level of service (volume to capacity analysis when analyzing I-84), and performance of the transportation system within the proposed development’s Area of Influence and any additional locations previously identified by the City Manager or designee for both the Buildout Year and any phases thereof, and the Long-Range Forecast Year.
    Performance analysis shall be based on the standards of Section.
        (1) Safety considerations shall be evaluated. Potential safety problems resulting from conflicting turning movements between and among driveways, intersections, and internal traffic shall be addressed. Distance to the nearest driveways on both sides of streets fronting the site and in both directions from site access points shall be shown. On- Site driveway stacking and queuing impacts shall be assessed. The potential for shared access with adjacent development shall be assessed.
        (2) Geometric design and operational improvements including but not limited to acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, turning lanes, traffic signals, and channelization shall be considered, evaluated, and recommended when determined necessary by standards and practices adopted by ODOT, Multnomah County, the City or approved by the City Manager or designated representative.
        (3) Adequacy of sight distance shall be addressed at the proposed road access point(s) for both the existing road configuration and for the ultimate road configuration based on improvements planned for the development and improvements identified in the Comprehensive Plan Transportation Element. Sight distance shall meet City standards or AASHTO standards as determined by the jurisdiction.
        (4) The analysis shall also identify and evaluate related impacts on bicycle, pedestrian, and transit access, circulation, and facilities.
        (5) Other, operational, circulation, safety, and capacity issues shall be evaluated and addressed as required by the City Manager or designated representative.
    (f) Mitigation Identification. The analysis shall make recommendations for improvements necessary for safe and efficient traffic flow and bicycle, pedestrian, and transit movement and access based on and roughly proportional to the identified impacts. Buildout Year, Long-Range Forecast Year, and project phasing impacts shall be considered.
    The traffic impact analysis shall discuss the estimated levels of impact, improvements, and mitigations, and shall demonstrate how the recommended mitigations are roughly proportional to the identified impacts.
    (g) Recommendations. The Traffic Impact Analysis report shall clearly state the mitigation measures recommended by the analysis and shall summarize how the recommended mitigations are roughly proportional to the identified impacts. The recommended street and highway mitigation measures shall be shown on a scaled drawing that depicts existing and recommended improvements.
G. Conditions. Based on the mitigation measures recommended by the Traffic Impact Analysis, the City in collaboration with the jurisdiction with authority on the road or abutting roads, may impose reasonable conditions on development as necessary to maintain compliance with performance standards in the Transportation System Plan (TSP), including where applicable Level of Service (LOS) standards, and in compliance with standards of the jurisdiction with authority on the road. Such conditions may include requiring construction of offsite improvements, but no improvements to streets or intersections not contiguous to the subject property shall be undertaken without the approval of the affected jurisdiction.

235.490 Town Center Development Plan.
A. Purpose. A Development Plan is required for all sites in the Town Center zone to ensure that transportation and other facilities will support the anticipated development, and comply with requirements of the zone. Figure 235-1 is the adopted plan for the entire Town Center Zone, and is a Concept Plan Regulating Diagram adopted using a Type III procedure. The adopted Concept Plan Regulating Diagram will provide the framework for the review of applicant submitted Development Plans for portions of the site.
B. When Required. Approval of a Development Plan meeting the requirements of this section is required before any land division or other development may occur on a site in the Town Center Zone. Proposed Development not identified in the current code or designated in Figure 235-1 may be enabled by an applicant initiated Town Center Development Plan as described in Section 235.400(C)(2)(b)(iii).
C. Procedures. 
    (1) Pre-Application Review of Development Plan. 
        (a) Prior to submitting an application for a Development Plan, the applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan to City staff for review. Such plan shall consist of a general site plan and brief narrative containing the following elements:
            i. Proposed land uses and estimated FARs ordensities,
            ii. Preliminary estimate of vehicle trip generation from proposed uses,
            iii. Street and parking circulation system,
            iv. Water transmission lines, and
            v. Major storm and sanitary sewer facilities,
            vi. Statement of compliance with the adopted Concept Plan Regulating Diagram (Figure 235-1),
            vii. Minor Modifications requested, if any.
        (b) City Staff shall review the preliminary development plan and prepare a pre-application report responding to it within 30 days of submittal. The report shall be based upon the Comprehensive Plan, City of Wood Village Vision statement for 2030 (June 2017) and compliance with the standards and regulations of this ordinance.
    (2) Town Center Development Plan. 
        (a) The applicant must submit a Development Plan application within one year of pre- application plan review. Otherwise, the pre-application review will expire and another pre- application review will be required prior to resubmission of the Plan.
        (b) The Development Plan shall be reviewed under the procedures listed in Sections 510-530 of the Code. The decision making authority provided in the code may approve, approve with conditions or deny the Plan based on the requirements of Section 235.110. For Type III, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be in the form of a recommendation to the City Council. For Type III hearings, the City Council must review the Planning Commission's decision and conduct a de novo hearing to determine whether the Plan should be approved, approved with conditions or denied.
            i. A Development Plan that is consistent with the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram (Figure 235-1) may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied through a Type I procedure.
            ii. The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny, through a Type II procedure, a proposed Development Plan that differs from Figure 235-1 in ways that are consistent with the “Minor Changes” limitations in Section 235.490(C)(3)(b)(1) through (4).
            iii. Through a Type III procedure, the Planning Commission and City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a proposed Plan that differs from Figure 235-1 in ways that are not consistent with the “Minor Changes” limitations in Section 235.490(C)(3)(b)(1) through (4).
            iv. Denial of a Plan shall not bar an applicant from proposing to amend the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram (Figure 235-1) before or concurrently with an application for Plan approval.
    (3) Changes and Modifications. 
        (a) Major Changes. Major changes in the Development Plan after it has been adopted shall be considered the same as a new application and shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in this section.
        (b) Minor Changes. Minor changes in the Development Plan may be approved by the Planning Commission, provided that such changes:
            1. Do not change densities;
            2. Do not change boundaries; and
            3. Do not change the location or amount of land devoted to specific land uses.
            4. Do not change the location of streets, paths and plazas, except as permitted by the standards of Section 235.420, Section 235.455 and Figure 235-1.
D. Criteria. An application for a Development Plan shall be approved if the proposal meets all of the following criteria. The City, in approving the application, may impose reasonable conditions of approval, consistent with the applicable criteria.
    (1) The application is consistent with the Wood Village Comprehensive Plan and the Wood Village Vision 2030 (June 2017); and
    (2) The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of the Town Center Zone including, but not limited to, the purpose of the zone, the Town Center Concept Plan Regulating Diagram, Section 235.420 and additional Sections referenced therein, Street and Path Types, Development Standards, Building and Façade Standards by Street Type and other zone standards; and
    (3) The site size, dimensions, location, topography, and access are adequate for the needs of the proposed use, considering the proposed building mass, parking, traffic, noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, and aesthetic considerations; and
    (4) The negative impacts of the proposed use, if any, on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other Code standards, or other reasonable conditions of approval; and
    (5) All required public facilities, including water, sanitary sewer, and streets, have adequate capacity or are to be improved to serve the proposal, consistent with City standards; and
    (6) The proposal meets all existing conditions of approval for the site or use, as required by prior land use decision(s), as applicable.
E. Conditions of Approval. The City may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:
    (1) Requiring site or architectural design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibrations, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, and/or dust;
    (2) Require or permit larger setback areas, lot areas, and/or lot depth or width;
    (3) Requiring landscaping, berms, screening, drainage, water quality facilities or specialty screening or improvements.
F. Required Contents. 
    (1) Town Center Development Plan Diagram. The Development Plan shall address the entire area of the proposed development site.
        (a) In addition to the requirements of Section 500.110, a Development Plan Diagram must include the following:
            i. A vicinity map, including zoning and uses of adjacentsites;
            ii. Scale (at least one inch equals 50 feet or larger);
            iii. North arrow;
            iv. Date;
            v. Approximate location and size of planned land uses including areas not covered by buildings;
            vi. Site topography at a contour interval not to exceed 5 feet; and
            vii. Locations of all natural features including, but not limited to, any existing trees of a caliper greater than 6 inches dbh, and any natural drainage ways, wetlands or creeks on the site and identification of any contemplated modifications of natural features.
        (b) The Development Plan shall include a diagram showing the approximate location of public facilities and services to support planned land uses. The public facilities shown shall include:
            i. Names and locations of proposed streets and/or paths consistent with the street design type locations depicted in Figure 235-1, except where topographical, arterial street access standards or other physical or regulatory constraints conflict with such alignments;
            ii. Additional pedestrian pathways, if their general locations can be reasonably anticipated;
            iii. Transit stops, if their general locations can be reasonably anticipated;
            iv. Major storm and sanitary sewer facilities;
            v. Major water transmission lines;
            vi. Public facilities, including streets, sewer, water and storm sewer on adjacent properties;
            vii. Street and pedestrian connections, if any, to existing streets or paths on adjacent properties;
            viii. Any other expected public facilities if their general locations can be reasonably anticipated;
            ix. The Open Space requirement of Section 235.460;
            x. The Public Plaza requirement of Section 235.450 and Table 235-5; and
            xi. The Gateway requirement of 235.470.
        (c) The Development Plan diagram shall include maximum building footprints and shall indicate the general expected location of residential uses, commercial and limited industrial uses, any areas of mixed use, and any existing buildings to remain. It should be generally understood which streets, paths and open spaces future buildings will be oriented to.
        The Town Center Development Plan may include a Phasing Plan to illustrate the anticipated sequence of development projects within the development site, how each development project can comply with applicable requirements including adequate parking ratios for proposed uses, and how development at build-out can comply with the applicable ultimate minimum FAR requirement for the development site.
    (2) Town Center Development Plan Narrative. The Town Center Development Plan shall include a narrative explaining how the following requirements are met:
        (a) Findings for the criteria of Section 235.490(D).
        (b) The Transportation Policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
        (c) The Transportation Impact Analysis requirements of Section 235.480.
        (d) The Limitations on Large Retail Use requirement of 235.220.
        (e) Any other requirements of this Code that the Planning Commission or City Council determine must be addressed in the Town Center Development Plan in order to ensure conformance with those requirements.
G. Effect of Plan. A Development Plan is not a subdivision, planned unit development or specific design review approval for land development. An applicant must obtain separate approvals for any development, including design review, subdivision or planned unit development approvals; such approvals may be requested and processed concurrent with a proposed Development Plan review in a consolidated land use decision procedure. A project or land division that is generally consistent with the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram may proceed under the regular provisions of this development code. If a proposal would, in the judgment of the assigned reviewer of this code, be clearly inconsistent with other applicable provisions of this Development Code including the 2030 Vision Plan (June 2017) and Comprehensive Plan, the applicant must seek amendment of the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram either before or concurrently with the application for design review, subdivision or planned unit developmentapproval.

Section 240 Manufacturing Zones

General Provisions

240.100 Purpose.
The manufacturing zones are intended to reserve land for industrial uses and development which improve the economic vitality of the city. Limits on the intensity of uses combined with the development standards provide flexibility as well as certainty to property owners, developers and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
A. Light Manufacturing. This zone is intended for industrial uses characterized by an absence of objectionable external features which can be permitted in relatively close proximity to residential and commercial districts.
B. General Manufacturing. This zone is intended for a broad range of industrial uses which can be located in areas where they do not directly affect the livability of residential neighborhoods and the quality and viability of commercial areas in the city. This district provides for the normal operation of an industry which can meet and maintain the standards set in this code in order to reasonably protect nearby residential and commercial districts.

240.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this section state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. The official zoning map indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below.

240.120
In addition to the standards definitions of Section 720.030, “Employment Related Definitions” may also apply.

Use Regulations

240.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the manufacturing zones are shown in Table 240-1 by the letter "Y". Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 240-1 with the letters "CU". These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Solid Waste uses and siting standards must be in compliance with Appendix A - Mitigation Agreement for Siting Solid Waste Facilities.
    (1) Marijuana Facilities Conditional Uses. 
        (a) Marijuana Facilities may be allowed, subject to a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Article 620 of this Code, in the Light Manufacturing and General Manufacturing Zones (LM & GM). No Marijuana facility may be located within the City unless it satisfies
        all the requirements of this Code and provides evidence of all licensing required by State law. No outdoor production or growing facilities may be authorized by this provision. Marijuana facilities legally established pursuant to this Code shall not be found in conflict with the provision of this Code in the event that a conflicting land use locates in the vicinity of a facility subsequent to the facility obtaining land use approval from the City. Should such conflict arise, the marijuana facility shall be considered a legal nonconforming use and subject to provision set for in Section 640 of this Code.
        (b) Marijuana Facilities may not be located and a Conditional Use Permit as provided in this zone shall not be issued for any facility that is:
            1. At the same address as a registered grow site.
            2. Within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a:
                aPublic or private preschool, elementary, secondary or career school attended primarily by minors; or,
            3. Public park; or,
            4. Within 1,000 feet of another marijuana facility.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 240-1 with the letter "N" are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses & development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in Section 640 - Non-conforming Situations.
D. Limited Uses. Uses shown in Table 240-1 with the letter "L" are allowed subject to the following limitations.
    (1) This regulation applies to all parts of Table 240-1 marked with a (1). Retail Sales and Service uses in the Light Manufacturing and General Manufacturing zones are limited to 35% of the footprint of all buildings on any lot or group of contiguous lots in common ownership or control. Larger Retail Sales and Service uses (more than 35% of the building footprint) are subject to approval under the conditional use procedure.
    (2) This regulation applies to all parts of Table 240-1 marked with a (2). Office uses in the Light Manufacturing and General Manufacturing zones are limited to 35% of the footprint of all buildings on any lot or group of contiguous lots in common ownership or control. Larger Office uses are subject to approval under the conditional use procedure.
    (3) This regulation applies to all parts of Table 240-1 marked with a (3). Daycare uses in the Light Manufacturing and General Manufacturing zones are limited to 3,000 gross square feet of area. Larger Daycare uses are subject to approval under the conditional use procedure.
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    |                                               |   LM    |   GM    |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY                          |         |         |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Household Living                              | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Group Living                                  | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES                         |         |         |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Retail Sales and Service                      | L(1)    | CU(1)   |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Marijuana Facilities other than Medical       | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Office                                        | L(2)    | L(2)    |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Quick Vehicle Servicing                       | CU      | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Vehicle Repair                                | Y       | CU(1)   |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Self Service Storage                          | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Commercial Recreation                         | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Major Event Entertainment                     | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES                         |         |         |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Manufacturing and Production                  | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Light manufacturing, processing, fabrication, | Y       | Y       |
    | packaging, assembly, and experimental,        |         |         |
    | research, testing or development facilities.  |         |         |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Warehouse and Freight Movement                | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Wholesale Sales                               | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Industrial Service                            | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Waste Related                                 | N       | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Marijuana Processor                           | CU      | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Marijuana Wholesaler                          | CU      | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Marijuana Producer                            | CU      | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES                      |         |         |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Basic Utilities                               | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Community Service                             | CU      | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Parks and Open Space                          | Y       | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Schools                                       | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Colleges                                      | Y       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Medical Centers                               | Y       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Medical Marijuana Dispensaries                | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Religious Institutions                        | N       | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Daycare                                       | CU/L(3) | CU/L(3) |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Essential Service Provider                    | CU      | N       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | OTHER CATEGORIES                              |         |         |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Detention Facilities                          | CU      | CU      |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Mining                                        | CU      | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities             | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    | Railroad Lines and Utility Corridors          | Y       | Y       |
    +-----------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
    Y = Yes, Permitted Use CU = Conditional Use Review Required
    N = No, Prohibited Use L = Permitted, but Subject to Limitations
    See Section 240.200 D. for footnotes (1), (2) and (3)

240.210 Accessory Uses.
Uses which are accessory to the permitted uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone, specific regulations for the accessory use and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 – Use Categories.

Development Standards

240.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design which will ensure that new land divisions and development will:
- Control the overall bulk and intensity of an area through required dimensional standards and building envelope limits.
- Provide adequate flexibility to allow development which is compatible with the existing area, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity.

240.310 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
A. Minimum Lot Size & Dimension. There is no minimum lot size or dimension for development of land or creation of new lots in manufacturing zones. Creation of new lots is subject to the regulations of Section 450 - Subdivisions and Partitions. The lot size for all permitted or conditional uses shall be adequate to fulfill the applicable requirements stated below.

240.320 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 240-2.
B. Extensions into required building setbacks.
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, open fire escapes, bay windows, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required building setback by no more than 20% of its depth. However, they may not be within 3' of a lot line.

240.330 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 240-2.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height. 
    (1) Projections allowed. Projections extending vertically for permitted buildings and uses, such as skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, and radio and television aerials, may be erected above the height limitations herein proscribed. Such structures shall not project more than 5' above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility power poles are exempt from the height limit.
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    |           Standard           |       LM       |       GM       |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Lot Size             | None           |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Min. lot area              | None           | None           |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Min. lot width             | None           | None           |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Min. lot depth             |                | None           |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | (See Section 240.310)        |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Maximum Height               | 45 ft(1)       | 45 ft(1)       |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | (See Section 240.330)        |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Setbacks             |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Front setback              | 10 ft(2,3)     | 10 ft(2,3)     |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Side setback               | None(2,3)      | None(2,3)      |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Rear setback               | None(2,3)      | None(2,3)      |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | (See Section 240.320)        |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Landscape            |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Site area                  | 10%(4)         | 10%(4)         |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | Landscape Buffer             |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Street frontage(5)         | 10 ft/L1(6,7)  | 10 ft/L1(6,7)  |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | – Side yard                  | L3(6) or F2(7) | L3(6) or F2(7) |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    | (See Sections 240.340 & 330) |                |                |
    +------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
    (1)For sites abutting or facing a residential zone the maximum height is 25 feet within the first 25 feet from the lot line facing or abutting the residential zone. For distances further than 25 feet the maximum height is 45 feet.
    (2)For sites abutting a commercial zone, the setback required for the abutting lot line shall be equal to that of the commercial zone.
    (3)For sites abutting or facing a residential zone, the setback requirement for the facing or abutting lot line shall be 50 feet.
    (4)Within boundaries of the development, minimum 10% or all site area available, whichever is greater.
    (5)Applies to all street frontages.
    (6)For sites facing or abutting a residential zone, the entire depth of the required setback must be landscaped.
    (7)See Section 330 - Landscaping & Screening for a description of the landscape standards (i.e., L1, F2, etc.).

240.340 Landscape and Buffer.
A. Required Landscaping. The minimum landscaping requirements are stated in Table 240-2 and shall satisfy the following requirements:
    (1) The minimum site area devoted to landscaping may be computed to include any required landscaping imposed by Section 350 - Parking and Loading.
    (2) Provisions shall be made for watering planting areas where such care is required for survival.
    (3) Required landscaping shall be continually maintained.
    (4) Maximum height of selected tree species shall be considered when planting under overhead utility lines.
B. Landscape Buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be established and maintained in accordance with the dimensions stated in Table 240-2 and the standards in Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening. The requirements of 240.340(A)(2), (3) & (4) apply to the landscape buffer as well.

240.350 Accessory Structures.
Structures which are incidental to the primary building are considered accessory structures and are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
A. Covered Accessory Structures. All covered accessory structures, whether attached to the primary building or detached, shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks requirements and height restrictions. These standards are stated in Table 240-2.
B. Uncovered Accessory Structures. Uncovered, detached accessory structures such as signs, flag poles and lamp posts are allowed in the front building setback but not in a required setback from an abutting commercial or residential zone.

240.360 Exterior Display, Storage and Work Activities.
A. Exterior Display. Exterior display of goods is allowed in all manufacturing zones. The setback and landscape standards for exterior display areas are stated in Table 240-3.
B. Exterior Storage. Exterior storage is allowed in all manufacturing zones. The setback and landscape standards for exterior storage areas are stated in Table 240-3.
C. Exterior Work Activities. Exterior work activities are allowed in the General Manufacturing zone and prohibited in the Light Manufacturing. The setback and landscape standards for exterior work areas are the same as that for exterior storage as stated in Table 240-3.
+-----------------------+----------------+
|       Standards       |   LM AND GM    |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Exterior Display      |                |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| – Abutting a street   | 10 ft/L3       |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| – Abutting NC zone    | 5 ft/L3        |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| – Abutting any R zone | 25 ft/L3 or F2 |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Exterior Storage      |                |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| – Abutting a street   | 25 ft/L3 or F2 |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| – Abutting NC or zone | 10 ft/F1       |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| – Abutting any R zone | 25 ft/F2       |
+-----------------------+----------------+
Note: For description of the landscape requirements (i.e., L3, F2, etc.). See Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening

240.370 Wastewater and Stormwater Disposal.
A. Industrial Wastewater Disposal. Industrial wastewater includes wastewater resulting from production, or resulting from the washing of equipment and vehicles, or resulting from similar activities. Stormwater runoff and runoff from the watering of landscaping is not included. All industrial wastewater disposal must be approved by the Public Works Director. Industrial wastewater must be disposed into a sanitary sewer unless an alternative disposal is approved by the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). The Public Works Director may require pretreatment. A sampling manhole and industrial wastewater discharge permit may be required. Sanitary and industrial wastewater quality must meet City code requirements.
B. Stormwater Disposal. All stormwater, groundwater, and runoff from the watering of landscaping must be discharged into an adequate watercourse, water body, storm sewer or into an approved on-site disposal system. Stormwater and groundwater disposal methods and the determination of the adequacy of the receiving systems require the approval of the Public Works Director. A permit from DEQ may also be required.

240.380 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences, and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to 3 ½ feet are allowed in required front building setback and required side building setbacks to the depth of the required front building setback.
    (2) Fences up to 8 feet are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks except for corner lot side setback which is limited to 3 ½ feet.

240.390 Additional Regulations.
A. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
B. Design Review. Design Review is required for all uses in manufacturing zones. See Section 630.
C. Parking and Loading. See Section 350.
D. Public Access. All lots shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before development is allowed.
E. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum setback requirements of the zone.
F. Signs. See Section 370.
G. Solid Waste, Mixed and Recyclables Storage. See Section 390.
H. Uncontained hazardous materials are prohibited.

Section 250 Commercial/Industrial Mixed Use Zone

General Provisions

250.100 Purpose.
This mixed use zone is specifically designed to encourage a variety of freeway- oriented uses which improve the economic vitality of the city. The development standards provide flexibility while ensuring compatibility of adjacent uses.

250.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this section state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. The official zoning map indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below.

250.120
In addition to the standards definitions of Section 720.030, “Employment Related Definitions” may also apply.

Use Regulations

250.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the Commercial/Industrial mixed use zone are shown in Table 250-1 by the letter "Y". Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 250-1 with the letters "CU". These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Solid Waste uses and siting standards must be in compliance with Appendix A - Mitigation Agreement for Siting Solid Waste Facilities.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 250-1 with the letter "N" are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses & development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in Section 640 - Non-conforming Situations.
D. Limited Uses. Uses shown in Table 250-1 with the letter "L" are allowed subject to the following limitations:
    (1) This regulation applies to all parts of Table 250-1 marked with a (1). Daycare uses in the Commercial/Industrial Mixed Use zone are limited to 3,000 gross sq. ft. of area. Larger Daycare uses are subject to approval under the conditional use procedure.
    (2) New Buildings. Uses shown in Table 250-1 with the number “(2)” are subject to the following standards:
    New buildings for retail commercial uses such as stores and restaurants and retail and professional services that cater to daily customers such as financial, insurance, real estate, legal, medical and dental offices shall be limited in order to ensure that they serve primarily the needs of workers in the area. New buildings for stores branches, agencies or other outlets for these retail uses and services shall not occupy more than 5,000 square feet of sales or service area in a single outlet or multiple outlets that occupy more than 20,000 square feet of sales or service area in a single building or in multiple buildings that are part of the same development project, with the following exceptions;
        (a) Within the boundaries of a public use airport subject to a facilities master plan, customary airport uses that are accessory to the travel-related and freight movement activities of airports, hospitality uses, and retail uses appropriate to serve the needs of the traveling public; and
        (b) Training facilities whose primary purpose is to provide training to meet industrial needs.
    New buildings for the uses described above shall not interfere with the efficient movement of freight along Main Roadway Routes and Roadway Connectors shown on Metro’s Freight Network Map, 2003 or subsequent updated. Measures such as restrictions on access to freight routes and connectors, siting limitations and traffic thresholds may be imposed by the City.
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    |                                                  |   C/I    |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | RESIDENTIAL CATEGORY                             |          |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Household Living                                 | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Group Living                                     | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | COMMERCIAL CATEGORIES                            |          |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Retail Sales and Service                         | Y(2)     |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Marijuana Facilities other than Medical          | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Lodging                                          | CU/L(2)  |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Office                                           | Y(2)     |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Quick Vehicle Servicing                          | Y(2)     |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Vehicle Repair                                   |  N       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Self Service Storage                             | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Commercial Recreation                            | CU       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Major Event Entertainment                        | CU       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Hotel or Motel                                   | Y        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | INDUSTRIAL CATEGORIES                            |          |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Manufacturing and Production                     | Y        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Warehouse and Freight Movement                   | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Wholesale Sales                                  | Y        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Industrial Service                               |  CU/L(2) |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Light manufacturing, processing, fabrication,    | Y        |
    | packaging, assembly, and experimental, research, |          |
    | testing or development facilities                |          |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Waste Related                                    |  N       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Marijuana Processor                              | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Marijuana Wholesaler                             | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Marijuana Producer                               | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES                         |          |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Basic Utilities                                  | Y        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Community Service                                | CU       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Parks and Open Space                             | CU       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Schools                                          | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Colleges                                         | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Medical Centers                                  | CU       |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Medical Marijuana Dispensaries                   | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Religious Institutions                           | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Daycare                                          | CU/L(1)  |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Essential Service Provider                       | N        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | OTHER CATEGORIES                                 |          |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities                | Y        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    | Railroad Lines and Utility Corridors             | Y        |
    +--------------------------------------------------+----------+
    Y = Yes, Permitted Use CU = Conditional Use Review Required
    N = No, Prohibited Use L = Permitted, but Subject to Limitations
    (2)See 250.200 D. Limited Uses per Title 4

250.210 Accessory Uses.
Uses which are accessory to the permitted uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone, specific regulations for the accessory use and any additional regulations stated in Section 300. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 - Use Categories.

Development Standards

250.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design which will ensure that new land divisions and development will:
- Control the overall bulk and intensity of an area through required dimensional standards and building envelope limits.
- Provide adequate flexibility to allow development which is compatible with the existing area, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity.
- Provide adequate assurance of compatibility of adjacent uses within the mixed use context.

250.310 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
A. Minimum Lot Size & Dimension. There is no minimum lot size or dimension for development of land or creation of new lots in the commercial/industrial mixed use zone. Creation of new lots is subject to the regulations of Section 450 - Subdivisions and Partitions. The lot size for all permitted or conditional uses shall be adequate to fulfill the applicable requirements stated below.
B. Lots or parcels may be divided into smaller lots or parcels as follows:
    (1) Lots or parcels smaller than 50 acres may be divided into any number of smaller lots or parcels.
    (2) Lots or parcels larger than 50 acres may be divided into smaller lots or parcels pursuant to a master plan approved by the City so long as the resulting division yields at least one lot or parcel of at least 50 acres in size.
    (3) Lots or parcels 50 acres or larger, including those created pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, may be divided into any number of smaller lots or parcels pursuant to a master plan approved by the city so long as at least 40 percent of the lot or parcel has been developed with industrial uses accessory to industrial uses, and no portion has been developed, or is proposed to be developed with uses described in subsection D.(2) of this section.
    (4) Notwithstanding paragraphs 2 and 3 of this subsection, any lot or parcel may be divided into smaller lots or parcels or made subject to rights-of-way for the following reasons:
        (a) To provide public facilities and services;
        (b) To separate a portion of a lot or parcel in order to protect a natural resource, to provide a public amenity, or to implement a remediation plan for a site identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to ORS 465.225;
        (c) To separate a portion of a lot or parcel containing a nonconforming use from the remainder of the lot or parcel in order to render the remainder more practical for a permitted use; or
        (d) To allow the creation of a lot for financing purposes when the created lot is part of a master planned development.

250.320 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 250-2.
B. Extensions into required building setbacks.
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, open fire escapes, bay windows, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required building setback by no more than 20% of its depth. However, they may not be within 3' of a lot line.
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    |           Standard           |  COMMERCIAL USE  |   OTHER USE    |
    |                              |    CATEGORIES    |   CATEGORIES   |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Lot Size             |                  |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Min. lot area              | None             | None           |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Min. lot width             | None             | None           |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Min. lot depth             | None             | None           |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | (See Section 250.310)        |                  |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | Maximum Height               | None (1)         | None (1)       |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | (See Section 250.330)        |                  |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Setbacks             |                  |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Front setback              | 10 ft            | 10 ft(3)       |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Side setback               | None(2)          | None(3)        |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Rear setback               | None(4)          | None(3)        |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | (See Section 250.320)        |                  |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | Minimum Landscape            |                  | 10%(5)         |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Site area                  | 15%(5)           |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | Landscape Buffer             |                  | 10 ft/L1(8)    |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Street Frontage(6)         | 10 ft/L1(7,8)    | L3(7) or F2(8) |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | – Side Yard                  | L3(2,7) or F2(8) |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    | (See Sections 250.340 & 330) |                  |                |
    +------------------------------+------------------+----------------+
    (1)For sites adjoining a residential zone the maximum height is 35 feet, unless otherwise limited by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
    (2)Sites abutting a residential zone shall have a side setback of 15 feet.
    (3)For sites abutting or facing a residential zone, the setback requirement for the facing or abutting lot line shall be 50 feet.
    (4)Sites adjoining a residential zone shall provide a minimum rear setback of 15 feet.
    (5)Within boundaries of the development, minimum percentage or all site area available, whichever is greater.
    (6)Applies to all street frontages.
    (7)For sites facing or abutting a residential zone, the entire depth of the required setback must be landscaped.
    (8)See Section 330 - Landscaping & Screening for a description of the landscape standards (i.e., L1, F2, etc.).

250.330 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 250-2.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height.
    (1) Projections Allowed. Projections extending vertically for permitted buildings and uses, such as skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, and radio and television aerials, may be erected above the height limitations herein proscribed. Such structures shall not project more than 5' above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility power poles are exempt from the height limit.

250.340 Landscape and Buffer.
A. Required Landscaping. The minimum landscaping requirements are stated in Table 250-2 and shall satisfy the following requirements:
    (1) The minimum site area devoted to landscaping may be computed to include any required landscaping imposed by Section 350 - Parking and Loading.
    (2) Provisions shall be made for watering planting areas where such care is required for survival.
    (3) Required landscaping shall be continually maintained.
    (4) Maximum height of selected tree species shall be considered when planting under overhead utility lines.
B. Landscape Buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be established and maintained in accordance with the dimensions stated in Table 250-2 and the standards in Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening. The requirements of 250.340(A)(2), (3) & (4) apply to the landscape buffer as well.

250.350 Accessory Structures.
 Structures which are incidental to the primary building are considered accessory structures and are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
A. Covered Accessory Structures. All covered accessory structures, whether attached to the primary building or detached, shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks requirements and height restrictions. These standards are stated in Table 250-2.
B. Uncovered Accessory Structures. Uncovered, detached accessory structures such as signs, flag poles and lamp posts are allowed in the front building setback but not in a required setback from an abutting commercial category use or residential zone.

250.360 Exterior Display, Storage and Work Activities.
A. Exterior Display. Exterior display of goods is allowed in this mixed use zone. The setback and landscape standards for exterior display areas are stated in Table 250-3.
B. Exterior Storage. Exterior storage is allowed in this mixed use zone. The setback and landscape standards for exterior storage areas are stated in Table 250-3.
C. Exterior Work Activities. Exterior work activities are prohibited in this mixed use zone.
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
|             Standards              | Commercial Use |   Other Use    |
|                                    |   Categories   |   Categories   |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| Exterior Display                   |                |                |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting a street                | 5 ft/L1        | 10 ft/L3       |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting Commercial Use Category |                | 5 ft/L3        |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting Other Use Category      | 5 ft/L1        |                |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting any R zone              | 5 ft/L1        | 25 ft/L3 or F2 |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| Exterior Storage                   |                |                |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting a street                | 10 ft/L3       | 25 ft/L3 or F2 |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting Commercial Use Category |                | 10 ft/F1       |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting Other Use Category      | 10 ft/L3       |                |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
| – Abutting any R zone              | 25 ft/L3       | 25 ft/F2       |
+------------------------------------+----------------+----------------+
Note: For description of the landscape requirements (i.e., L3, F2, etc.), see Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening.

250.370 Wastewater and Stormwater Disposal.
A. Industrial Wastewater Disposal. Industrial wastewater includes wastewater resulting from production, or resulting from the washing of equipment and vehicles, or resulting from similar activities. Stormwater runoff and runoff from the watering of landscaping is not included. All industrial wastewater disposal must be approved by the Public Works Director. Industrial wastewater must be disposed into a sanitary sewer unless an alternative disposal is approved by the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). The Public Works Director may require pretreatment. A sampling manhole and industrial wastewater discharge permit may be required. Sanitary and industrial wastewater quality must meet City Code requirements.
B. Stormwater Disposal. All stormwater, groundwater, and runoff from the watering of landscaping must be discharged into an adequate watercourse, water body, storm sewer or into an approved on-site disposal system. Stormwater and groundwater disposal
methods and the determination of the adequacy of the receiving systems require the approval of the Public Works Director. A permit from DEQ may also be required.

250.380 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences, and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to 3 ½ feet are allowed in required front building setback and required side building setbacks to the depth of the required front building setback.
    (2) Fences up to 8 feet are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks except for corner lot side setback which is limited to 3 ½ feet.

250.390 Additional Regulations.
A. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
B. Design Review. Design Review is required for all uses in this mixed use zone. See Section 630.
C. Parking and Loading. See Section 350.
D. Public Access. All lots shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before development is allowed. Access to commercial use categories shall be from the highest classified or capacity street.
E. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum setback requirements of the zone.
F. Signs. See Section 370.
G. Solid Waste, Mixed and Recyclables Storage. See Section 390.
H. Uncontained hazardous materials are prohibited.

Section 260 OPEN SPACE ZONE

General Provisions

260.100 Purpose.
The open space zone is intended to preserve land and provide for public institutions such as parks, government facilities, government offices, utility structures, and other similar public uses. All structures such as field houses, garages, park equipment and government office structures should add to the character of the open space. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.110 Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this chapter state the uses and development standards for the base zone only. Additional regulations may apply to sites with overlay zones, or specific uses. Section 300 states these additional regulations. The official zoning map indicates sites subject to overlay regulations. Special use regulations are referenced below. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

Use Regulations

260.200 Primary Uses.
A. Uses Allowed Outright. The uses allowed in the open space zone are shown in Table 260-1 by the letter “Y.” Uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards of the base zone and any additional regulations that apply to the use or the site. Additional regulations are listed in Section 300.
B. Conditional Uses. The uses which are allowed upon approval through the conditional use review process are shown in Table 260-1 with the letters “CU.” These uses must meet the conditional use approval criteria, the development standards and any additional regulations stated in Section 300.
C. Prohibited Uses. Uses shown in Table 260-1 with the letter “N” are prohibited in the zone. Legally established uses and development which existed at the time this Code was adopted and would otherwise be prohibited, are subject to additional regulations in Section 640 – Non­conforming situations. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.210 Accessory Uses.
Uses which are accessory to the permitted or conditional uses are allowed if they meet the development regulations of the base zone and any additional regulations stated in Section 300, pending a Design Review. Typical accessory uses are included in Section 710 – Use Categories.
+---------------------------------------------------+----+

+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| OPEN SPACE CATEGORIES                                  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Natural Park, including wildlife preserves        | Y  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Improved Park, including playgrounds/picnic areas | Y  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Sports Fields with lighting                       | CU |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Sports Fields without lighting                    | Y  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORIES                               |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Utility Facilities, such as towers or substations | CU |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Government Offices, including parking             | Y  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Government Structures, including field houses     | Y  |
| and shops                                         |    |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Community Centers                                 | Y  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| OTHER CATEGORIES                                       |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Detention Facilities                              | N  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Mining                                            | N  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Radio and TV Broadcast Facilities                 | N  |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+
| Railroad Lines and Utility Corridors              | CU |
+---------------------------------------------------+----+

+------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Y = Yes, Permitted Use | CU = Conditional Use Review Required      |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| N = No, Prohibited Use | L = Permitted, but Subject to Limitations |
+------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

Development Standards

260.300 Purpose.
Development standards are intended to promote site planning and design which will ensure that new development will:
A. Maintain the character of the built-up area through required dimensional standards.
B. Provide for needed privacy for any property neighboring active park uses.
C. Maintain and enhance the building scale and relationship between structures of the existing built-up area.
D. Provide adequate flexibility to allow development which is compatible with the existing neighborhood, fits the topography of the site and allows architectural diversity. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.310 Lot Size and Dimensional Standards.
The minimum lot size and dimensions are shown in Table 260-2. All new lots created must comply with these standards. (See Section 300 for regulations which apply to flag lots, partitions and subdivision, and planned unit developments.)
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
|                                     Standard                                      |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Minimum Lot Size                                                                  |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| – Min. lot area             | None                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| – Min. lot width            | None                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| – Min. lot depth            | None                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Maximum Height (See Section | 60 feet                                             |
| 260.330)                    |                                                     |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Minimum Setbacks                                                                  |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| – Front setback             | 20 feet to residentially zoned property, otherwise, |
|                             | none                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| – Side setback              | 10 feet to residentially zoned property, otherwise, |
|                             | none                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| – Rear setback (See Section | 10 feet to residentially zoned property, otherwise, |
| 260.320)                    | none                                                |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.320 Building Setbacks.
A. Required Setbacks. The setbacks for front, rear and side yards are stated in Table 260-2.
B. Extensions into Required Building Setbacks. 
    (1) Minor Projections Allowed. Minor features of a building such as eaves, chimney, open fire escapes, bay windows up to twelve (12) feet in length, uncovered stairways and wheelchair ramps, uncovered decks or balconies, which are attached to the building may extend into a required front building setback by no more than five (5) feet and into a side setback or rear building setback no more than two and one-half (2½) feet. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.330 Height.
A. Maximum Height. The maximum height for all structures is stated in Table 260-2.
B. Exemption to the Maximum Height. 
    (1) Height Projections Allowed. Projections extending vertically from permitted buildings and uses such as skylights, chimneys, small-scale residential energy equipment, and radio and television aerials may be erected above the height limitations herein prescribed. Such structures shall not project more than twenty-five (25) feet above the maximum permitted height.
    (2) Utility poles and emergency communication equipment are exempt from the height limit. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.340 Landscape and Buffer.
A. Required Landscaping. The minimum landscaping requirements shall satisfy the following:
    (1) The minimum site area devoted to landscaping may be computed to include any required landscaping imposed by Section 350 – Parking and Loading.
    (2) Provisions shall be made for watering planting areas where such care is required for survival.
    (3) Maximum height of selected tree species shall be considered when planting under overhead utility lines.
    (4) Street trees shall be planted on all street frontages in accordance with City street tree guidelines.
B. Landscape Buffer. A landscaped buffer shall be established and maintained between the uses listed below, and any residential zoned property in accordance with the standards of Section 330 – Landscaping and Screening, as applicable:
    (1) Lighted fields.
    (2) Any government structures, including government offices. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.350 Accessory Structures.
Structures which are incidental to the primary building such as garages, shops, picnic shelters, energy equipment, and playground structures are considered accessory structures. These structures are allowed when they meet the following requirements:
A. Attached Accessory Structures. If attached to the primary building or separated by a breezeway, accessory structures shall fulfill the front, side and rear building setbacks of the primary building. These standards are stated in Table 260-2.
B. Detached Accessory Structures. If detached, all structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any residential zone. This is intended to address nuisance concerns. The City Manager may approve any setback less than twenty (20) feet if other methods to address possible nuisance exist or are employed, to the satisfaction of the City Manager. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.360 Site Coverage.
A. There are no minimum site coverage requirements for this zone. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.370 Fences.
A. Types of Fences. The fencing standards apply to walls, fences, and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry or other material including vegetative materials.
B. Location and Height Limits. 
    (1) Fences up to three and one-half (3½) feet are allowed in the required front building setback and in the required side building setback to the depth of the required front setback. Should the front of a structure be oriented in a way such that the front of the structure does not face a street right-of-way, then the three and one-half (3½) foot height requirement applies only to the area in front of the structure.
    (2) Fences up to six (6) feet are allowed in required side and rear building setbacks. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

260.380 Additional Regulations.
A. Demolitions. Demolition of all buildings is regulated by the Building Code currently adopted by the City of Wood Village.
B. Design Review. Design review is required for all uses and developments except for single-family detached dwellings in light residential zones. See Section 630. Design review is required for all accessory buildings whether attached or detached.
C. Parking and Loading. See Section 350.
D. Public Access. All lots in the zone shall have frontage or approved access to public streets, public water and public sewer before construction shall be permitted.
E. Sale or Conveyance Prohibited. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum lot or setback requirements of the zone.
F. Signs. See Section 370. (Ord. 2-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

Section 300 ADDITIONAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION 310  ACCESSORY HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION 320  GROUP LIVING
SECTION 325  ESSENTIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
SECTION 330  LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
SECTION 335  HEIGHT TRANSITION STANDARDS
SECTION 340  MANUFACTURED HOMES
SECTION 345  MOBILE FOOD UNITS AND FOOD PODS
SECTION 350  PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION 360  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION 370  SIGNS
SECTION 380  TEMPORARY USES
SECTION 390  MIXED SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES STORAGE IN NEW MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
SECTION 395  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS

Section 310 Accessory Home Occupations

310.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for occupations in residential districts in a manner that will ensure that they are utilized only as accessory uses incidental to the primary residential use of the premises upon which they are located.

310.020 Operational Standards.
Home occupations shall be limited to those activities which are customarily carried on within a dwelling, and which are operated entirely within the principal dwelling by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit as a clearly secondary and incidental use of such a dwelling. The home occupation must not change the residential character of the dwelling and shall meet all of the following conditions:
A. No dwelling shall be used as headquarters for the assembly of employees for instructions or other purposes such as being dispatched for work at other locations.
B. All aspects of the conduct of a home occupation shall be confined, contained and conducted within the dwelling.
C. Any home occupation which causes abnormal automotive or pedestrian traffic or which is objectionable due to unsightliness or emission of odor, dust, smoke, noise, glare, heat, vibration or similar causes discernible on the outside of any building containing such home occupation shall not be permitted.
D. No significant enlargement or alteration to a dwelling for the sole purpose of conducting a home occupation shall be permitted that is inconsistent with the residential nature of the premises.
E. The premises shall at all times be maintained as residential in appearance, cleanliness and quietness.
F. Dimensions, power rating or weight of such equipment and tools used in the conduct of a home occupation shall not exceed that of normal household equipment and tools.
G. There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation; no exterior signs shall be used; no other on-site advertising visible from the exterior shall be used which informs the public of the address of the home occupation.
H. Any materials used or any item produced or repaired on the premises shall not be displayed or stored so as to be visible from the exterior of the building.
I. The number of customers allowed in a home occupation residence is limited to:
    (1) No more than eight (8) customers may enter the premises on a daily basis,
    (2) No more than two (2) customers may enter the premises at any single time, and
    (3) No customers may enter the premises between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
J. There shall be no outside storage of materials or equipment associated with the home occupation. Nor shall there be any storage or use of explosive, flammable, radioactive, toxic or other hazardous materials that are not normally found in the home nor in amounts not normally associated with a residence. Specific limitations and requirements for the storage of hazardous materials in a residence are found in and regulated by the Uniform Building Code.
K. No more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for the home occupation. Accessory buildings or yard space shall not be used for home occupation purposes.
L. Family daycare providers as defined by ORS 418.805 are exempt from standards set forth in subsections (I) and (K) of this section.
M. Short-term vacation rentals are considered home occupations and are exempt from standards set forth in subsections (I)(2) and (I)(3) of this section. (Ord. 2-2020 § 2 (Att. A))

310.030 Establishing and Maintaining a Home Occupation.
A. An application for a Home Occupation Permit is reviewed as a Type I procedure as specified in Section 500. A home occupation permit may be granted provided the use is not inconsistent with or disruptive to the normal residential usage of the premises or cause external effects which are detrimental to neighboring properties or are incompatible with the characteristics of the residential district. A Home Occupation must meet the operational standards of Section 310.020.
B. Any person may request staff to review a Home Occupation Permit if evidence of non-compliance to this code is evident.
C. Permits for home occupations may be revoked at any time for failure to adhere to standards and conditions of approval for home occupation.
D. A change in the characteristics of the use will require a new permit.

310.040 Accessory Home Occupation Exemption.
A. Activities such as parties and events in which goods are sold such as Tupperware, clothes, purses, candles, etc. are exempt from the home occupation permit and provisions of Section 310.020 as long as there is only one party or event held per month per household.

Section 320 Group Living

320.010 Purpose.
These regulations ensure that uses in the Group Living Category will be compatible with the character of residential and commercial areas.

320.020 Use Regulations.
The regulations of this section apply to all uses in the Group Living use category. The base zone sections state whether Group Living uses are allowed, limited, conditional uses, or prohibited. If they are conditional uses, they are subject to the regulations of Section 620 in addition to the provisions of this section. Group Living uses that are accessory to a College, Medical Center, or Religious Institution, such as dormitories, fraternities, or monasteries, and that are part of an approved conditional use are exempt from the regulations of this chapter.

320.030 Development Standards.
The development standards of the base zone and overlay zone apply unless superseded by the standards below.
A. Resident Density. 
    (1) Purpose. Resident density is limited to parallel the residential densities of the various zones. Resident density is also regulated to address service demands and to prevent nuisance-type impacts for overcrowding.
    (2) Description of Residents. Residents include all people living at the site, including those who provide support services, building maintenance, care, supervision, etc. People who only work at the site are not considered residents.
    (3) Density Standard. Group Living uses are limited to the following number of residents per square foot of site area:
    +-----------+--------------------------------------------+
    |   Zone    |            Number of Residents             |
    +-----------+--------------------------------------------+
    | MR 4 zone | 2 residents per 1,000 sq. ft.              |
    +-----------+--------------------------------------------+
    | MR 2 zone | 2.5 residents per 1,000 sq. ft.            |
    +-----------+--------------------------------------------+
    | NC zones  | not limited (must comply with the building |
    |           | or housing code)                           |
    +-----------+--------------------------------------------+
B. Minimum Spacing. 
    (1) Purpose. The minimum spacing standards assure that large Group Living uses so not unduly affect the character of residential and commercial areas.
    (2) Spacing Standards. Group living facilities that are conditional uses must be at least 600 feet from a site with any other group living facility that is also a conditional use.
C. Required Outdoor Area. The requirements for outdoor areas applies in all zones. Larger areas may be required as part of a conditional use review. The outdoor area requirement is 48 square feet for every 3 residents, with a minimum dimension of 6 feet by 6 feet. Individual outdoor areas may be combined. The minimum size of a combined area is 500 square feet and the minimum dimension is 15 by 15 feet.
D. Parking and Loading. Parking requirements are stated in Section 350, Parking and Loading.

320.040 Other Regulations.
Uses in the Group Living use category may also be subject to County, State or Federal licensing requirements. For more information, applicants should contact the Department of Human Services of the county in which the use will be located.

Section 325 Essential Service Providers

325.010 Purpose.
These regulations allow for uses which provide essential services to people of low or no income while maintaining public safety, preserving a positive climate for investment in commercial and employment zones, and preventing negative impacts on residential zones. The regulations are intended to reduce conflict between Essential Service Provider uses (ESP’s) and other uses, and to ensure that ESP uses do not dominate the character of an area.

325.020 When These Regulations Apply.
All regulations of this section apply to all uses in the Essential Service Provider (ESP) category. The base zone sections state whether ESP uses are allowed, conditional, limited or prohibited. If they are conditional uses, they are subject to the regulations of Section 620 in addition to the provisions of this section.

325.030 General Restrictions.
A. All functions associated with the ESP must take place within the building proposed to house the ESP.
B. Restrooms must be provided to serve the expected number of clients at peak period and must be kept in working order.
C. Outdoor waiting for clients, if any, may not be in the public right-of-way, must be physically separated from the public right-of-way, and must be large enough to accommodate the expected number of clients.
D. A maintenance plan for the exterior of the building and site must be submitted with the application and must be followed. The plan must provide for the building and site to be maintained at a level that will not detract from the character of the surrounding area.
E. A litter control plan must be submitted with the application and must be followed. The plan must provide for effective litter removal at and near the site of the facility.

325.040 ESP Review Required.
ESP reviews are processed through a Type III procedure. Review is required for the establishment of an ESP or any change in operation for an established ESP.

325.050 ESP Review Approval Criteria.
ESP’s may be approved if the review body finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following approval criteria are met:
A. The use will not result in ESP establishments dominating the character of the area;
B. The service provided is different than other ESP’s within 750 feet of the site and/or the ESP provides services to a different set of clients;
C. The facility is designed to protect both clients and the public by using techniques of crime prevention through environmental design;
D. The proposed use and development will comply with the use and development requirements of 325.030 above; and
E. The proposed use and development is able to meet the approval criteria for Conditional Uses, if applicable, as stated in Section 620.

Section 330 Landscaping and Screening

330.010 Purpose.
The landscape and screening standards are intended to:
•Establish and enhance a pleasant visual character which recognizes aesthetics and safety issues;
•Promote compatibility between land uses by reducing the visual, noise, and lighting impacts of specific development on users of the site and abutting uses;
•Unify development, and enhance and define public and private spaces;
•Promote the retention and use of existing vegetation; and
•Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter from the wind.
The regulations address materials, placement, layout and timing of installation.

330.020 Landscaping and Screening Standards.
Subsections A through G state the different levels of landscaping and screening standards to be applied throughout the City. The locations where the landscaping or screening is required and the depth of the landscaping or screening are stated in various places throughout the code. All landscaping and screening required by this code must comply with all of the provisions of this section, unless specifically superseded. The landscaping standards are generally in a hierarchical order. The landscaping standards are minimums; higher standards can be substituted as long as all fence or vegetation height limitations are met. Crime prevention and safety should be remembered when exceeding the landscaping standards (height and amount of vegetation may be an issue).
A. L1, General Landscaping. 
    (1) Intent. The L1 standard is a landscape treatment for open areas. It is intended to be applied in situations where distance is used as the principal means of separating uses or development, and landscaping is required to enhance the area in-between. While primarily consisting of ground cover plants, it also includes a mixture of trees, high shrubs, and low shrubs.
    (2) Required Materials. The L1 standard requires one tree per 800 square feet and either two high shrubs or three low shrubs per 400 square feet of landscaped area. The shrubs and trees may be grouped. A combination of ground cover plants, grass, barkdust, decorative rock or like materials as approved by the Design Review Board, must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. See Figure 330-1.
B. L2, Low Screen. 
    (1) Intent. The L2 standard is a landscape treatment which uses a combination of distance and low level screening to separate uses or development. The standard is applied where a low level of screening is adequate to soften the impact of the use or development, or where visibility between areas is more important than a total visual screen. It is usually applied along street lot lines.
    (2) Required Materials. The L2 standard requires enough low shrubs to form a continuous screen 3 feet high and 95 percent opaque year around. In addition, one tree is required per 30 linear feet of landscaped area or the equivalent. A combination of ground cover plants, grass, barkdust, decorative rock or like materials as approved by the Design Review Board, must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. A 3 foot high masonry wall or a berm may be substituted for the shrubs, but the trees and ground cover are still required. When applied along street lot lines, the screen or wall is to be placed along the interior side of the landscaped area. See Figure 330-2.Figure 330-1 L1 - General Landscaping Figure
    [IMAGE: <330-1_L1-General-Landscaping.png>]Figure 330-2 L2 - Low Screen Landscaping
    [IMAGE: <330-2_L2-Low-Screen-Landscaping.png>]
C. L3, High Screen. 
    (1) Intent. The L3 standard is a landscape treatment which uses screening to provide the physical and visual separation between uses or development. It is used in those instances where visual separation is required.
    (2) Required Materials. The L3 standard requires enough high shrubs to form a screen 6 feet high and 95 percent opaque year around. In addition, one tree is required per 30 linear feet of landscaped area or the equivalent. A combination of ground cover plants, grass, barkdust, decorative rock or like materials as approved by the Design Review Board, must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. A 6 foot high masonry wall may be substituted for the shrubs, but the trees and ground cover are still required. When applied along street lot lines, the screen or wall is to be placed along the interior side of the landscaped area. See Figure 330-3.
D. L4, High Wall. 
    (1) Intent. The L4 standard is intended to be used in special instances where extensive screening of both visual and noise impacts is needed to protect abutting sensitive uses in areas and where there is little space for separation.
    (2) Required Materials. The L4 standard requires a 6 foot high masonry wall along the interior side of the landscaped area. One tree is required per 30 linear feet of wall or the equivalent. In addition, four high shrubs are required per 30 linear feet of wall. A combination of ground cover plants, grass, barkdust, decorative rock or like materials as approved by the Design Review Board, must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. See Figure 330-4.Figure 330-3 L3 - High Screen Landscaping
    [IMAGE: <330-3_L3-High-Screen-Landscaping.png>]Figure 330-4 L4 - High Wall Landscaping
    [IMAGE: <330-4_L4-High-Wall-Landscaping.png>]
E. L5, High Berm. 
    (1) Intent. The L5 standard is intended to be used in special instances where extensive screening of both visual and noise impacts is needed to protect abutting sensitive uses, and where it is desirable and practical to separate a use by distance as well as sight-obscuring materials.
    (2) Required Materials. The L5 standard requires a berm between 4 and 6 feet high. If the berm is less than 6 feet high, low shrubs that meet the L2 standard must be planted on top of the berm to assure that the overall screen height is 6 feet. In addition, one tree is required per 30 linear feet of berm or the equivalent. A combination of ground cover plants, grass, barkdust, decorative rock or like materials as approved by the Design Review Board, must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. See Figure 330-5.Figure 330-5 L5 - High Berm Landscaping
    [IMAGE: <330-5_L5-High-Berm-Landscaping.png>]
F. F1, Partially Sight-Obscuring Fence. 
    (1) Intent. The F1 fence standard provides a tall, but not totally blocked visual separation. The standard is applied where a low level of screening is adequate to soften the impact of the use or development, or where visibility between areas is more important than a total visual screen. It is applied in instances where landscaping is not necessary and where nonresidential uses are involved.
    (2) Required Materials. Fences must be 6 feet high and at least 50 percent sight-obscuring. Fences may be made of wood, metal, bricks, masonry or other permanent materials. See Figure 330-6.
G. F2, Sight-Obscuring Fence. 
    (1) Intent. The F2 fence standard provides a tall and complete visual separation, and is intended to be used in special instances where complete screening is needed to protect abutting uses, and landscaping is not practical. It is usually applied in nonresidential situations.
    (2) Required Materials. Fences must be 6 feet high and 100 percent sight-obscuring. Fences may be made of wood, metal, bricks, masonry or other permanent materials. See Figure 330-7.Figure 330-6 F1 - Partially Sight-Obscuring Fence
    [IMAGE: <330-6_F1-Partially-Sight-Obscuring-Fence.png>]Figure 330-7 F2 - Totally Sight-Obscuring Fence
    [IMAGE: <330-7_F2-Totally-Sight-Obscuring-Fence.png>]

330.030 Plant Materials.
A. Shrubs and Ground Cover. All required ground cover plants and shrubs must be of sufficient size and number to meet the required standards within 3 years of planting.
B. Trees. Trees may be deciduous or evergreen. Deciduous trees at the time of planting must be fully branched, have a minimum height of 7 feet or be 1 1/2 inches in caliper. Evergreen trees at the time of planting must be fully branched and a minimum of 5 feet in height.
C. Plant Material Choices. 
    (1) Existing Vegetation. Existing landscaping or natural vegetation may be used to meet the standards, if healthy and protected and maintained during the construction phase of the development. When the existing trees are at least 8 inches in diameter, measured 5 feet above the ground, they may count triple towards meeting the tree requirements of a landscaping standard.
    (2) Selection of Materials. Landscape materials should be selected and sited to produce a hardy and drought-resistant landscape area. Selection should include consideration of soil type and depth, the amount of maintenance required, spacing, exposure to sun and wind, the slope and contours of the site, and compatibility with existing native vegetation preserved on the site.
D. Complying with the Standards. It is the applicant's responsibility to show that the landscaping materials proposed will comply with the regulations of this section.

330.040 Installation and Maintenance.
A. Installation. Plant materials must be installed to current nursery industry standards. Plant materials must be properly supported to ensure survival. Support devices such as guy wires or stakes must not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement.
B. Maintenance. Maintenance of landscaped areas is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy manner. Plants that die must be replaced in kind.
C. Protection. All required landscaped areas, particularly trees and shrubs, must be protected from potential damage by adjacent uses and development, including parking and storage areas.

330.050 Landscape Plans.
Landscape plans must be submitted showing all landscaped areas. Plans must be drawn to scale and show type, size, number and placement of materials. Materials must be identified with both their scientific and common names. Any proposed irrigation system must also be shown.

330.060 Completion of Landscaping.
The installation of any required landscaping may be deferred during the summer or winter months to the next planting season, but never for more than 6 months. In this instance, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the installation of all required landscaping. In all instances, all required landscaping must be installed prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.

Section 335 Height Transition Standards
(as per Table 230-2 Maximum height standard in the NC Zone)

335.010 Purpose.
To reduce the visual and solar impacts of the height of new buildings located on adjoining lots.

335.020 Applicability.
The following standards apply to all buildings to be built on lots in the NC Zone that abut any residential zone.
[IMAGE: <335.020_Applicability-1.png>]
[IMAGE: <335.020_Applicability-2.png>]
[IMAGE: <335.020_Applicability-3.png>]

Standards

335.030 Height Transition Standards.
A. For every one foot of height of a proposed building, one foot of horizontal distance between the building to the abutting residential property line is required. See drawing 335-1. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the proposed building and the property line of the abutting residential zone. When the proposed structure is designed such that different sections will have different heights, the height transition area shall be measured for each vertical surface as if it were free-standing. The building then must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting residential property line than it would be if the section was free-standing.
B. The standard under A above applies to all buildings to be built on lots in the NC Zone when those lots abut any residential zone.

335.040 Elements Allowed Within the Height Transition Area.
The required buffer and screening of the site, as well as utilities, may be located within the height transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may be located within the height transition area.

Section 340 Manufactured Homes

340.010 Manufactured Homes on Individual Residential Lots.
A. Generally. One (1) manufactured home may be located on an individual lot in any residential zone, provided that the manufactured home meets the standards contained in Section 340.010B below.
B. Standards. 
    (1) Each manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and have a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
    (2) The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than twelve (12) inches above the ground.
    (3) The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof, with a slope of no less than a nominal three (3) feet in height for each twelve (12) feet in width.
    (4) The manufactured home, and attached or detached garage, shall have exterior siding and roofing which is similar in color, material and appearance to siding and roofing commonly used on residential dwellings within the City, or which is consistent with the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings, as determined by the City.
    (5) The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce heat loss to levels equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code as defined in ORS 455.010.
    (6) The manufactured home shall have an attached or detached garage.
    (7) In addition to the provisions in paragraphs 1 to 6 of this subsection, the manufactured home and the lot upon which it is sited shall be subject to all other Code requirements to which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subject.

340.020 Manufactured Home Parks.
Manufactured Home Parks may be located in the MR2 zone only. Except as herein provided, the standards of Section 630 Design Review, shall apply to all manufactured home parks. The following additional standards shall also apply:
A. Generally. 
    (1) Sale Prohibited. Manufactured home park spaces shall be available for rental or lease only. Individual sale is prohibited.
    (2) Uses Permitted. No building, structure, or land within a manufactured home park shall be used for any purpose except for:
        (a) Residential manufactured homes, together with normal accessory uses such as awnings, patio slabs, carport or garages, and storage buildings.
        (b) Private and public utilities and services,
        (c) Community recreation facilities, including swimming pools, operated for the residents and guests of the park only.
        (d) One (1) manufactured home or other residence for the use of a manager or a caretaker responsible for maintaining and operating the park.
    (3) Occupancy. No occupancy permit for any manufactured home park, building, or facility shall be issued by the City until the park or an approved phase of the park has been completed according to the final site plan approved by the Design Review Board. Deviations from the approved plan must be resubmitted to the Board for review and approval.
    (4) Alterations and Additions. The owner(s) of the manufactured home park property, or duly authorized park management, shall be held responsible for all alterations and additions to a manufactured home park or to individual homes within the park, and shall ensure that all necessary permits and inspections are obtained from the City or other applicable authority prior to the alterations or additions being made.
B. Recreational Vehicles. 
    (1) The occupancy of recreational vehicles within the manufactured home parks as permanent living quarters are prohibited.
    (2) Unoccupied recreational vehicles located in designated parking or storage areas within manufactured home parks are permitted.
    (3) If storage yards for recreational vehicles, boats or trailers are provided, an eight (8) foot high sight-obscuring fence shall be erected around the perimeter of the storage yard.
C. Design Standards. 
    (1) Spaces shall be a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet, with a width of no less than twenty-five (25) feet at the front space line and forty feet at the building line.
    (2) The boundaries of all spaces shall be surveyed or otherwise suitable and permanently marked on-site, as determined by the City.
    (3) Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space. Additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the manufactured home park with not less than one (1) additional parking space per every ten (10) manufactured homes. All off-street parking spaces shall be paved.
    (4) A minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalk shall be required on one (1) side of all private streets within manufactured home parks.
D. Siting Standards. 
    (1) Only one (1) manufactured home shall be permitted on a space.
    (2) The supplementary siting standards contained in Section 730 - Measurements shall apply to manufactured home parks, provided that space lines shall be deemed to be the equivalent to lot lines for the purposes of applying those standards.
    (3) Buildings setbacks shall be equivalent to Manufactured Home Park setbacks required by the State, provided however that perimeter rear yard setbacks for manufactured homes shall be ten (10) feet from additional properties. Spaces lines shall be deemed the equivalent to lot lines for the purposes of applying those setback standards. Awnings, carports and other attached structures shall be considered part of the manufactured home for setback purposes.
E. Unit Standards. 
    (1) Each manufactured home shall have a minimum floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet.
    (2) Except as otherwise herein provided, accessory uses, buildings, and structures shall be treated as per Section 210.110.
    (3) All manufactured homes shall be placed on a foundation stand, adequate to provide a stable, fixed support. The stand shall be all-weather and surfaced with asphalt, concrete or crushed rock, and at least as large as the manufactured home.
    (4) All manufactured homes shall provide exterior finishing and construction as follows:
        (a) Skirting of moisture resistant, non-combustible material or fire retardant wood.
        (b) Pedestals, or blocking supports, insuring adequate support and in compliance with the Oregon Department of Commerce manufactured home setup procedures.
        (c) Awnings, car ports, and similar structures shall be of a material, size, color and pattern similar to the manufactured home and shall conform to all applicable building codes.
F. Utility Standards. 
    (1) All manufactured homes, service buildings and accessory structures shall be connected to public water and sewer system in accordance with City standards.
    (2) Sufficient fire hydrants shall be installed so that no manufactured home, or other structure is further than three hundred (300) feet from a hydrant, as measured down the center lines of streets, whether private or public. Fire protection shall be provided in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code.
G. Vehicular Circulation. 
    (1) All private streets shall be constructed in accordance with applicable City standards and shall be curbed. The minimum paved street improvement width shall be:
        (a) 24 feet with no on-street parking allowed.
        (b) 32 feet with on-street parking allowed on one (1) side.
        (c) 36 feet with parking allowed on two (2) sides, provided that at least one (1) private street thirty-six (36) feet in width with no on-street parking allowed shall be constructed to intersect with an adjacent public street.
    (2) Any street within the manufactured home park that, due to volumes of traffic or street location, as determined by the City, functions as a minor collector or higher functional classification roadway shall be a public street and constructed to full City public improvement standards.
H. Miscellaneous Park Standards. 
    (1) All other community design standards contained in Section 630 and relating to off-street parking and loading, energy conservation, historic resources, environmental resources, landscaping, access and egress, signs, parks and open space, on-site storage, and site design that are not specifically varied by Section 660 shall apply to manufactured home parks.

Section 345 Mobile Food Units and Food Pods

345.010 Purpose.
Establish a policy framework for managing mobile food businesses which can provide opportunities to enliven under-utilized parking lots, allow individual entrepreneurship at a small scale, and provide unique eating establishments for the public. The purpose of this section is to allow for mobile food unit sites or “food pods” where mobile food units (carts) can be located.

345.020 Definitions.
A. Mobile Food Unit: is defined by OAR 333-150-0000 as any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer. Permanent site improvements may or may not be required; however, the standards and permit processes of this section are intended to ensure that mobile food unit sites are conducted as lawful uses and in a manner that is not detrimental or disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties, residents and pedestrians.
B. Food Pod: A single site that includes three (3) or more food carts.

345.030 Exemptions.
The following are exempt from provisions of this section:
1. Locations where mobile food units stop for less than two hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period, the applicant must submit a document from the property owner(s) showing permission to park and conduct business at the location. Locating on any public right of way is prohibited.
2. Locations where mobile food units are stored when not in operation are exempt from the provisions of this section; however, the storage of commercial vehicles may be subject to other requirements of the City of Wood Village Zoning and Development Code (ZDC).
3. Mobile food units and other mobile vending units that are operated as part of an approved community event.

345.040 Mobile Food Unit Site Standards.
The following standards apply to mobile food unit sites.
1. Zoning. Mobile food unit sites are permitted within the Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Town Center (TC), Commercial/Industrial (C/I) General Manufacturing (GM), and Light Manufacturing (LM) zones as shown in the use tables found within this title.
2. Allowed Locations. Vendors may locate carts or pods in the following locations:
    (A) Private Parks and Property: For applications submitted for placement of one (1) or two (2) units, the cart owner(s) may be the applicant. The applicant must obtain written approval from the property owner. For applications submitted for three (3) or more units, the property owner shall be the applicant.
    (B) Sidewalks and Right-of-Way: No food carts or pods shall be located on or within a public sidewalk or right of way.
3. Cart Accessory Items and Structures. All applications are subject to a Type II land use procedure and approval. Locations with one (1) or two (2) carts may include any of the following items, but are not required. All Food Pods are required to include the following items, and identify the location in their land use application.
    (A) Required Items:
        (1) Trash/Recycling receptacles. Trash receptacles for customer use shall be maintained no more than ten (10) feet from each mobile food unit. All vendors will be responsible for clearing any litter within 25’ of their vending unit.
        (2) Picnic tables or other seating areas.
    (B) Optional Items:
        (1) Handwashing/Restroom Facilities.
        (2) Canopies or covered seating facilities: One (1) individual unit may have an outdoor seating area, which may have a roof, flooring, and railings, but no walls (e.g., decks, picnic shelters), provided that the square footage does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. A group of two or more mobile food units may have an outdoor seating area, which may have a roof, flooring, and railings, but no walls (e.g., decks, picnic shelters), provided that the square footage does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet per mobile vending unit with a maximum size of 5,000 square feet. For example, this is further defined to mean three (3) mobile food units could have a dining structure up to 600 square feet.
        (3) Storage Building: A maximum of two storage buildings, provided that the combined square footage does not exceed two hundred (200);
        (4) Enclosed Trash/Recycling area.
4. Signs. Pursuant to ZDC Section 370 one (1) “A-Frame” sign is permitted for each mobile food unit, and attached wall signs are allowed on the units.
5. Minimum Setbacks and Separation Distance. All mobile food units on the site shall be located a minimum of:
    (A) Five (5) feet from any structure or other mobile food unit;
    (B) Ten (10) feet from any front lot line; and
    (C) Five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, except if such lot line abuts a residential zone the minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet.
6. Screening. If the mobile food unit site is adjacent to a residential zone, the residential property shall be screened from the mobile food unit site, including the mobile food unit, seating, queuing, etc., abutting the residential zone. Required screening:
    (A) May be provided by an existing, continuous, sight-obscuring structure, fence, or hedge;
    (B) If new, shall be a continuous, sight-obscuring vegetative screen; or if fencing is utilized as screening, it shall be sight obscuring, including masonry, vinyl, board, or similar fencing. Chain-link fencing with slats shall not qualify as acceptable screening material; and
    (C) Sight obscuring fences and landscaping shall have a minimum height of six feet.
7. Setback from Vehicular and Pedestrian Use Areas. Windows and doors used for service to customers shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from loading areas, driveways, on-site circulation drives, and parking lot aisles, and a minimum of five feet from bicycle parking spaces and walkways.
8. Obstruction of Vehicular and Pedestrian Use Areas and Landscape Areas. No mobile food unit or associated element, such as seating areas, trash receptacles, signs, and customer queuing areas, shall occupy bicycle parking spaces, loading areas or walkways. Mobile vending units shall not occupy landscaping areas approved as part of a prior design review or other land use application. However, occupying existing on-site automobile parking spaces is permitted, provided that such spaces are not designated as ADA stalls, simultaneously used for parking or required to meet minimum parking requirements on the site.
9. Surfacing. All Food Pods shall be placed on an existing hard-surfaced area, or on an area specifically paved for the purpose with an approved hard surface. Any associated parking, loading and maneuvering areas for vehicles shall be on existing or newly constructed hard-surfaced areas, unless a permeable parking, loading or maneuvering area surface was authorized as part of a previously implemented design review approval for the site. One (1) or two (2) food carts may be placed on a gravel surface in accordance with City Public Works Standards.
10. Driveway Access. Any new or modified driveway access must be submitted for review by the City and associated jurisdictions.
11. Intersection Sight Distance and Roadside Clear Zones. The mobile food unit or food pod and any attachments or accessory items shall comply with the intersection sight distance and roadside clear zone standards of the City.
13. Utilities. All food carts and food pods must provide details on how utilities will be provided. If the cart or pod relies on power generation, all generators shall be self-contained, run-quiet models that are not audible from any adjacent property line.
14. Sewage Disposal. Subsurface sewage disposal is prohibited.

345.050 Mobile Food Unit Standards.
The following standards apply to each mobile food unit on the site.
1. Attachments. Attachments to the mobile vending unit, such as awnings are permitted only if they are supported entirely by the unit and do not touch the ground. Awnings shall have a minimum height clearance of seven (7) feet. Neither the mobile food unit nor any item relating to the unit shall lean against or hang from any structure or utility pole. No structure shall be attached to the mobile food unit.
2. Accessory Storage. All items relating to the mobile food unit shall be stored in, on, or under the unit, or in approved storage building.
3. Interior Seating or Vending. Customer seating or vending inside the mobile food unit is prohibited.
4. Skirting. Skirting shall be placed around the perimeter of the mobile vending unit if it is part of a Food Pod.
5. Drive-Thru Service. Drive-thru mobile food units are prohibited.
6. Other Licenses and Code Compliance Required. Besides meeting the requirements of this section, the operator of a mobile food unit must have an active City business license and must comply with the permit requirements of the Multnomah County Health Department, Multnomah County Transportation, and Gresham Fire. Specifically, all mobile food units regulated by this code are subject to NFPA 58, liquefied petroleum gas, NFPA 70 National Electrical code, NFPA 96 Standard for ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations, NFPA 10 Fire extinguishers and NFPA 17 and 17A Dry Chemical Extinguishing systems and Wet Chemical Extinguishing systems. NFPA 96.78.2 will also apply, a provision dealing with the minimum separation between units and separation between a unit and a property line.

345.060 Permit Procedures.
Mobile food unit permits will be processed as follows:
1. Type II Procedure. All food carts, food pods and related structures are required to obtain design review approval in accordance with Section 520.100, a quasi-judicial procedure.
2. Submittal Requirements. Application submittals for a mobile food unit site permit shall include the following:
    (A) A completed Land Use application and applicable fees;
    (B) Information sufficient to address the standards in Section 345.040;
    (C) A site plan of the subject property drawn to scale and including:
        (1) Lot lines,
        (2) Location of existing structures,
        (3) Proposed boundaries of the mobile food unit site. Within the boundaries of the mobile food unit site, the location of all mobile food units, seating areas, and any accessory items or structures shall be shown,
        (4) Proposed distance between the mobile vending unit site and adjacent lot lines, as well as the proposed separation distance between units and between units and other on-site structures,
        (5) Location of existing loading areas, driveways, on-site circulation drives, parking lot aisles, bicycle and automobile parking spaces, and walkways,
        (6) Orientation of service windows and doors on the mobile food units and location of queuing areas,
        (7) Location of existing landscaping,
        (8) Location of proposed landscaping,
        (9) Location and type of screening if required.
3. Conditions of Approval for Type II Applications. The approval body may impose conditions upon the approval of a mobile food unit and/or food pod to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
    (A) Further limiting the hours, days, place and manner of operation;
    (B) Requiring site and building design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, glare, and odor;
    (C) Requiring additional building setbacks;
    (D) Further limiting the building area and outdoor storage used and restricting the location of the use on the site in relationship to adjoining uses;
    (E) Designating the size, number, location and design of vehicle access points;
    (F) Requiring landscaping, buffering and/or screening of the mobile food unit site from adjoining uses and establishing standards for the continued maintenance of these improvements;
    (G) Requiring storm drainage improvements, and surfacing of parking and loading areas;
    (H) Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;
    (I) Requiring and designating the size, height and location of fences and materials used for their construction;
    (J) Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, and other vegetation, watercourses, slopes, wildlife habitat areas and drainage areas;
    (K) Limiting the type and number of vehicles or equipment to be parked or stored on the site;
    (L) Any other limitations which the review body considers to be necessary or desirable to make the use comply with this section; and
    (M) Any limitations or conditions imposed by the City’s service providers, including but not limited to Wood Village Water and Sewer, Multnomah County Transportation, Multnomah County Health Department, ODOT, Gresham Fire & Emergency, and Gresham Building Services, etc.
4. Compliance Inspection: The City Manager or designee shall perform a site inspection and issue a certificate of completion to the applicant prior to the opening and use of any food cart or pod.
5. Approval Period and Time Extension. A mobile food unit site approval is valid for one year from the date of the final written decision. If the City’s final written decision is appealed, the approval period shall commence on the date of the final appellate decision. During this one-year period, the approval shall be implemented, or the approval will become void. “Implemented” means all necessary development permits shall be obtained and maintained for the approved development. At the end of the first one-year period, the permit may be renewed administratively for one (1) year. A second administrative approval for another year may occur at the end of the second year. No more than two (2) administrative renewals shall occur per original approval. At the close of the third year, the applicant must submit a new Type II application. City approval of a mobile unit is not transferable in the case of new business ownership of the existing unit or unit replacement. A new application to the City is required.
6. Grounds for Revocation. The City Manager or designee may:
    (A) Revoke a mobile food unit site permit approval if the conditions of approval have not been or are not being complied with and the mobile food unit site is otherwise being conducted in a manner contrary to this chapter.
    (B) The City Manager or designee shall approve the use as it exists, revoke the mobile food unit site permit, or compel measures to be taken to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood and conformance with this section after reviewing a complaint. Complaints may be originated by the City or the public. Complaints shall clearly state the objection to the mobile food unit site, such as:
        (1) Generation of excessive traffic;
        (2) Generation of excessive noise or litter;
        (3) Other offensive activities not compatible with the surrounding area.
    (C) When a mobile food unit site permit has been revoked due to violation of these standards, another application for a mobile food unit site on the subject parcel will be considered once all outstanding issues are resolved.

Section 350 Parking and Loading

350.010 Introduction.
This section establishes the standards for the amount, location, and development of motor vehicle parking, and standards for on-site loading areas. Other City Ordinances may regulate other aspects of parking and loading.

350.020 Parking Plan Required.
A parking plan, drawn to scale, must accompany land use applications. Depending on the nature and magnitude of the development, it may be possible to show the needed parking information on the site plan. The plan must show the following elements that are necessary to indicate that the requirements of this Code are being met.
1. Delineation of individual vehicles and bicycle parking spaces, including handicapped parking spaces.
2. Loading areas and docks.
3. Circulation area necessary to serve spaces.
4. Location of bicycle and motorcycle parking areas, if any.
5. Access to streets, alleys, and properties to be served.
6. Curb cuts.
7. Type of landscaping, fencing, or other screening materials.
8. Abutting land uses.
9. Grading, drainage, surfacing, and sub-grading details.
10. Location of lighting fixtures.
11. Delineation of all structures and obstacles to circulation on the site.
12. Specifications of signs and bumper guards.
13. Location of planter bays where required.
14. Proposed number of employees and amount of floor area space applicable to the parking requirements for the proposed use.

Motor Vehicle Parking

350.030 General Regulations.
A. Where the Regulations Apply. The regulations of this section apply to all parking areas in all zones, whether required by the code or put in for the convenience of property owners or users. Parking areas include those accessory to a use, or for a park and ride use in the Basic Utilities use category.
B. Occupancy. All required parking areas must be completed and landscaped prior to occupancy of any structure except as provided in Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening.
C. Use of Required Parking Spaces. Required parking spaces must be available for the use of residents, customers, or employees of the use. Fees may be charged for the use of required parking spaces. Required parking spaces may not be assigned in any way to a use on another site, except for joint parking situations (see Section 350.045), or to redevelop a portion of a parking lot for transit oriented uses including bus stops, pullouts, shelters, park and ride stations and similar facilities as approved by the City in cooperation with Tri-Met. Redevelopment or joint use of a parking lot may occur only when the underlying parking stall requirements have been met. Required parking spaces may not be used for the parking of equipment or storage of goods or inoperable vehicles.
D. Curb Cuts. Access points with the street shall be the minimum necessary to provide access while not inhibiting the safe circulation and carrying capacity of the street. Curb cuts shall be designed to established City standards.
E. Proximity of Parking to Use. Required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on the site of the use. Required parking spaces for nonresidential uses must be located on the site of the use or in parking areas whose closest point is within 250 feet of the site.

Required Parking Spaces

350.040 Purpose.
The purpose of required parking spaces is to provide enough on-site parking to accommodate the majority of traffic generated by the range of uses which might locate at the site over time, while at the same time maximizing land use by avoiding an oversupply of parking stalls. The required parking numbers correspond to broad use categories, not specific uses, in response to this long term emphasis. Variation from parking requirements shall be allowed only after approval of a variance as per Section 660.

350.045 Number of Required Spaces.
1. Table 350-1A and 1B state the required minimum and maximum number of spaces for each use category.
2. When computing parking spaces based on floor area, areas used for parking are not counted. The number of parking spaces is computed based on the primary use of the site except as stated in Paragraphs 3 and 4 below.
3. When there are two or more separate uses on a site, the required parking for the site is the sum of the required parking for the individual uses. For joint use parking, see Paragraph 5.
4. When a use has more than 20 percent of its floor area in a distinct function (i.e., office, warehouse, or retail), the required parking is calculated separately for each function. An example would be a 40,000 square foot use with a 10,000 square foot office area and a 30,000 square foot warehouse. The required parking would be computed separately for the office and warehouse functions.
5. Joint Use Parking. Joint use of required parking spaces may occur where two or more uses on the same or separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. The number of required stalls per use may be reduced up to 25%. Joint use of required nonresidential parking spaces is allowed if the following documentation is submitted in writing to the City Administrator as part of a building permit application or land use review.
    (a) The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking;
    (b) The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;
    (c) An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of both uses; and
    (d) A legal instrument such as an easement, lease, contract or similar written document or deed restriction that guarantees access to the parking for both uses.
6. Bicycle Standards. 
    (a) Required Bicycle Parking. 
        (i) Multi-family residential development shall provide a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces or one per 10 auto spaces, whichever is greater.
        (ii) Industrial development shall provide a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces or one space for every 30 auto spaces, whichever is greater.
        (iii) Development in commercial and institutional categories must provide a minimum of two bicycle parking spaces per building or one space for each 30 auto spaces, whichever is greater.
    (b) Bicycle Parking Development Standards. 
        (i) The parking shall be well-lighted and lockable so as to provide security and convenience to bicyclists. The bicycle parking must be within 50 feet of a well- used building entrance. On property with multiple uses of buildings, bicycle parking may be clustered in one or more locations.
        (ii) The on-site circulation system must be designed to accommodate safe and convenient bicycle access.
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |          Use Category           |       Specific Uses        |    Minimum Required Parking    |
        |                                 |                            |             Spaces             |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Residential Categories                                                                        |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Household Living:               | 1 and 2 family units       | 1 per unit                     |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | "                               | 3 and more units           | 1.5 per unit                   |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Group Living                    |                            | 1 per 3 residents              |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Commercial Categories                                                                         |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Retail Sales & Service          | Retail, personal service,  | 1 per 300 sq.ft. of gross      |
        |                                 | repair oriented            | leasable area (GLA)            |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | "                               | Restaurants, bars          | 8 per 1000 sq.ft. GLA          |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | "                               | Sports clubs, Recreation   | 4.3 per 1000 sq. ft. GLA       |
        |                                 | facilities                 |                                |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | "                               | Drive-thru restaurants     | 9.9 per 1000 sq.ft. GLA        |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | "                               | Temporary Lodging          | 1 per rentable room; for       |
        |                                 |                            | associated uses such           |
        |                                 |                            | as restaurants, see above      |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | "                               | Theaters                   | 1 per 4 seats or 1 per         |
        |                                 |                            | 6 feet of bench area           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Office                          |                            | 1 per 400 sq.ft. GLA           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Quick Vehicle Servicing         |                            | 1 per 500 sq.ft. GLA           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Vehicle Repair                  |                            | 1 per 750 sq.ft. GLA           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Self Service Storage            |                            | 4 plus 1 for each 150          |
        |                                 |                            | rentable spaces                |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Commercial Recreation           |                            | 4.3 per 1000 sq.ft. of         |
        |                                 |                            | GLA                            |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Major Event Entertainment       |                            | 1 per 8 seats or per CU        |
        |                                 |                            | review                         |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Industrial Categories                                                                         |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Manufacturing & Production      |                            | 1 per 625 sq.ft. GLA           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Warehouse & Freight Movement    |                            | 1 per 750 sq.ft. of GLA        |
        |                                 |                            | for the first                  |
        |                                 |                            | 3,000 sq.ft. of GLA and        |
        |                                 |                            | then 1 per                     |
        |                                 |                            | 1,500 sq.ft. of GLA thereafter |
        |                                 |                            | If over 150,000 sq.ft. –       |
        |                                 |                            | 0.3 per 1000 sq.ft. GLA        |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Wholesale Sales, Industrial     |                            | 1 per 750 sq.ft. of GLA        |
        | Service                         |                            |                                |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Waste Related                   |                            | Per CU Review                  |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Institutional Categories                                                                      |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Basic Utilities                 |                            | None or per CU review          |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Community Service               |                            | 1 per 400 sq.ft. of floor      |
        |                                 |                            | area or per CU review          |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Essential Service Providers     |                            | Per CU review                  |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Parks and Open Space            |                            | Per CU review for active       |
        |                                 |                            | area                           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Schools                         | Grade, elementary, middle, | 0.2 per # of students          |
        |                                 | junior high                | plus staff                     |
        |                                 | high school and colleges   |                                |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Medical Center                  |                            | 1 per 300 sq.ft. of floor      |
        |                                 |                            | area or per CU review          |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Religious Institutions          |                            | 0.5 per seat                   |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Daycare                         |                            | 1 per 300 sq.ft. of GLA        |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Other Categories                                                                              |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Agriculture                     |                            | None or per CU review          |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Detention Facilities            |                            | Per CU review                  |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Mining                          |                            | Per CU review                  |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Radio & TV Broadcast Facilities |                            | 2 per site                     |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Rail Lines & Utility Corridors  |                            | None                           |
        +---------------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------------+
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        |         Use Category          |          Maximum Permitted Parking Ratios          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | "                             |  (spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable   |
        |                               |                       area)                        |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        |                               | Generally           | Within 1/4 mile of fixed     |
        |                               |                     | route transit with 20-minute |
        |                               |                     | service                      |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Household Living              | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Group Living                  | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Retail Sales and Service:     |                     |                              |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Restaurant                    | 23                  | 19.1                         |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Restaurant with drive         | 15                  | 12.4                         |
        | through                       |                     |                              |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Motel/Hotel                   | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Movie Theatre                 | 0.5 spaces per seat | 0.4                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | All other                     | 5.75                | 5.1                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Office – Medical/Dental       | 5.9                 | 4.9                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | – All other                   | 4.1                 | 3.4                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Quick Vehicle Servicing       | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Commercial Outdoor Recreation | 6.5                 | 5.4                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Major Event Entertainment     | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Manufacturing and Production  | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Wholesale Sales               | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Colleges                      | 0.3                 | 0.3                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Schools – High Schools        | 0.3                 | 0.3                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | – All other schools           | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Religious Institutions        | 0.8 spaces per seat | 0.6                          |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | Other Institutional Use       | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        | Categories                    |                     |                              |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+
        | All other categories          | no maximum          | no maximum                   |
        +-------------------------------+---------------------+------------------------------+

Development Standards for One and Two Unit Dwellings

350.050 Purpose.
The size and placement of vehicle parking areas are regulated in order to enhance the appearance of neighborhoods.

350.055 General Regulations.
A. Structures These Regulations Apply To. The regulations of this section apply to houses, attached houses, duplexes, and manufactured homes. The regulations apply to required and excess parking areas. Parking for manufactured home parks is regulated in Section 340 - Manufactured Homes.
B. Parking Area Locations. Required parking spaces are not allowed within the first 10 feet from a front lot line. In addition, no more than 40 percent of the land area between the front lot line and the front building line may be paved for parking or driveway purposes. Parking in garages is subject to the base zone setback standards.
C. Parking Space Sizes. The minimum size of a required parking space is 9 feet by 19 feet. The minimum driveway width on private property is 9 feet for residential uses.
D. Paving. All driveways and parking areas shall have a durable, dust free surfacing of asphalt, concrete, or other material approved by the Director of Public Works.

Development Standards for All Other Uses

350.060 Purpose.
The development standards promote vehicle areas which are safe and attractive for motorists and pedestrians. The parking area layout standards are intended to promote safe circulation within the parking area and to provide for convenient entry and exit of vehicles. The setback and landscaping standards:
•Improve and soften the appearance of parking areas;
•Reduce the visual impact of parking areas from sidewalks, streets, and especially from adjacent residential zones;
•Direct traffic in parking areas;
•Shade and cool parking areas; and
•Decrease airborne and waterborne pollution.

350.065 General Regulations.
A. Where These Standards Apply. The standards of this section apply to all vehicle areas whether required or excess parking, except for residential parking areas subject to the standards of Section 350.050 through 350.055.
B. Improvements. 
    (1) Paving. In order to control dust and mud, all vehicle areas shall have a durable, dust free surface of asphalt, concrete, or other material approved by the Public Works Director. For instance, infrequently used parking areas may have a gravel surface. However, some portions of individual parking spaces may be landscaped per the standards of Paragraph D4 below.
    (2) Striping. All parking areas, must be striped in conformance with the parking dimension standards of Subsection D below.
    (3) Protective Curbs Around Landscaping. All perimeter and interior landscaped areas must have protective curbs along the edges. Trees must have adequate protection from car doors as well as car bumpers.
C. Setbacks and Perimeter Landscaping for Surface Parking Areas. The minimum required setbacks and landscaping for surface parking areas are stated in Table 350-2. The setbacks apply when a parking area abuts a street or lot line.
+--------------------------+------------------+----------+
|         Location         |          All zones          |
+--------------------------+------------------+----------+
| "                        |    except GM     |    GM    |
+--------------------------+------------------+----------+
| Lot line abutting street | 5 ft/L2 10 ft/L1 | 5 ft/L2  |
|                          |                  | 10 ft/L1 |
+--------------------------+------------------+----------+
| Lot line abutting a NC,  | 5 ft/L2 10 ft/L1 | 5 ft/L2  |
| LM, C/I, TC or GM zone   |                  | 10 ft/L1 |
| lot line                 |                  |          |
+--------------------------+------------------+----------+
| Lot line abutting a LR   | 5 ft/L3          | 10 ft/L3 |
| or MR zone lot line      |                  |          |
+--------------------------+------------------+----------+
D. Parking Area Layouts. 
    (1) Access to Parking Spaces. 
        (a) All parking areas, must be designed so that a vehicle may enter or exit without having to move another vehicle.
        (b) All parking areas must be designed to allow vehicles to enter and exit the roadway in a forward motion. However, this does not apply to parking areas with one or two spaces and whose only access is on a non-arterial street.
    (2) Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions. 
        (a) The minimum dimensions for required parking spaces are stated in Table 350-3. All excess spaces must comply with at least the dimensions for compact spaces, stated in Table 350-3. Compact spaces must be clearly labeled on the site for compact use.
        (b) At least 50% of required parking spaces must comply with the minimum dimensions for standard spaces.
    (3) Disabled Parking. Where required by this Code, Chapter 31 of the Uniform Building Code or the Americans With Disabilities Act, disabled parking spaces must meet the dimension standards stated in Table 350-3.
    (4) Landscape Instead of Paving. A portion of a standard parking space may be landscaped instead of paved. The landscaped area may be up to 2 feet of the front of the space as measured from a line parallel to the direction of the bumper of a vehicle using the space. Landscaping must be ground cover plants. The landscaping does not apply towards any perimeter or interior landscaping requirements, but does count towards any overall site landscaping requirement.
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    |   Angle    |   Type   |   Width   | Curb Length | 1 Way Aisle | 2 Way Aisle | Stall Depth |
    |    (A)     |          |    (B)    |     (C)     |    Width    |    Width    |     (E)     |
    |            |          |           |             |     (D)     |     (D)     |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 0°         | Standard | 9 ft      | 22 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 8 ft        |
    | (Parallel) |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Compact  | 7 ft      | 19 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 7 ft 6 in   |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Disabled | 13 ft     | 22 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 8 ft        |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 30°        | Standard | 9 ft      | 18 ft       | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 17 ft       |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Compact  | 7 ft 6 in | 15 ft       | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 14 ft       |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Disabled | 13 ft     | 18 ft       | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 17 ft       |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 45°        | Standard | 9 ft      | 12 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 19 ft       |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Compact  | 7 ft 6 in | 10 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 16 ft       |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Disabled | 13 ft     | 12 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 19 ft       |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 60°        | Standard | 9 ft      | 10 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 20 ft       |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Compact  | 7 ft 6 in | 8 ft 6 in   | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 16 ft 6     |
    |            |          |           |             |             |             | in          |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Disabled | 13 ft     | 10 ft 6     | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 20 ft       |
    |            |          |           | in          |             |             |             |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | 90°        | Standard | 9 ft      | 9 ft        | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 19 ft       |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Compact  | 7 ft 6 in | 7 ft 6 in   | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 15 ft       |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    | "          | Disabled | 13 ft     | 9 ft        | 12 ft       | 24 ft       | 19 ft       |
    +------------+----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
    Notes: [1] See Figure 350-1Figure 350-1. Parking Dimension Factors
    [IMAGE: <350-1_Parking-Dimension-Factors.png>]
E. Parking Area Interior Landscaping. 
    (1) Amount of Landscaping. All surface parking areas with more than 10 spaces must provide interior landscaping complying with one or a mix of both the standards stated below. In addition, the City encourages the use of bio-retention cells as rain gardens in parking lot islands, and utilization of site landscaping for treatment of stormwater runoff in the parking lot.
        (a) Option 1. Interior landscaping must be provided at the rate of 20 square feet per stall. At least one tree must be planted for every 200 square feet of landscaped area. Ground cover plants must completely cover the remainder of the landscaped area.
        (b) Option 2. One tree must be provided for every four parking spaces. If surrounded by cement, the tree planting area must have a minimum dimension of 4 ft. If surrounded by asphalt, the tree planting area must have a minimum dimension of 3 ft.
    (2) Development Standards for Parking Area Interior Landscaping. 
        (a) All landscaping must comply with the standards of Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening. Trees and shrubs must be fully protected from potential damage by vehicles.
        (b) Interior parking area landscaping must be dispersed throughout the parking area. Some trees may be grouped, but the groups must be dispersed.
        (c) Perimeter landscaping may not substitute for interior landscaping. However, interior landscaping may join perimeter landscaping as long as it extends 4 feet or more into the parking area from the perimeter landscape line.
        (d) Parking areas that are 30 feet or less in width may locate their interior landscaping around the edges of the parking area. Interior landscaping placed along an edge is in addition to any required perimeter landscaping.

Loading

350.070 Purpose.
A minimum number of loading spaces are required to ensure adequate areas for loading for larger uses and developments. These regulations ensure that the appearance of loading areas will be consistent with that of parking areas.

350.075 Loading Standards.
A. Number of Loading Spaces. The minimum required number of loading spaces for all buildings is:
+-------------------------------------+---+
| Buildings under 20,000 sq. ft.      | 0 |
+-------------------------------------+---+
| Buildings from 20,000 to 50,000 sq. | 1 |
| ft.                                 |   |
+-------------------------------------+---+
| Buildings over 50,000 sq. ft.       | 2 |
+-------------------------------------+---+
B. Size of Loading Spaces. Required loading spaces must be at least 35 feet long, 10 feet wide, and have a clearance of 13 feet.
C. Placement, Setbacks and Landscaping. Loading areas must comply with the setback and perimeter landscaping standards stated in Table 350-4.
D. Forward Motion. Loading facilities must be designed so that vehicles enter and exit the site in a forward motion.
+----------------------------------+-----------+----------+
|             Location             | All zones |    GM    |
|                                  | except GM |          |
+----------------------------------+-----------+----------+
| Lot line abutting street         | 5 ft/L2   | 5 ft/L2  |
|                                  | 10 ft/L1  | 10 ft/L1 |
+----------------------------------+-----------+----------+
| Lot line abutting a NC, LM, C/I, | 5 ft/L2   | 5 ft/L2  |
| TC or GM zone lot line           | 10 ft/L1  | 10 ft/L1 |
+----------------------------------+-----------+----------+
| Lot line abutting an R zone lot  | 5 ft/L4   | 10 ft/L4 |
| line                             |           |          |
+----------------------------------+-----------+----------+

Section 360 Planned Development District

360.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Development District is to provide opportunities to create more desirable environments through the application of flexible and diversified land development standards under a comprehensive plan and program professionally prepared. The Planned Development District is intended to be used to encourage the application of new techniques and new technology to community development which will result in superior living or development arrangements with lasting values. It is further intended to achieve economics in land development, maintenance, street systems and utility networks while providing building groupings for privacy, usable and attractive open spaces, safe circulation and the general well-being of the inhabitants.

360.020 Procedure.
A. Preliminary Development Plan and Program.
The applicant shall submit a Preliminary Development Plan and Program to the Planning Commission for an approval in principle. Such presentation shall consist of a preliminary plan in schematic fashion and a written program containing the following elements:
    (1) Plan Elements. 
        (a) Proposed land uses and densities
        (b) Building types and intensities
        (c) Circulation pattern
        (d) Parks, playgrounds, open spaces
        (e) Existing natural features
    (2) Program Elements. 
        (a) Applicant's market analysis of proposed use
        (b) Proposed ownership pattern
        (c) Operation and maintenance proposal, i.e. Homeowners Association, Condominium, Co-op or other
        (d) Solid waste and recyclables storage where required. See Section 390
        (e) Lighting
        (f) Water supply
        (g) Public transportation
        (h) Community facilities, i.e. schools, libraries, fire protection and shopping
        (i) General timetable of development
        (j) Qualifications of the proposed design team for the preparation of the General Plan and Program. The design team shall be designated on the basis of the extent and complexity of the Planned Development and shall consist of one or more persons with qualifications such as an Urban Planner, an Architect, an Engineer, a Landscape Architect, a Designer, an Attorney or other similar professionals or technicians.
    (3) Planning Commission initial review of the Preliminary Plan and Program need not be a public hearing unless the applicant requests such hearing in the application. Notice for such requested hearing shall be given as provided in Section 520.100 Type II Procedure.
    (4) The Planning Commission shall informally review the Preliminary Development Plan and Program at a regular meeting and may act to grant preliminary approval, approval with recommended modifications or denial. Such action shall be based upon the Comprehensive Plan, the standards of this ordinance and other regulations and the suitability of the proposed development in relation to the character of the area.
    (5) Approval in principle of the Preliminary Development Plan and Program shall be limited to the preliminary acceptability of the land uses proposed and their inter-relationships and shall not be construed to endorse precise location of uses nor engineering feasibility. The Planning Commission may require the development of other information than that specified in Section 360.020B to be submitted with the General Development Plan and Program.
    (6) The Planning Commission shall review and may recommend expansion, additions or modifications in the qualifications of the proposed design team for the preparation of the General Plan and Program.
    (7) The Planning Commission shall determine the extent of any additional market analysis to be included in the General Development Plan and Program.
B. General Development Plan and Program. 
    (1) After receiving approval in principle of the Preliminary Plan and Program, the applicant shall have a General Development Plan and Program prepared by the professional design team having the qualifications recommended or approved by the Planning Commission.
    (2) The applicant shall apply for an amendment of the Zoning Map as set forth in Section 680.010.
    (3) Upon receipt of the application accompanied by the General Development Plan and Program, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 680.010.
    (4) The General Development Plan and Program shall contain the following elements:
        (a) Plan Elements. 
            i. General Development Plan in conformance with the approved Preliminary Plan.
            ii. Existing and proposed contour map or maps of the site to a scale commensurate with the size of the development.
            iii. Location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, or other public open spaces and land uses within 500 feet of the boundaries of the development.
            iv. Existing sewers, water mains, and other underground facilities within and adjacent to the development and their certified capacities.
            v. Proposed sewers or other disposal facilities, water mains and other underground utilities.
            vi. A preliminary subdivision plan if the property is proposed to be divided.
            vii. A land use plan indicating the uses planned for the development.
            viii. Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for interior circulation, public parks, playgrounds, school sites, public buildings or other uses dedicated or reserved to the public, if any.
            ix. Parks, playgrounds, open space that is to be maintained and controlled by the owners of the property and the proposed uses thereof.
            x. A traffic flow map showing the circulation pattern within and adjacent to the proposed development. Include a map that identifies possible street connections (except where prevented by topography, barriers or environmental constraints) at intervals of no more than 530 feet both within the project and to adjacent land in compliance with the City, County and Regional Transportation Plans. Street connections at intervals of no more than 330 feet are recommended in areas planned for the higher density mixed-use development.
            xi. Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways, malls, trails or easements. Illustrate accessways for pedestrians, bicycles or emergency vehicles on public easements or right-of-way where full street connections are not possible with spacing between streets and accessways preferably not to exceed 330 feet, unless impractical due to existing development or environmental, topography, physical barriers or environmental constraints.
            xii. Location, arrangement, number and dimension of automobile garages and parking spaces, width of aisles, bays and angle of parking.
            xiii. Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and unloading spaces and docks, if any.
            xiv. Preliminary architectural plans and elevations of typical buildings and structures, indicating the general height, bulk, appearance and number of dwelling units.
            xv. A preliminary tree planting and landscaping plan including areas of ground cover and approximate finished grades, slopes, bank and ditches. All existing trees over 12" in diameter and groves of trees shall be shown. Trees to be removed by development shall be so marked.
            xvi. The approximate location, height and materials of all walls, fences and screen plantings. Elevation drawings of typical walls and fences shall be included.
            xvii. The stages, if any, of the development construction. Such stages shall be clearly marked on the General Development Plan.
        (b) Program Elements. 
            i. Narrative statement of the goals and objectives of the planned development.
            ii. A completed market analysis, if required by the Planning Commission.
            iii. Evidence of resources available to develop the project.
            iv. Tables showing the total number of acres, the distribution of areas by use, the percentage designated for each dwelling type, off-street parking, streets, parks, playgrounds, schools and open spaces as shown on the proposed development plan.
            v. Tables showing the overall density of the proposed residential development and showing density by dwelling types and any proposals for the limitation of density.
            vi. Drafts of appropriate restrictive convenants and drafts of documents providing for the maintenance of any common open space, of required dedications or reservations of public open spaces and of any dedications of development rights.
C. Action and Findings. 
    (1) The Planning Commission, after public hearing as provided in Section 530.100, may by resolution, recommend approval of the Planned Development district and the General Development Plan and Program, with or without modifications or may deny the application. A decision to recommend approval of a Planned Development district shall be based upon the following finding:
        (a) That the proposed development is in substantial conformance with the Comprehensive Plan for the City.
        (b) That exceptions from the standards of the underlying district are warranted by the decision by the design and amenities incorporated in the development plan and program.
        (c) That the proposal is in harmony with the surrounding area or its potential future use.
        (d) That the system of ownership and the means of developing, preserving and maintaining open spaces is suitable.
        (e) That the approval will have a beneficial effect on the area which could not be achieved under other zoning districts.
        (f) That the proposed development, or a unit thereof, can be substantially completed within four (4) years of the approval.
    (2) A resolution for approval shall be considered by the City Council according to the provisions of Section 530.100. A Planning Commission action to deny the application may be appealed to the Council as provided in Section 550.100.
D. Final Plan and Program. 
    (1) Following approval of the Planned Development District by the City Council the applicant shall prepare a Final Plan and Program which shall be submitted to the City Administrator to check for compliance with the approved General Development Plan and Program.
    (2) If the Final Plan and Program is found to be in compliance, it shall be so certified by the City Administrator and recorded by the applicant in the County offices of the Department of Records and Elections as the Final Development Plan along with all documents relating to dedications, improvements, agreements, restrictions, and associations which shall constitute the Final Program.
    (3) The standards of the Subdivision Regulations shall be met if the property is to be divided or streets are to be dedicated.
    (4) All public site dedications, development rights to open spaces or other dedications for the entire site or approved staged portion shall be recorded prior to the issuance of any building permit.
    (5) Final copies of all approved articles governing operation and maintenance shall be filed with the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any building permit.

360.030 Development Standards.
A. Application of Standards. 
    (1) In cases of conflict between standards of the underlying district and the Planned Development District, the standards of the Planned Development District shall apply.
B. Minimum Site Size. 
    (1) Planned Development Districts shall be established only on parcels of land which are suitable for the proposed development and of sufficient size to be planned and developed in a manner consistent with the purposes of this Section.
    (2) A Planned Development District shall not be established on less than four (4) acres of contiguous land unless the Planning Commission finds that property of less than four (4) acres is suitable as a Planned Development District by virtue of its unique character, topography, or landscaping features, or by virtue of qualifying as an isolated problem area as determined by the Planning Commission.
C. Compatibility with Neighborhood. 
    (1) The plans and program shall present an organized arrangement of buildings, service facilities, open spaces and improvements such as recreation facilities, landscaping and fencing to insure compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the character of the neighborhood.
    (2) Periphery yards of a Planned Development District site shall be at least as deep as those required by the yard regulations of the adjoining district unless the Planning Commission finds that equal protection will be accorded through specific features of the approved plan.
D. Lot Coverage. Lot coverage shall be the same as the underlying district unless the Planning Commission finds that an exception is warranted in terms of the character and amenities proposed in the total development.
E. Open Space. 
    (1) Open Space in a Planned Development District means the land area to be used for scenic, landscaping or open recreational purposes within the development.
        (a) It shall not include street rights-of-way, driveways or open parking areas.
    (2) Open Space shall be adequate for the recreational and leisure use of the population occupying the Planned Development District and designed to enhance the present and future value of the development.
    (3) To the maximum extent possible, the plan and program shall assure that natural features of the land are preserved and landscaping is provided.
    (4) In order to assure that open space will be permanent, dedication of development rights to Wood Village for other than open space use may be required.
    (5) Instruments guaranteeing the maintenance of open space shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. Documents dedicating development rights and provisions for maintenance of open space shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney.
    (6) The Planning Commission may require that instruments of conveyance provide that in the event the open space is permitted to deteriorate is not maintained in a condition consistent with the approved plan and program, then and in such event the City may at its option cause such maintenance to be done and assess the costs to the affected property owners.
    (7) Recreation Area. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of recreation area shall be provided for each dwelling unit proposed in the Development Plan for units No. 1 through and including No. 30. A minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of recreation area shall be provided for each dwelling unit for Units No. 31 or more. The recreation area shall be of a shape that will make it usable for its intended purpose. Recreation buildings may be considered as a part of this requirement. Recreation areas shall not be located in required yard.
    (8) Storage Area. Storage space (for boats, campers, etc.) shall be provided on a multi-family development site at the rate of one (1), ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot space in size for every four (4) living units. Adequate maneuvering room shall be provided; storage space shall be fenced with a six (6) foot sight-obscuring fence and conform to standard set backs.
    (9) Landscaping. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in each multi-family development and shall satisfy the following requirements:
        (a) All areas in a multi-family dwelling, not occupied by paved roadways or walkways, patios, shall be landscaped.
        (b) Native and ornamental trees with a height of twenty (20) feet or greater shall be retained unless it can be justified to be impractical.
        (c) Screen planting, masonry walls, or fencing shall be provided to screen objectionable views effectively within a reasonable time. Views to be screened include boat and RV parking areas, garbage and recycling collection stations and other similar uses.
        (d) Other landscape planting of adequate size, quantity and character shall be planted and maintained to provide an attractive setting and other improvements to provide adequate privacy and pleasant outlooks for living units.
        (e) It shall be the responsibility of the management to see that landscaped areas and yards are well kept.
F. Subdivision Lot Sizes. Minimum area, width, depth and frontage requirements for subdivision lots in a Planned Development District may be less than the minimums specified in the underlying district if in accordance with the approved General Development Plan and Program. The balance of the total tract area shall be devoted to open space as defined herein.
G. Staging. 
    (1) The applicant may elect to develop the site in successive stages in a manner indicated in the General Development Plan and Program. Each such stage shall be substantially complete within itself.
    (2) The Planning Commission may require that development be done in stages if public facilities are not adequate to service the entire development initially.

360.040 Permitted Uses.
A. For Residential Districts. The following uses are permitted in a Planned Development District:
    (1) Housing concepts may include but are not limited to single family residences, duplexes, row houses, townhouses, cluster units or multiple family dwellings.
    (2) Related commercial uses which are designated exclusively to serve the development of which they are a part, when approved by the Planning Commission.
    (3) Related community service uses which are designed to serve the development of which they are a part, when approved by the Planning Commission.
        (a) Such community service uses may also be designed to serve the adjacent area if considered desirable by the Planning Commission upon examination of the plan.
    (4) Accessory buildings and uses.
B. For Commercial and Industrial Districts. 
    (1) Uses permitted in the underlying district.
    (2) Community service uses approved by the Planning Commission.
    (3) Other uses as approved by the Planning Commission as consistent with the Plan and Program.
    (4) Accessory buildings and uses.

360.050 Changes and Modifications.
A. Major Changes. Major changes in the General Development Plan and Program after it has been adopted shall be considered the same as a new petition and shall be made in accordance with the procedures specified in this Section.
B. Minor Changes. 
    (1) Minor changes in the General Development Plan and Program may be approved by the Planning Director, provided that such changes:
        (a) Do not increase the densities
        (b) Do not change boundaries
        (c) Do not change any use
        (d) Do not change the location or amount of land devoted to specific land uses.
    (2) Such changes may include:
        (a) Minor shifting of the location of buildings, proposed streets, public or private ways, utility easements, parks or other public open spaces, or other features of the plan.

360.060 Expiration.
If substantial construction or development has not taken place within four (4) years from the date of approval of the General Development Plan and Program, the Planning Commission shall review the district at a public hearing to determine whether or not its continuation in whole or in part is in the public interest, and if found not to be, shall recommend to the City Council that the Planned Development District on the property be removed.

Section 370 Signs

370.010 Definitions.
See Section 720 - Definitions

370.020 General Provisions.
A. No person shall erect, construct, alter, place, change, relocate, suspend or attach any sign without first obtaining from the City a written permit to do so, paying the fees prescribed therefore, and otherwise complying with all of the applicable provisions of this Code. Signs will be maintained in good condition, both structurally, and in their appearance.
B. Permit Application: Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the City and shall include at a minimum,
    (a) A sketch drawn to scale indicating the proposed sign and identifying existing signs on the premises,
    (b) Sign location, colors, graphic design, structural and mechanical design and engineering data which ensures its structural stability unless otherwise excepted herein;
    (c) Names and addresses of the owner(s) of the subject property, the person authorizing erection of the sign and the party erecting the same as well as the party who shall maintain the same.
C. Application Approval and Permit Issuance: Unless otherwise provided by this Code, no permit shall be issued for any new sign or substantial modification thereof within the City until the same be reviewed and approved under the direction of the City Manager.
D. Signs Exempt from Permits: The following signs do not require permits as herein required:
    (1) Traffic or other governmental street signs, such as railroad crossing signs and notices as may be authorized or required by State or Federal Law or the Wood Village City Council.
    (2) Signs of public utility companies indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety or which show the location of underground facilities or of public telephones.
    (3) Signs not visible from public right-of-way
E. Signs Exempt from Permits but Requiring Conformance to Set Standards and Regulations:
    (1) Construction Project Sign: a sign erected in conjunction with a construction project and used to inform the public of the architects, engineers and construction organizations participating in the project and indicating "future home of" information.
        (a) One (1) such sign may be erected after appropriate building permits have been obtained.
        (b) No such sign shall exceed sixty-four (64) square feet total or thirty-two (32) square feet per face.
        (c) No free-standing sign shall exceed (8) feet in height.
        (d) The sign shall be removed at the time final occupancy is approved by the City or in the event a building permit or license for such construction expires.
    (2) Garage Sale Sign: a sign advertising garage sales or similar events in residential zones.
        (a) No limit
        (b) Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet per face.
        (c) Shall not exceed four (4) feet in height.
        (d) Such sign may be erected up to one (1) week prior to the event and shall be removed no later than the day after the event. Such sign shall not be placed in the public right-of-way or vision clearance areas and shall not be maintained for more than ten (10) days in any one six (6) month period of time.
    (3) Gasoline Station Price Sign: Unless otherwise herein provided,
        (a) One (1) sign shall be allowed for the purpose of advertising gasoline prices.
        (b) Shall be a one (1) or two (2) faced sign with a maximum of nine (9) square feet in area per face.
        (c) Maximum height not to exceed eight (8) feet.
        (d) No time or other restrictions.
    (4) Name Plate: a sign when otherwise permitted in an area identifying the name, street address, occupation and/or profession of the occupant of the premises. Graphic information and all name plates shall be limited to the identification of the business name as registered with the State of Oregon.
        (a) One (1) name plate allowed.
        (b) Such signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each occupant and shall be affixed to the building wall.
    (5) Non-Commercial Sign: a notice or pictorial sign, except those used for purposes of making things known about goods, services or activities offered by "for profit" entities shall be allowed in any zone when otherwise permitted, subject to the same regulations as signs in the particular zone and counted in the quantity limitations of signs for that zone for each property.
    (6) Public Safety and Convenience: Signs used to serve the public safety or convenience such as "entrance", "parking", or "no-smoking", "turn off motor" signs.
        (a) Unlimited number of signs allowed.
        (b) Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face
        (c) Not to exceed eight (8) feet in height.
        (d) Shall meet all other pertinent requirements and City standards.
    (7) Window Sign: Window signs will not need a permit nor will they be included in allowable area calculations.
    (8) Non-Commercial Flags: Flags displayed from permanently located free-standing or wall-mounted flagpoles which are designed to allow raising and lowering of flags.
        (a) Shall be limited in number to one per hundred feet of linear frontage, with a maximum of six per premises. Such displays shall be kept neat, clean and in good repair.
    (9) Political Signs: Signs relating to the nomination or election of any individual for public office or advocacy of any measure to be voted upon at any special or general election:
        (a) If placed in a residential zone shall not exceed an area of two (2) square feet and in a non-residential area not more than ten (10) square feet;
        (b) Shall be permitted from a date not more than forty-five (45) days prior thereto to a date ten (10) days following such election. Such sign shall be considered temporary in nature and shall be placed upon the concerned property only by the property owner, resident or with the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof.
    (10) Tourist Attraction Directional Sign: A uniformly designed sign used by a public agency to identify a local or regional tourist attraction.
F. Signs or Advertising Devices Expressly Prohibited:
    (1) Signs Structurally Unsafe: no sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained unless the sign and sign structure is so constructed, erected and maintained as to be able to withstand wind, seismic and other loads as specified in the Uniform Building Code of the City.
    (2) Intersection Signs: notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, no sign except authorized traffic signs shall be erected at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing vision or at any location where it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign.
    (3) Regulatory Sign Confusion: signs resembling traffic signs or signals shall not be constructed, erected or maintained or signs which bear the words "stop", "go slow", "caution", "danger" and "warning" or similar words except as officially authorized and installed by the City or other authorized governmental agencies.
    (4) Portable Signs: signs not permanently affixed to a building structure or the ground and designed to move from place to place except garage sale signs, special event signs, political signs, real estate signs or as otherwise provided in this Code including Section 370.030 (C)(3) regulating free-standing signs in commercial and industrial zones.
    (5) Roof Signs: signs erected, maintained, displayed, and physically attached to the roof.
    (6) Flashing Signs: signs, any part of which flash intermittently, except time and temperature signs. (Ord. 15-2010)
    (7) Temporary: Temporary signs that revolve or rotate.
G. Other Prohibitions: the following sign or sign "characteristics" are prohibited unless specifically provided for herein:
    (1) Signs Attached to Any Tree or Public Utility Pole other than warning signs issued by public utilities.
    (2) Signs Using Bare-Bulb Illumination or Lighted so that the immediate source of illumination is visible. This is not intended to prohibit the use of neon as a source of illumination.
    (3) Signs Using Flame as a source of light.
    (4) Signs Designed or Used for the Purpose of Emitting Sound or Dispersing Smells.
    (5) Signs with Described Illumination (Direction): No artificial light of whatever type or nature, used for the purpose of lighting any sign shall be so erected or constructed or placed, nor shall any substance or material capable of reflecting light be so placed as to result in directing the same into any private residence. Hotels and motels are not considered private residences. No exposed reflective type bulb, strobe light or incandescent light shall be used in such a way so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street; provided however, a reflective type lamp bulb of whatever wattage may be used for illumination of the displayed surface of a sign, if not directed towards the view from any public street.

370.030 Specific Regulations for Certain Zoning Designations.
No person shall install or maintain any sign in the City of Wood Village and in the zoning district here designated except as herein provided:
A. Allowed signage within Light Residential Zones (LR7.5, LR12):. 
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+----------------------+--------+
|            Type            | Area not to exceed: |     Height     |        Number        | Permit |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+----------------------+--------+
| Name Plates                | One (1) square      |                | One (1)              | No     |
|                            | foot                |                |                      |        |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+----------------------+--------+
| Development Identification | Thirty-two (32)     | Six (6) inches | One (1) internally   | Yes    |
|                            | square feet         |                | lighted or unlighted |        |
+----------------------------+---------------------+----------------+----------------------+--------+
B. Temporary Signs Allowed in Light Residential Zones:. 
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
|      Type      |      Area       |    Height     |      Number      |   Time and Other   | Permit |
|                |                 |               |                  |    Restrictions    |        |
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Real Estate    | Total combined  | Not to exceed | One sign placed  | Shall be removed   | No     |
|                | area twelve     | eight (8)     | at a right       | at the end         |        |
|                | (12) square     | feet          | angle or         | of two (2)         |        |
|                | feet            |               | the two signs    | years or           |        |
|                |                 |               | facing the       | when ninety        |        |
|                |                 |               | street.          | (90) percent       |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | of the subdivision |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | lots contain       |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | a completed        |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | structure.         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | Three (3)          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | contiguous         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | lots shall         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | be limited         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | to one (1)         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | double-faced       |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | sign placed        |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | at a right         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | angle or           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | two (2) facing     |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | the street.        |        |
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Political      | Two (2) square  |               |                  | Not more than      | No     |
|                | feet            |               |                  | forty-five         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | (45) days          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | prior thereto      |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | to a date          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | ten (10)           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | days following     |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | such election.     |        |
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Garage Sale    | Four (4) square | Four (4) feet |                  | May be erected     | No     |
|                | feet per        | or less       |                  | up to one          |        |
|                | face            |               |                  | (1) week           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | prior to           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | the event          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | and shall          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | be removed         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | no later           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | than the           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | day after          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | the event;         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | limit to           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | ten (10)           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | days in any        |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | one six (6)        |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | month period.      |        |
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Opening Banner |                 |               |                  | Must be attached   | Yes    |
|                |                 |               |                  | to permanent       |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | structure          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | including          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | the building,      |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | an approved        |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | fence, or          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | waste enclosure    |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | Must be removed    |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | within forty-five  |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | (45) days          |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | of opening         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | business           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | day.               |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | Prohibited         |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | for home           |        |
|                |                 |               |                  | occupations.       |        |
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Human-powered  |                 |               | Must be 20       | Prohibited         | No     |
|                |                 |               | feet from        | for home           |        |
|                |                 |               | the intersection | occupations.       |        |
+----------------+-----------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+--------+
C. Allowed signage within Multi-Residential zones (MR4 & MR2):. 
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
|     Type      |  Area not to   |     Height     |      Number       |   Time and Other   | Permit |
|               |    exceed:     |                |                   |    Restrictions    |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Name Plates   | One (1) square |                | One (1)           |                    | No     |
|               | foot           |                |                   |                    |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Real Estate   | Total combined | Not to exceed  | One sign placed   | Shall remove       | No     |
|               | area twelve    | eight (8)      | at a right        | at the end         |        |
|               | (12) square    | feet           | angle or          | of two (2)         |        |
|               | feet           |                | the two signs     | years or           |        |
|               |                |                | facing the        | when ninety        |        |
|               |                |                | street.           | (90) percent       |        |
|               |                |                |                   | of the subdivision |        |
|               |                |                |                   | lots contain       |        |
|               |                |                |                   | a completed        |        |
|               |                |                |                   | structure.         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | Three (3)          |        |
|               |                |                |                   | contiguous         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | lots shall         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | be limited         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | to one (1)         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | double-faced       |        |
|               |                |                |                   | sign placed        |        |
|               |                |                |                   | at a right         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | angle or           |        |
|               |                |                |                   | two (2) facing     |        |
|               |                |                |                   | the street.        |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Monument      | Thirty-two     | Eight (8)      | One (1)           | Prohibited         | Yes    |
|               | (32) square    | feet           |                   | for home           |        |
|               | feet           |                |                   | occupations.       |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Wall (fascia, | Sign area      | May not extend | No limit if       | Prohibited         | Yes    |
| awning and    | may not exceed | above the      | within the        | for home           |        |
| painted wall  | 20% of a       | roofline.      | maximum total     | occupations.       |        |
| signs are     | building’s     |                | allowed area.     |                    |        |
| permitted)    | front entry    |                |                   |                    |        |
|               | wall; may      |                |                   |                    |        |
|               | be split       |                |                   |                    |        |
|               | among faces.   |                |                   |                    |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Human-powered |                |                | Must be 20        | Prohibited         | No     |
|               |                |                | feet from         | for home           |        |
|               |                |                | the intersection. | occupations.       |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
| Political     | Two (2) square |                |                   | Not more than      | No     |
|               | feet           |                |                   | forty-five         |        |
|               |                |                |                   | (45) days          |        |
|               |                |                |                   | prior thereto      |        |
|               |                |                |                   | to a date          |        |
|               |                |                |                   | ten (10)           |        |
|               |                |                |                   | days following     |        |
|               |                |                |                   | such election.     |        |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+--------------------+--------+
D. Neighborhood Commercial Zone:
    (1) Permanent signs allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial zone (NC). 
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    |      Type      |   Area not to    |      Height       |     Number      |   Illumination/other   | Permit |
    |                |      exceed      |                   |                 |      restrictions      |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Wall           | Sign area        | May not extend    | No limit if     | External or            | Yes    |
    |                | may not exceed   | above the         | within the      | internal               |        |
    |                | 20% of a         | roofline.         | maximum total   | if illumination        |        |
    |                | building’s       |                   | allowed area.   | confined               |        |
    |                | front entry      |                   |                 | to the lettering       |        |
    |                | wall; may        |                   |                 | and logo.              |        |
    |                | be split         |                   |                 | Duration of            |        |
    |                | among faces.     |                   |                 | illumination           |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | limited to             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | 7:00 a.m. –            |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | 12:00 midnight         |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | unless commercial      |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | use is operated        |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | on a 24-hour           |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | basis.                 |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Electronic     | Electronic       |                   |                 | Maximum eight          | Yes    |
    | Display System | Message Centers  |                   |                 | thousand               |        |
    |                | may be used      |                   |                 | nits between           |        |
    |                | in the following |                   |                 | dusk and               |        |
    |                | areas: Wall,     |                   |                 | dawn;                  |        |
    |                | Monument,        |                   |                 | Must maintain          |        |
    |                | and Directory.   |                   |                 | messages               |        |
    |                | The size         |                   |                 | for a minimum          |        |
    |                | limit is         |                   |                 | of eight               |        |
    |                | based on         |                   |                 | (8) seconds            |        |
    |                | the size         |                   |                 | for each               |        |
    |                | restrictions     |                   |                 | provided               |        |
    |                | in those         |                   |                 | message and            |        |
    |                | categories.      |                   |                 | remain static          |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | until the              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | next message;          |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | must not utilize       |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | high intensity,        |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | flashing,              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | undulating,            |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | blinking               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | or pulsating           |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | content,               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | or portray             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | explosions,            |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | fireworks              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | or chasing             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | lights or              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | other devices          |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | to interfere           |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | with vehicular         |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | safety.                |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | A-Frame*       | Twelve (12)      | Not to exceed     | One (1) per     | May not be             | No     |
    |                | square feet      | thirty-six        | business        | illuminated            |        |
    |                |                  | (36) inches       |                 | or have other          |        |
    |                |                  | including         |                 | mechanical             |        |
    |                |                  | legs.             |                 | capabilities.          |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | Must be located        |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | within 10              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | feet of footprint.     |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Banner         | Thirty-two       |                   | One (1) per     | Must be attached       | Yes    |
    |                | (32) square      |                   | business        | to permanent           |        |
    |                | feet             |                   |                 | structure              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | including              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | the building,          |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | an approved            |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | fence, or              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | waste enclosure.       |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Feather*       |                  |                   | One (1) per     | Must be located        | No     |
    |                |                  |                   | business        | within 10              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | feet of footprint      |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Air Filled*    |                  |                   | One (1) per     | Distance from          | No     |
    |                |                  |                   | business        | the back               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | of curb must           |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | be equal               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | or greater             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | than the               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | height of              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | the sign/display.      |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Projecting     | 18 square        | Shall not         | One (1) per     | Internal or            | Yes    |
    |                | feet per         | extend above      | site frontage.  | indirect               |        |
    |                | sign face.       | the roof          |                 | external               |        |
    |                |                  | line.             |                 | illumination.          |        |
    |                |                  | Minimum clearance |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | of seven          |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | (7) feet          |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | between the       |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | bottom of         |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | the sign          |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | and the ground.   |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | May extend        |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | into the          |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | right-of-way      |                 |                        |        |
    |                |                  | 2 feet.           |                 |                        |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Revolving/     |                  | Must have         | One (1) per     | Must be attached       | Yes    |
    | Rotating       |                  | clearance         | business        | to a permanent         |        |
    |                |                  | of seven          |                 | structure              |        |
    |                |                  | (7) feet          |                 | No floodlights,        |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | flashing               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | lights or              |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | similar high-intensity |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | artificial             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | lighting               |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | devices                |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | No substance           |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | or material            |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | capable of             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | reflecting             |        |
    |                |                  |                   |                 | light.                 |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Monument       | Total combined   | Not to exceed     | One sign placed |                        | Yes    |
    |                | area twelve      | eight (8)         | per primary     |                        |        |
    |                | (32) square      | feet              | frontage.       |                        |        |
    |                | feet             |                   | A second        |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                   | sign allowed    |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                   | on secondary    |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                   | frontage        |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                   | that is 300’    |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                   | or more in      |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                   | length.         |                        |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Freestanding   | Prohibited in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC)                                  |        |
    |                | zone.                                                                           |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Directory      | Such signs may be permitted for a building or                                   | Yes    |
    | Signs          | complex of buildings containing more than one                                   |        |
    |                | tenant or occupant.  Directory signs shall be                                   |        |
    |                | limited to identification of the name of the                                    |        |
    |                | building or complex and the names of tenants                                    |        |
    |                | or occupants thereof. Such sign shall have a                                    |        |
    |                | maximum height of not more than fifteen (15)                                    |        |
    |                | feet and a maximum area of not more than sixty                                  |        |
    |                | (60) square feet as determined by the City. In                                  |        |
    |                | evaluating the height and area requirements for                                 |        |
    |                | such directory signs, the City may consider but                                 |        |
    |                | is not limited to the following factors:                                        |        |
    |                | (a) Number of tenants or occupants.                                             |        |
    |                | (b) Number and size of other existing or proposed                               |        |
    |                | signs on the building.                                                          |        |
    |                | (c) Distance between the building and adjacent                                  |        |
    |                | street.                                                                         |        |
    |                | (d) Number of traffic lanes and traffic speed                                   |        |
    |                | for the street adjacent to the proposed sign.                                   |        |
    |                | Number of other existing or proposed directory                                  |        |
    |                | signs provided that one (1) directory sign shall                                |        |
    |                | be permitted for any amount of frontage on a                                    |        |
    |                | single street, and a second in the event the                                    |        |
    |                | lineal street footage is more than three hundred                                |        |
    |                | (300) feet; provided further when frontage is                                   |        |
    |                | on more than one (1) street, one (1) directory                                  |        |
    |                | sign shall be permitted for each street frontage                                |        |
    |                | so long as the signs are not closer than three                                  |        |
    |                | hundred (300) feet from one another measuring                                   |        |
    |                | by lineal street frontage.                                                      |        |
    +----------------+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+------------------------+--------+
    *While A-Frame, Feather, and Inflatable signs are permitted, no more than two (2) of these sign types at a time may be on display at the same location.
    (2) Temporary signs allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial zone (NC):. 
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    |      Type      |  Area not to   |    Height     |     Number      | Illumination/other | Permit |
    |                |    exceed:     |               |                 |    restrictions    |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Real Estate    | Total combined | Not to exceed | One sign placed | Shall remove       | No     |
    |                | area twelve    | eight (8)     | at a right      | at the end         |        |
    |                | (12) square    | feet          | angle or        | of two (2)         |        |
    |                | feet           |               | the two signs   | years or           |        |
    |                |                |               | facing the      | when ninety        |        |
    |                |                |               | street shall    | (90) percent       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of the subdivision |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | lots contain       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | a completed        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | structure.         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | Three (3)          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | contiguous         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | lots shall         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | be limited         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | to one (1)         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | double-faced       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | sign placed        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | at a right         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | angle or           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | two (2) facing     |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the street.        |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | A-Frame**      | Twelve (12)    | Not to exceed | One (1) per     | May not be         | No     |
    |                | square feet    | thirty-six    | business        | illuminated        |        |
    |                |                | (36) inches   |                 | or have other      |        |
    |                |                | including     |                 | mechanical         |        |
    |                |                | legs          |                 | capabilities       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | Must be located    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within 10          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | feet of footprint. |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Opening Banner | Thirty-two     |               | One (1) per     | Must be attached   | Yes    |
    |                | (32) square    |               | business        | to permanent       |        |
    |                | feet           |               |                 | structure          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | including          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the building,      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | an approved        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | fence, or          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | waste enclosure    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | Must be removed    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within forty-five  |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (45) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of opening         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | business           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | day                |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Special Event  | Maximum size   |               | One (1) per     | Applicable         | Yes    |
    | Banner*        | of 10% of      |               | business        | to businesses      |        |
    |                | building       |               |                 | with at least      |        |
    |                | frontage       |               |                 | 4,300 Square       |        |
    |                | with a limit   |               |                 | feet of building   |        |
    |                | of 180 SQ.     |               |                 | frontage.          |        |
    |                | feet.          |               |                 | Must be removed    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within sixty       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (60) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of installation.   |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Feather**      |                |               | One (1) per     | Must be located    | No     |
    |                |                |               | business        | within 10          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | feet of footprint  |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Air Filled**   |                |               | One (1) per     | Distance from      | No     |
    |                |                |               | business        | the back           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of curb must       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | be equal           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | or greater         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | than the           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | height of          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the sign/display.  |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Human-powered  |                |               |                 | Must be 20         | No     |
    |                |                |               |                 | feet from          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | intersection.      |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Political      | Two (2) square |               |                 | Not more than      | No     |
    |                | feet           |               |                 | forty-five         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (45) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | prior thereto      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | to a date          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | ten (10)           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | days following     |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | such election.     |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    *Special Event Banners are also permitted when used by a nonprofit or governmental agency in the promotion of a public event or initiative.
    **While A-Frame, Feather, and Inflatable signs are permitted, no more than two (2) of these sign types at a time may be on display at the same location.
E. Town Center
    (1) Commercial entities within the Town Center Master Plan are subject to same regulations as the Neighborhood Commercial Zone with the following exception regarding directory signage:
        (a) Such signs shall have a maximum height of not more than twenty-five (25) feet and a maximum width of nine (9) feet for a decorative base, and eight (8) feet for the structure/frame as determined by the City.
        (b) Any number of business identification modules may be added within the sign frame without expanding the sign frame.
    (2) Residential entities within the Town Center Master Plan are subject to same regulations as MR2.
F. Commercial/Industrial Zone:
    (1) Permanent signs allowed in the Commercial/Industrial zone (CI). 
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    |      Type      |   Area not to    |     Height       |        Number         |   Illumination/other   | Permit |
    |                |     exceed:      |                  |                       |      restrictions      |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Wall           | Sign area        | May not extend   | No limit if           | External or            | Yes    |
    |                | may not exceed   | above the        | within the            | internal               |        |
    |                | 20% of a         | roofline.        | maximum total         | if illumination        |        |
    |                | building’s       |                  | allowed area.         | confined               |        |
    |                | front entry      |                  |                       | to the lettering       |        |
    |                | wall; may        |                  |                       | and logo.              |        |
    |                | be split         |                  |                       | Duration of            |        |
    |                | among faces.     |                  |                       | illumination           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | limited to             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | 7:00 a.m. –            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | 12:00 midnight         |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | unless commercial      |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | use is operated        |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | on a 24-hour           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | basis.                 |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Electronic     | Electronic       |                  |                       | Maximum eight          | Yes    |
    | Display System | Message Centers  |                  |                       | thousand               |        |
    |                | may be used      |                  |                       | nits between           |        |
    |                | in the following |                  |                       | dusk and               |        |
    |                | areas: Wall,     |                  |                       | dawn.                  |        |
    |                | Monument,        |                  |                       | Must maintain          |        |
    |                | and Directory.   |                  |                       | messages               |        |
    |                |  The size        |                  |                       | for a minimum          |        |
    |                | limit is         |                  |                       | of eight               |        |
    |                | based on         |                  |                       | (8) seconds            |        |
    |                | the size         |                  |                       | for each               |        |
    |                | restrictions     |                  |                       | provided               |        |
    |                | in those         |                  |                       | message and            |        |
    |                | categories.      |                  |                       | remain static          |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | until the              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | next message;          |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | must not utilize       |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | high intensity,        |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | flashing,              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | undulating,            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | blinking               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | or pulsating           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | content,               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | or portray             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | explosions,            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | fireworks              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | or chasing             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | lights or              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | other devises          |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | to interfere           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | with vehicular         |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | safety.                |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Real Estate    | Total combined   | Not to exceed    | One sign placed       | Shall remove           | No     |
    |                | area twelve      | eight (8)        | at a right            | at the end             |        |
    |                | (12) square      | feet.            | angle or              | of two (2)             |        |
    |                | feet.            |                  | the two signs         | years or               |        |
    |                |                  |                  | facing the            | when ninety            |        |
    |                |                  |                  | street.               | (90) percent           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | of the subdivision     |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | lots contain           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | a completed            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | structure.             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | Three (3)              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | contiguous             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | lots shall             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | be limited             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | to one (1)             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | double-faced           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | sign placed            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | at a right             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | angle or               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | two (2) facing         |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | the street.            |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | A-Frame*       | Twelve (12)      | Not to exceed    | One (1) per           | May not be             | No     |
    |                | square feet      | thirty-six       | business.             | illuminated            |        |
    |                |                  | (36) inches      |                       | or have other          |        |
    |                |                  | including        |                       | mechanical             |        |
    |                |                  | legs.            |                       | capabilities.          |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Banner         | Thirty-two       |                  | One (1) per           | Must be attached       | Yes    |
    |                | (32) square      |                  | business              | to permanent           |        |
    |                | feet             |                  |                       | structure              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | including              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | the building,          |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | an approved            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | fence, or              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | waste enclosure.       |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Feather*       |                  |                  | One (1) per           |                        | No     |
    |                |                  |                  | business              |                        |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Air Filled*    |                  |                  | One (1) per           | Distance from          | No     |
    |                |                  |                  | business              | the back               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | of curb must           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | be equal               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | or greater             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | than the               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | height of              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | the sign/display.      |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Projecting     | 18 square        | Shall not        | 1 per site            | Internal or            | Yes    |
    |                | feet per         | extend above     | frontage.             | indirect               |        |
    |                | sign face.       | the roof         |                       | external               |        |
    |                |                  | line.            |                       | illumination.          |        |
    |                |                  | Shall project    |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | no more than     |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | six (6) feet     |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | or two-thirds    |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | (2/3) of         |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | the width        |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | of the sidewalk. |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | Clearance        |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | not less         |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | than ten         |                       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | (10) feet.       |                       |                        |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Monument       | Thirty-two       | Eight (8)        | One (1) per           |                        | Yes    |
    |                | (32) square      | feet in height;  | primary frontage;     |                        |        |
    |                | feet             | thirty (30)      | second monument       |                        |        |
    |                |                  | inches above     | allowed on            |                        |        |
    |                |                  | the nearest      | a secondary           |                        |        |
    |                |                  | ground surface.  | frontage              |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                  | that is three-hundred |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                  | (300) feet            |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                  | or more in            |                        |        |
    |                |                  |                  | length.               |                        |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Revolving/     |                  | Must have        |                       | Must be attached       | Yes    |
    | Rotating       |                  | clearance        |                       | to a permanent         |        |
    |                |                  | of seven         |                       | structure              |        |
    |                |                  | (7) feet         |                       | No floodlights,        |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | flashing               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | lights or              |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | similar high-intensity |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | artificial             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | lighting               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | devices.               |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | No substance           |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | or material            |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | capable of             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | reflecting             |        |
    |                |                  |                  |                       | light.                 |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    | Freestanding   | Area: Maximum area of each face of a multi-faced                                     | Yes    |
    |                | free-standing sign shall be 1.0 square foot of                                       |        |
    |                | sign face area per linear foot of site frontage,                                     |        |
    |                | not exceeding 75 square feet. When property has                                      |        |
    |                | frontage on more than one street, the property                                       |        |
    |                | may be permitted to have the number of free-standing                                 |        |
    |                | signs in accordance with the above provision                                         |        |
    |                | for each such street frontage based on the aforementioned                            |        |
    |                | formula.                                                                             |        |
    |                | Height: Shall not exceed in height the distance                                      |        |
    |                | from any portion of the sign to the center line                                      |        |
    |                | of an adjacent public right-of-way, up to a maximum                                  |        |
    |                | of 25 feet. Free-standing signs shall be located                                     |        |
    |                | so as to assure adequate sight distance at street                                    |        |
    |                | intersections and driveways.                                                         |        |
    |                | Number: One (1) free-standing sign, shall be permitted                               |        |
    |                | for any amount of street or highway frontage                                         |        |
    |                | adjacent to any one parcel, tract of real property                                   |        |
    |                | or separate tax lot. An additional free-standing                                     |        |
    |                | sign shall be permitted for each additional three                                    |        |
    |                | hundred (300) lineal feet                                                            |        |
    |                | Other Restrictions:                                                                  |        |
    |                | o    The owner of any lot or parcel real property                                    |        |
    |                | fronting on more than one street or highway who                                      |        |
    |                | desires to utilize a single sign, the faces of                                       |        |
    |                | which are to be set at angles, must request a                                        |        |
    |                | variance under this Code.                                                            |        |
    |                | o    The owner of any lot or parcel of real property                                 |        |
    |                | fronting on more than one street or highway may                                      |        |
    |                | elect to combine the total street frontage of                                        |        |
    |                | said property in establishing the maximum permitted                                  |        |
    |                | size of any free-standing sign; however in the                                       |        |
    |                | event all street or highway frontage is so combined,                                 |        |
    |                | only one such sign shall be permitted and such                                       |        |
    |                | single sign shall not exceed in area the maximum                                     |        |
    |                | hereinabove set forth.                                                               |        |
    |                | o    Two or more owners of separate adjacent parcels                                 |        |
    |                | of real property zoned for commercial or industrial                                  |        |
    |                | use may elect to combine the street or highway                                       |        |
    |                | frontage of their respective adjacent properties                                     |        |
    |                | and in such case one (1) free-standing sign shall                                    |        |
    |                | be permitted to be constructed in accordance                                         |        |
    |                | with the provisions of this Code. This election                                      |        |
    |                | shall not be permitted if there exists on any                                        |        |
    |                | portion of said properties any other free-standing                                   |        |
    |                | signs unless said signs are removed and shall                                        |        |
    |                | be permitted only so long as all concerned owners                                    |        |
    |                | consent thereto.                                                                     |        |
    +----------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+--------+
    *While A-Frame, Feather, and Inflatable signs are permitted, no more than two (2) of these sign types at a time may be on display at the same location.
    (2) Temporary signs allowed in the Commercial/Industrial zone (CI)
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    |      Type      |  Area not to   |    Height     |     Number      | Illumination/other | Permit |
    |                |    exceed:     |               |                 |    restrictions    |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Real Estate    | Total combined | Not to exceed | One sign placed | Shall remove       | No     |
    |                | area twelve    | eight (8)     | at a right      | at the end         |        |
    |                | (12) square    | feet          | angle or        | of two (2)         |        |
    |                | feet           |               | the two signs   | years or           |        |
    |                |                |               | facing the      | when ninety        |        |
    |                |                |               | street.         | (90) percent       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of the subdivision |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | lots contain       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | a completed        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | structure          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | three (3)          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | contiguous         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | lots shall         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | be limited         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | to one (1)         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | double-faced       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | sign placed        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | at a right         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | angle or           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | two (2) facing     |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the street.        |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | A-Frame*       | Twelve (12)    | Not to exceed | One (1) per     | May not be         | No     |
    |                | square feet    | thirty-six    | business        | illuminated        |        |
    |                |                | (36) inches   |                 | or have other      |        |
    |                |                | including     |                 | mechanical         |        |
    |                |                | legs.         |                 | capabilities.      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | Must be located    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within 10          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | feet of footprint. |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Banner         | Thirty-two     |               | One (1) per     | Must be attached   | Yes    |
    |                | (32) square    |               | business        | to permanent       |        |
    |                | feet           |               |                 | structure          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | including          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the building,      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | an approved        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | fence, or          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | waste enclosure.   |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Feather*       |                |               | One (1) per     | Must be located    | No     |
    |                |                |               | business        | within 10          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | feet of footprint. |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Air Filled*    |                |               | One (1) per     | Distance from      | No     |
    |                |                |               | business        | the back           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of curb must       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | be equal           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | or greater         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | than the           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | height of          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the sign/display.  |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Human-powered  |                |               |                 | Must be 20         | No     |
    |                |                |               |                 | feet from          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | intersection.      |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Opening Banner |                |               |                 | Must be attached   | No     |
    |                |                |               |                 | to permanent       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | structure          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | including          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the building,      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | an approved        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | fence, or          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | waste enclosure.   |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | Must be removed    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within forty-five  |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (45) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of opening         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | business           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | day.               |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Special Event  | Maximum size   |               | One (1) per     | Applicable         | Yes    |
    | Banner         | of 10% of      |               | business        | to businesses      |        |
    |                | building       |               |                 | with at least      |        |
    |                | frontage       |               |                 | 4,300 Square       |        |
    |                | with a limit   |               |                 | feet of building   |        |
    |                | of 180 SQ.     |               |                 | frontage.          |        |
    |                | feet.          |               |                 | Must be removed    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within sixty       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (60) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of installation.   |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Political      | Two (2) square |               |                 | Not more than      | No     |
    |                | feet           |               |                 | forty-five         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (45) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | prior thereto      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | to a date          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | ten (10)           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | days following     |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | such election.     |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    *While A-Frame, Feather, and Inflatable signs are permitted, no more than two (2) of these sign types at a time may be on display at the same location.
G. General Manufacturing and Light Manufacturing zones (GM, LM):
    (1) Permanent Signs Allowed in General Manufacturing and Light Manufacturing zones (GM, LM). 
    +--------------+----------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------+--------+
    |     Type     |  Area not to   |     Height      |        Number         | Illumination/other | Permit |
    |              |    exceed:     |                 |                       |    restrictions    |        |
    +--------------+----------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Wall         | Sign area      | May not extend  | No limit if           | External or        | Yes    |
    |              | may not exceed | above the       | within the            | internal           |        |
    |              | 20% of a       | roofline        | maximum total         | if illumination    |        |
    |              | building’s     |                 | allowed area.         | confined           |        |
    |              | front entry    |                 |                       | to the lettering   |        |
    |              | wall; may      |                 |                       | and logo.          |        |
    |              | be split       |                 |                       |                    |        |
    |              | among faces    |                 |                       |                    |        |
    +--------------+----------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Monument     | Thirty-two     | Eight (8)       | One (1) per           |                    | Yes    |
    |              | (32) square    | feet in height; | primary frontage;     |                    |        |
    |              | feet           | thirty (30)     | second monument       |                    |        |
    |              |                | inches above    | allowed on            |                    |        |
    |              |                | the nearest     | a secondary           |                    |        |
    |              |                | ground surface. | frontage              |                    |        |
    |              |                |                 | that is three-hundred |                    |        |
    |              |                |                 | (300) feet            |                    |        |
    |              |                |                 | or more in            |                    |        |
    |              |                |                 | length.               |                    |        |
    +--------------+----------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Banner       | Thirty-two     |                 | One (1) per           | Must be attached   | Yes    |
    |              | (32) square    |                 | business              | to permanent       |        |
    |              | feet           |                 |                       | structure          |        |
    |              |                |                 |                       | including          |        |
    |              |                |                 |                       | the building,      |        |
    |              |                |                 |                       | an approved        |        |
    |              |                |                 |                       | fence, or          |        |
    |              |                |                 |                       | waste enclosure    |        |
    +--------------+----------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Freestanding | Maximum area of each face of a multi-faced free-standing                      | Yes    |
    |              | sign shall be 1.0 square foot of sign face area                               |        |
    |              | per linear foot of site frontage, not exceeding                               |        |
    |              | 75 square feet. When property has frontage on                                 |        |
    |              | more than one street, the property may be permitted                           |        |
    |              | to have the number of free-standing signs in                                  |        |
    |              | accordance with the above provision for each                                  |        |
    |              | such street frontage based on the aforementioned                              |        |
    |              | formula.                                                                      |        |
    |              | Shall not exceed in height the distance from any                              |        |
    |              | portion of the sign to the center line of an                                  |        |
    |              | adjacent public right-of-way, up to a maximum                                 |        |
    |              | of 25 feet. Free-standing signs shall be located                              |        |
    |              | so as to assure adequate sight distance at street                             |        |
    |              | intersections and driveways.                                                  |        |
    |              | One (1) free-standing sign, shall be permitted                                |        |
    |              | for any amount of street or highway frontage                                  |        |
    |              | adjacent to any one parcel, tract of real property                            |        |
    |              | or separate tax lot. An additional free-standing                              |        |
    |              | sign shall be permitted for each additional three                             |        |
    |              | hundred (300) lineal feet                                                     |        |
    |              | Other Restrictions:                                                           |        |
    |              | o    The owner of any lot or parcel real property                             |        |
    |              | fronting on more than one street or highway who                               |        |
    |              | desires to utilize a single sign, the faces of                                |        |
    |              | which are to be set at angles, must request a                                 |        |
    |              | variance under this Code.                                                     |        |
    |              | o    The owner of any lot or parcel of real property                          |        |
    |              | fronting on more than one street or highway may                               |        |
    |              | elect to combine the total street frontage of                                 |        |
    |              | said property in establishing the maximum permitted                           |        |
    |              | size of any free-standing sign; however in the                                |        |
    |              | event all street or highway frontage is so combined,                          |        |
    |              | only one such sign shall be permitted and such                                |        |
    |              | single sign shall not exceed in area the maximum                              |        |
    |              | hereinabove set forth.                                                        |        |
    |              | o    Two or more owners of separate adjacent parcels                          |        |
    |              | of real property zoned for commercial or industrial                           |        |
    |              | use may elect to combine the street or highway                                |        |
    |              | frontage of their respective adjacent properties                              |        |
    |              | and in such case one (1) free-standing sign shall                             |        |
    |              | be permitted to be constructed in accordance                                  |        |
    |              | with the provisions of this Code. This election                               |        |
    |              | shall not be permitted if there exists on any                                 |        |
    |              | portion of said properties any other free-standing                            |        |
    |              | signs unless said signs are removed and shall                                 |        |
    |              | be permitted only so long as all concerned owners                             |        |
    |              | consent thereto.                                                              |        |
    +--------------+----------------+-----------------+-----------------------+--------------------+--------+
    (2) Temporary signs allowed in the General and Light Manufacturing zones (GM, LM). 
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    |      Type      |  Area not to   |    Height     |     Number      |   Time and Other   | Permit |
    |                |     exceed     |               |                 |    Restrictions    |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Opening Banner | Sixty (60)     |               |                 | Must be attached   | No     |
    |                | square feet    |               |                 | to permanent       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | structure          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | including          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the building,      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | an approved        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | fence, or          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | waste enclosure.   |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    |                |                |               |                 | Must be removed    |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | within forty-five  |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (45) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of opening         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | business           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | day.               |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Political      | Two (2) square |               |                 | Not more than      | No     |
    |                | feet           |               |                 | forty-five         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | (45) days          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | prior thereto      |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | to a date          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | ten (10)           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | days following     |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | such election.     |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
    | Real Estate    | Total combined | Not to exceed | One sign placed | Shall remove       | No     |
    |                | area twelve    | eight (8)     | at a right      | at the end         |        |
    |                | (12) square    | feet          | angle or        | of two (2)         |        |
    |                | feet           |               | the two signs   | years or           |        |
    |                |                |               | facing the      | when ninety        |        |
    |                |                |               | street.         | (90) percent       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | of the subdivision |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | lots contain       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | a completed        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | structure.         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | Three (3)          |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | contiguous         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | lots shall         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | be limited         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | to one (1)         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | double-faced       |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | sign placed        |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | at a right         |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | angle or           |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | two (2) facing     |        |
    |                |                |               |                 | the street.        |        |
    +----------------+----------------+---------------+-----------------+--------------------+--------+
H. Freeway-Oriented Activities:
    (1) For not more than one (1) free-standing sign allowed in this sub-section, the City may allow a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet and a maximum area per face of 250 square feet if the City finds that the activity to be identified by the proposed sign is a freeway-oriented activity.
    (2) For purposes of this section the term "freeway-oriented activity" shall mean:
        (a) A business or activity of such nature that it is committed primarily to providing services, lodging or products to non-resident travelers on Interstate 84; and
        (b) Such business or activity shall be located on property that lies within six hundred (600) feet of a line parallel to the center line of Interstate 84 and a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet along Interstate 84 in each direction from the center line of NE 238th Drive.
I. Signs Not Intended to be Read From the Street: Nothing contained in this Code shall prevent the erection, location or construction of signs on private property when such advertising signs are not intended to be read from any public street or highway or when such signs are designed to direct and guide pedestrian and vehicular traffic while said traffic is on the parcel of real property on which the signs are located and are not intended or "practically speaking" cannot be read from any public street or highway. Such signs shall not contain letters over one (1) inch in height when located within twenty (20) feet of any street right-of-way and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches in height when located further than twenty (20) feet from any street or right-of-way. No such sign shall be internally illuminated; no sign or any part thereof shall rotate or consist of any moving, rotating or otherwise animated parts; all such signs shall be subject to review and approval by the City Manager.

370.040 Hazardous Signs.
The following are considered hazardous to public safety and may be addressed through enforcement action as prescribed in the Wood Village Municipal Code:
A. Signs in disrepair due to but limited to normal wear or extreme weather;
B. Obstructing the public right-of-way
C. Other situations deemed hazardous by City
D. Signs that incorporate white or blue neon tubing that exceeds 300 milliamperes rating, or other neon tubing that exceeds 120 milliamperes rating.

370.050 Variance Procedures Relating to Signs.
The requirements of Section 370, unless otherwise herein stated, shall apply to all signs. Variance requests shall be subject to all of the procedures, requirements and restrictions established for variances under Section 660.
A. Additional Requirements: Variances shall not be granted for the convenience of the applicant who may wish to use a "standard pattern or design". In all instances the Planning Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, shall not grant a variance unless it shall find that such variance will not adversely affect the surrounding property or neighborhood or the development thereof with reference to the City's Comprehensive Plan.
    (1) A request for variance shall require the payment of a permit fee as provided by City Council Resolution establishing the same.
    (2) All variance requests shall be submitted to the City's Planning Commission upon form provided and obtained from the City.

370.055 Existing Non-Conforming Sign.
A. Nonconforming signs are those signs types listed below that were lawfully installed prior to April 30, 2017 or for which a permit was issued prior to April 30, 2017, which do not conform to the requirements of the City Zoning Development Code.
    (a) Wall
    (b) Freestanding
    (c) Directory
    (d) Monument
Any nonconforming sign shall be made to comply with the Zoning and Development Code when structural alterations, relocation or replacement of a sign occur. However, changes on a readerboard or outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted without loss of nonconforming status. On-site or off-site repairing or restoring any part of a sign or sign structure to a safe condition, including normal maintenance, shall be permitted without loss of non-conforming status.

370.060 General Administration and Enforcement.
A. Administration: All signs, all applications therefore shall be exclusively administered by the City.
B. Enforcement: All provisions of this section are subject to enforcement as provided in the Wood Village Municipal Code. The City Manager or duly authorized representatives may enter upon, at reasonable times, any building, structure or premise in the City of Wood Village to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this Code.
C. Abandoned Signs: Any person who owns or leases a sign shall remove such sign when either the business it advertises has discontinued business in the City or the business it advertises is no longer conducted in or about the premises on which the sign is located. If the person who owns or leases such sign fails to remove it, the City is authorized to remove at the cost of the owner of the building, structure or premise.
D. Permit Fees: Application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees as established by City Council Resolution including such building permit fees as required for construction of other types of buildings or structures within the City.

370.070 Right of Appeal and Procedure.
A. All decisions of the City Manager relating to the enforcement and administration of Section 370 including the refusal to issue a sign permit to construct, erect or maintain the same or to require the alteration or removal of a sign or the granting or refusal to grant a variance from provisions of this Code may be appealed to the City Planning Commission by serving written notice on the City Manager within fifteen (15) days of notification, the City Manager or the City Planning Commission , as the case may be, upon form supplied by the City.
B. Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Planning Commission shall have the right of further appeal to the City Council upon written notice of appeal filed with the City Manager within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice of decision of the Planning Commission is mailed. Such appeal shall be promptly scheduled for hearing by the City Council in the same manner as appeals from decisions of the Planning Commission set forth in Section 550 of this Code.
C. Decisions of the City Council may be appealed to a Court of competent jurisdiction as provided by ORS 34.010 and such other ORS provisions as may be applicable.

Section 380 Temporary Uses

380.010 Temporary Uses Permit.
Temporary uses are characterized by their short term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: leasing offices, temporary carnivals, neighborhood celebrations and fairs, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, and seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands. Four (4) types of temporary uses require permit approval identified in Sections 380.030(A), (B) and (C). Food Carts and Food Pods are regulated separately under Section 710.227. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

380.020 Temporary Use Permit Not Required for Temporary Uses of Limited Duration.
Application for a temporary use permit is not required to locate the following temporary uses, but such uses must comply with the requirements set forth in Section 380.030(A)(1) through (7):
•Any temporary use of land of up to a fourteen (14) day duration (such as a promotional event, festival, carnival, or outdoor sale) which conforms with all other requirements of this Code and other applicable city regulations and public health and safety requirements, some of which may further limit such uses in terms of location, scope and duration.
•Any temporary use of construction trailers or temporary office structures for a construction site or project that does not have open access to the general public. The temporary structures or units must be located on site and removed within fourteen (14) days after the project or work has been completed. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

380.030 Permit Required.
A. Seasonal, Special Events and Street Vendors. These types of uses occur only once in a calendar year and for no longer than a period of ninety (90) days. Applications for such temporary uses shall be processed pursuant to the Type II procedure under Section 520.100 and subject to the applicant paying the basic public hearing planning fee. The City may approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit. Approval shall be based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:
    (1) The use is permitted in the underlying land use district and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval);
    (2) The applicant has proof of property owner’s permission to place the use on his/her property;
    (3) There is adequate parking as required by ZDC Chapter 350, Parking and Loading;
    (4) The use provides adequate vision clearance, as required by ZDC Chapter 730 and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets;
    (5) Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the property, code access and circulation requirements;
    (6) The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibration, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the district; and
    (7) The use is adequately served by sewer or a septic system and city water, as applicable. Public restrooms must be provided. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits.
    (8) The Planning Commission may make an exception to any requirement in this section upon finding there is an overriding public benefit to the exception (such a determination would require a Type III review).
    (9) Signage for seasonal events may be reviewed as part of the Temporary Use Permit and must follow all requirements of ZDC Chapter 370, Signs.
B. Temporary Real Estate Sales Office, Model Home. Applications for such temporary uses shall be processed pursuant to the Type II procedure under Section 520.100 and subject to the applicant paying the basic public hearing planning fee. The City may approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit. If the reviewing authority finds there are significant negative impacts from the use or a change in circumstances in the area, the annual permit may be denied. Approval shall be based upon findings which demonstrate compliance with the criteria set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (8) of this section. In addition, approval shall be subject to the following additional criteria.
    (1) Temporary Real Estate Sales Office. 
        (a) The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is sold; and
        (b) The property to be used for the temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose; and
        (c) This type of temporary use may be renewed annually by City staff, unless there are citizen complaints about the use in which case the permit must be renewed by the Planning Commission or Design Review Board; and
        (d) Public restrooms must be provided; and
        (e) All signs must comply with Section 370.020, Signs, General Provisions.
    (2) Model House. 
        (a) The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated; and
        (b) The model house shall be designed as a permanent structure that meets all relevant requirements of this code.
        (c) This type of temporary use may be renewed annually by City staff, unless there are citizen complaints about the use in which case the permit must be renewed by the Planning Commission or Design Review Board.
        (d) All signs must comply with Section 370.020, Signs, General Provisions.
C. Temporary Building. Applications for temporary trailers or prefabricated buildings that are not regulated under subsection B of this section, other than construction trailers/offices, shall be processed pursuant to the Type II procedure under Section 520.100 and subject to the applicant paying the basic public hearing planning fee. The City may approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit. City staff may renew this type of temporary use annually, unless there are citizen complaints about the use in which case the renewal of the permit must be considered by the Planning Commission or Design Review Board. If the reviewing authority finds there are significant negative impacts from the use or a change in circumstances in the area, the annual permit may be denied. Approval shall be based upon findings which demonstrate compliance with the criteria set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (7) of this section. In addition, approval shall be subject to the following additional criteria:
    (1) The temporary trailer or building shall be associated with the primary use on the property;
    (2) The building complies with applicable building codes;
    (3) The length of time that the temporary building will be used does not exceed twelve (12) months. When a temporary building exceeds this time frame, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or receive City staff approval to annually renew the temporary use permit. The review authority may revoke a permit or deny renewal if it is found that there are significant negative impacts from the use or there is a change in circumstances in the area;
    (4) All signs must comply with Section 370.020, Signs, General Provisions. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

Section 390 Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage in New Multi-Unit Residential and Non-Residential Buildings

390.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to ensure that certain new construction incorporates functional and adequate space for on-site storage and efficient collection of mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables prior to pick-up and removal by haulers.

390.020 Applicability.
The mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables storage standards shall apply to new multi-unit residential buildings containing five or more units1 and non-residential construction that are subject to full site plan or design review; and are located within urban zones that allow, outright or by condition, for such uses.
1ORS 459A.010 (2)(d)

390.030 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to standards dealing with solid waste and recyclables storage areas only.
MIXED SOLID WASTE. Solid waste that contains recoverable or recyclable materials, and materials that are not capable of being recycled or recovered for further use.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLES. At a minimum, recyclable materials designated "principle recyclable materials" by the State Environmental Quality Commission under ORS 495A.025, with the exception of yard debris. Currently these materials include newspaper, ferrous and non-ferrous scrap metal, used motor oil, corrugated cardboard, aluminum, container glass, office paper and tin cans (OAR 340-60-030).
STORAGE AREA. The space necessary to store mixed solid waste and source separated recyclables that accumulate between collection days.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A structure that contains five or more dwelling units that share common walls or floors/ceilings with one or more units.
NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A structure that is used for any non-residential function, including but not limited to office, retail, wholesale/warehouse/industrial, educational, and institutional uses.

390.040 Materials Accepted.
Except as provided for in Section 390.050 (C), the storage area must be able to accept at least all "principle recyclable materials" designated by the Oregon Environmental Quality Commission and other source-separated recyclables identified by City Ordinance.

390.050 Methods of Demonstrating Compliance.
An applicant shall choose one of the following three methods to demonstrate compliance: 1) minimum standards; 2) comprehensive recycling plan; or 3) licensed hauler review and sign-off.
The following provisions apply to all three methods of demonstrating compliance:
1. Section 390.060 (Location, Design and Access Standards), except as provided in Section 390.050 (B).
2. The floor area of an interior or exterior storage area required by this Section shall be excluded from the calculation of lot coverage and from the calculation of building floor area for purposes of determining minimum storage requirements.
A. Minimum Standards Method. Description of Method: This method specifies a minimum storage area requirement based on the size and general use category of the new construction.
Typical Application of Method: This method is most appropriate when the specific use of a new building is not known. It provides specific dimensional standards for the minimum size of storage areas by general use category.
Application Requirements and Review Procedures: The size and location of the storage area(s) shall be indicated on the site plan of any construction subject to this Section. Through the site plan review process, compliance with the general and specific requirements set forth below is verified.
    (1) General Requirements:
        (a) The storage area requirement is based on the predominant use(s) of the building (i.e. residential, office, retail, wholesale/warehouse /manufacturing, educational/ institutional, or other). If a building has more than one of the uses listed herein and that use occupies 20 percent or less of the floor area of the building, the floor area occupied by that use shall be counted toward the floor area of the predominant use(s). If a building has more than one of the uses listed herein and that occupies more than 20 percent of the floor area of the building, then the storage area requirement for the whole building shall be the sum of the requirement for the area of each use.
        (b) Storage areas for multiple uses on a single site may be combined and shared.
        (c) The specific requirements are based on an assumed storage height of 4 feet for solid waste/recyclables. Vertical storage higher than 4 feet but no higher than 7 feet may be used to accommodate the same volume of storage in a reduced floor space (potential reduction of 43% of specific requirements). Where vertical or stacked storage is proposed, the site plan shall include drawings to illustrate the layout of the storage area and dimensions of containers.
    (2) Specific Requirements:
        (a) Multi-unit residential buildings containing 5-10 units shall provide a minimum storage area of 50 square feet. Buildings containing more than 10 residential units shall provide an additional 5 square feet per unit for each unit above 10.
        (b) Non-residential buildings shall provide a minimum storage area of 10 square feet (sq. ft.), plus:
        Office: 4 square feet/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area (GFA)
        Retail: 10 sq. ft./1,000 sq. ft. GFA
        Wholesale/Warehouse/Manufacturing: 6 sq. ft./1,000 sq. ft. GFA
        Educational and Institutional: 4 sq. ft./1,000 sq. ft. GFA
        Other: 4 sq. ft./1,000 sq. ft. GFA
B. Comprehensive Recycling Plan Method. Description of Method: The comprehensive recycling plan method is most appropriate when an applicant has independently developed a comprehensive recycling plan that addresses materials collection and storage for the proposed use.
Typical Application of Method: This method can be used when a comprehensive recycling plan has been developed for a specific facility. It is most suited to large non-residential uses such as hospitals, schools and industrial facilities. The comprehensive recycling plan method can be used for new construction or expansion that is subject to full site plan review.
Application Requirements and Review Procedure: The comprehensive recycling plan shall be submitted at the same time site plans are submitted for site plan review. The applicant shall submit plans and text that show how mixed solid waste and recyclables generated by the proposed development will be served under a comprehensive recycling plan. The location, design and access standards set forth in Section 390.060 are applicable to new storage areas only.
C. Licensed Hauler Review Method. Description of Method: This method provides for coordinated review of the proposed site plan by the licensed hauler serving the subject property.
Typical Application of Method: This method is to be used when there are unique conditions associated with the site, use or waste stream that make compliance with any of the other two methods infeasible. The objective of this method is to match a specific hauler program (types of equipment, frequency of collection, etc.) to the unique characteristic(s) of the site or development.
The following constitute unique conditions:
    (1) Use of either of the two other methods of compliance would interfere with the use of the proposed development by reducing the productive space of the proposed development, or make it impossible to comply with the minimum off-street parking requirements of the underlying zone.
    (2) The site is of an irregular shape or possesses steep slopes that do not allow for access by collection vehicles typically used by the licensed hauler to serve uses similar in size and scope to the proposed use.
    (3) The proposed use will generate unique wastes that can be stacked, folded, or easily consolidated without the need for specialized equipment, such as a compactor, and can therefore be stored in less space than is required by Section 390.050 (A) of this Section.
    Application Requirements and Review Procedure: The applicant shall work with the licensed hauler to develop a plan for storage and collection of source separated recyclables and mixed solid waste expected to be generated from the new building. A narrative describing how the proposed site meets one or more of the unique site conditions described above plus site and building plans showing the size and location of storage area(s) required to accommodate anticipated volumes shall be submitted for site plan review. Additionally, a letter from the licensed hauler shall be submitted at the same time that describes the level of service to be provided by the hauler, including any special equipment and collection frequency, which will keep the storage area from exceeding its capacity.

390.060 Location, Design and Access Standards for Storage Areas.
The following location, design and access standards for storage areas are applicable to all three methods of compliance: 1) minimum standards; 2) comprehensive recycling plan; or 3) licensed hauler review.
A. Location Standards. 
    (1) To encourage its use, the storage area for source separated recyclables shall be co-located with the storage area for residual mixed solid waste.
    (2) Indoor and outdoor storage areas shall comply with Uniform Building and Fire Code requirements.
    (3) Storage area space requirements can be satisfied with a single location or multiple locations, and can combine both interior and exterior locations.
    (4) Exterior storage areas can be located within interior side yard or rear yard areas. Exterior storage areas shall not be located within a required front yard setback or in a yard adjacent to a public or private street.
    (5) Exterior storage areas shall be located in central and visible locations on a site to enhance security for users.
    (6) Exterior storage areas can be located in a parking area, if the proposed use provides at least the minimum number of parking spaces required for the use after deducting the area used for storage. Storage areas shall be appropriately screened according to the provisions in Section 390.060 B, Design Standards.
    (7) The storage area shall be accessible for collection vehicles and located so that the storage area will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement on the site or on public streets adjacent to the site.
B. Design Standards. 
    (1) The dimensions of the storage area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of local collection.
    (2) Storage containers shall meet Uniform Fire Code standards and be made and covered with waterproof materials or situated in a covered area.
    (3) Exterior storage areas shall be enclosed by a sight obscuring fence, wall, or hedge at least six feet in height. Gate openings which allow access to users and haulers shall be provided. Gate openings for haulers shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and shall be capable of being secured in a closed and open position.
    (4) Storage area(s) and containers shall be clearly labeled to indicate the type of materials accepted.
C. Access Standards. 
    (1) Access to storage areas can be limited for security reasons. However, the storage area shall be accessible to users at convenient times of the day, and to collection service personnel on the day and approximate time they are scheduled to provide collection service.
    (2) Storage areas shall be designed to be easily accessible to collection trucks and equipment, considering paving, grade and vehicle access. A minimum of 10 feet horizontal clearance and 8 feet of vertical clearance is required if the storage area is covered.
    (3) Storage areas shall be accessible to collection vehicles without requiring backing out of a driveway onto a public street. If only a single access point is available to the storage area, adequate turning radius shall be provided to allow collection vehicles to safely exit the site in a forward motion.

Section 395 Accessory Dwelling Units
An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a habitable living unit that provides the basic requirements for shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation. ADUs are permitted in single family zones, and in the single family areas of the Town Center Zone.

395.010 Purpose.
The purpose of allowing ADUs is to:
A. Provide homeowners with a means of obtaining, through tenants in either the ADU or the principle unit, rental income, companionship, security and services.
B. Add affordable units to the existing housing supply.
C. Make housing units available to moderate-income people who might otherwise have difficulty finding homes within the City.
D. Develop housing units in single-family neighborhoods that are appropriate for people at a variety of stages in the life cycle.
E. Protect neighborhood stability, property values, and single-family residential appearance of the neighborhood by ensuring that ADUs are installed under the conditions of this Code.

395.020 Requirements for All Accessory Dwelling Units.
In addition to the standards of the State Uniform Building Code, all accessory dwelling units must meet the following:
A. Creation. One accessory dwelling unit per single-family residence may be created through the following methods only:
    (1) Converting existing living area, attic, basement, or garage of a single-family unit;
    (2) Adding floor area to a single-family unit;
    (3) Constructing a detached ADU on a single-family site;
    (4) Constructing a new house or detached house with an internal or detached ADU.
B. No ADU in part or in total may be used as a short-term vacation rental unless it or the principal unit is owner-occupied.
C. Number of Residents. The total number of individuals that reside in both units may not exceed the number that is allowed for a household.
D. Location of Entrances. If a separate entrance is provided, the primary entrance to the ADU shall be located in such a manner as to be visually secondary to the main entrance of the principal unit.
E. Floor Area. The maximum gross habitable floor area (GHFA) of the ADU shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet GHFA.
F. Setbacks and Dimensional Requirements. The ADU shall comply with the setback and dimensional requirements of the underlying zone.
G. Design and Appearance. The ADU shall be designed so that, to the degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building conforms to the original design characteristics and style of the primary building. (Ord. 2-2020 § 3 (Att. A))

Section 400 OVERLAY ZONES, FLOODPLAIN HAZARD AREAS, WATER QUALITY ZONES AND LAND DIVISIONS
SECTION 400  OVERLAY ZONES
SECTION 410  AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION 420  SOIL CONSTRAINT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION 425  FLOODPLAIN HAZARD AREAS
SECTION 430  WATER QUALITY RESOURCE AREA PROTECTION
SECTION 450  SUBDIVISION AND LAND PARTITIONS
SECTION 460  TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITY DESIGN STANDARDS

Section 400 Overlay Zones

400.010 Overlay Zone Application.
The following overlay zones and conditions therein, shall be applied to any zoning district which the Planning Commission deems necessary to carry out the intention of the overlay.

400.020 Purpose.
Overlay zones are intended to address special conditions which are found in limited areas of the City. These conditions can arise from the natural or man made environment. The overlay zone may further restrict the uses or development standards than the base zoning or may further define specific development standards. Overlay zones may not permit any use which is otherwise prohibited, conditional or limited under the base zone or relax development standards.

Section 410 Airport Overlay Zone

410.010 Purpose.
This overlay zone is intended to comply with necessary restrictions associated with the Troutdale Airport. In order to carry out the provisions of this overlay zone, certain zones are defined and established which include all of the land lying beneath the Airport Imaginary Surfaces as they apply to the City of Wood Village. Such zones are shown on the current Master Height Restriction Map (or equivalent) as prepared by the Port of Portland.
This overlay zone is intended to prevent the establishment of air space obstructions in airport approaches and surrounding areas through height restrictions and other land use controls.

410.020 Compliance.
In addition to complying with the provisions of the primary zoning district, uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of this overlay zone. In the event of any conflict between any provisions of this overlay zone and the primary zoning district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.

410.030 Special Definitions.
A. Airport Approach Safety Zone. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the Primary Surface. The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the Primary Surface and extends to a width of: 1,250 feet for a Utility Runway having only visual approaches; 2,500 feet for a runway other than a Utility Runway having only visual approaches; 2,000 feet for a Utility Runway having a non-precision instrument approach; and 3,500 feet for a non-precision instrument runway other than utility, having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile. The Airport Approach Surface extends for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 feet for each foot upward (20:1) for all utility and visual runways and 10,000 feet at a slope of 34 feet for each one foot upward (34:1) for all non-precision instrument runways other than utility.
B. Airport Hazard. Any structure, tree or use of land which exceeds height limits established by the Airport Imaginary Surfaces.
C. Airport Imaginary Surfaces. Those imaginary areas in space which are defined by the Airport Approach Safety Zone, Transitional Zones, Horizontal Zone, Clear Zone and Conical Surface and in which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces is an obstruction.
D. Clear Zone. Extends from the primary surface to a point where the approach surface is 50 feet above the runway and elevation.
E. Conical Surface. Extends one foot upward for each 20 feet outward (20:1) for 4,000 feet beginning at the edge of the horizontal surface (5,000 feet from the center of each end of the Primary Surface of each visual and utility runway or 10,000 feet for all non-precision instrument runways other than utility at 150 feet above the airport elevation) and upward extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
F. Horizontal Surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet from the center of each end of the Primary Surface of each visual or utility runway and 10,000 feet from the center of each end of the Primary Surface of all other runways and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
G. Noise Impact. Noise levels exceeding 55 Ldn.
H. Place of Public Assembly. A structure or place which the public may enter for such purposes as deliberation, education, worship, shopping, entertainment, amusement, awaiting transportation or similar activity.
I. Primary Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the Primary Surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. When the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the Primary Surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the Primary Surface is 250 feet for Utility Runways having only visual approaches, 500 feet for Utility Runways having non-precision instrument approaches and 500 feet for other than Utility Runways.
J. Transitional Zones. Extend one foot upward for each seven feet outward (7:1) beginning on each side of the Primary Surface which point is the same elevation as the runway surface, and from the sides of the approach surfaces thence extending upward to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation (Horizontal Surface).
K. Utility Runway. A runway is constructed and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.

410.040 Use Restrictions.
Any use permitted in the zoning district in which the land is located, except as hereinafter limited by Section 410.050.

410.050 Uses Requiring Conditional Use Review.
A. Single-family dwellings, manufactured homes, duplexes and multi-family dwellings, when authorized in the primary zoning district.
B. Commercial and industrial uses, when authorized in the primary zoning district, which may result in the following:
    (1) Electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft.
    (2) Difficulty for pilots in distinguishing between airport lights and others.
    (3) Impaired visibility.
    (4) Creation of bird strike hazards.
    (5) Endangerment or interference with the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
    (6) Attraction of large numbers of people.

410.060 Prohibited Uses.
A. No place of public assembly shall be permitted in the Airport Approach Safety Zone.
B. No structure or building shall be allowed within the Clear Zone.

410.070 Development Restrictions.
A. To meet the standards and reporting requirements established in FAA Regulations, Part 77, no structure shall penetrate into the Airport Imaginary Surfaces as defined above in Section 410.030 (C).
B. Whenever there is a conflict in height limitations prescribed by this overlay zone and the primary zoning district, the lowest height limitation fixed shall govern; provided, however, that the height limitations here imposed shall not apply to such structures customarily employed for aeronautical purposes.
C. No glare producing materials shall be used on the exterior of any structure located within the Airport Approach Safety Zone.

410.080 Master Height Restriction Map.
See map on Page 4-7.
(Prepared by Port of Portland)

410.090 Review Procedure.
Uses requiring conditional use review shall be processed as a Type III review.

410.095 Review Criteria.
A. Single family dwellings, manufactured homes, duplexes and multi family dwellings shall be approved provided that the landowner signs and records in the deed and mortgage records of Multnomah County a Noise Disclosure Statement and Aviation and Hazard Easement and submits them to the Port of Portland and City Planning Department.
B. Commercial and industrial uses which create problems as defined in 410.050(B) shall be reviewed with assistance from an appropriate Port of Portland official. Necessary conditions will be developed in consultation with that official.

Section 420 Soil Constraint Overlay Zone

420.010 Purpose.
The Soil Constraint Overlay provides for additional review by the Director of Public Works to assure that proper site drainage has been provided in areas which have been determined to have poorly draining soils. The Soil Constraint overlay applies to areas indicated on the Poor Soil map of the City of Wood Village Comprehensive Plan.

420.020 Use Restrictions.
Any permitted, conditional or limited use as defined by the bare zone shall be allowed in the Soil Constraint Overlay zone.

420.030 Development Restrictions.
The development standards as stated in the base zone shall apply in the Soil Overlay zone.

420.040 Review by the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall review all Land Use Review, Design Review and Building Permit applications to assure that adequate site drainage is provided for any use development, building or structure proposed. The Director of Public Works shall use the Uniform Building Code or other commonly accepted standards in his determination of adequacy of site drainage. The Director of Public Works review shall be handled as a Type I administrative review requiring no public notice or hearing. No permit shall be issued to a site within the Soil Drainage overlay without the approval of the City Engineer.

420.050 Poor Soil Map of the City of Wood Village Comprehensive Plan.
See Below map
[IMAGE: <420.050_Poor-Soil-Map.png>]

Section 425 Floodplain Hazard Areas

425.010 Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.020 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this section includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
F. Coordinating and supplementing the provisions of the state building code with local land use and development ordinances/codes. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.030 Specific Definitions.
APPEAL. Means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this section or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. Is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in the preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-A30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”
BASE FLOOD. Means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT. Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
DEVELOPMENT. Means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING. Means for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.
FLOOD or FLOODING. 
    (1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
        (a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
        (b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
        (c) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
    (2) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(a) of this definition.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). Means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. Means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD PROOFING. Means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY. Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
LOWEST FLOOR. Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of Section 425.080(B).
MANUFACTURED DWELLING. Means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK or SUBDIVISION. Means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Means a vehicle which is: 
    (1) Built on a single chassis;
    (2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
    (3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
    (4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE. Means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
    (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
    (2) Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a “historic structure.”
VARIANCE. Means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
WATER DEPENDENT. Means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.040 General Provisions.
A. Lands to Which This Section Applies. This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Wood Village.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map, Multnomah County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” effective date February 1, 2019, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Code. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City of Wood Village City Office. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in Section 425.050(C)(2) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under Section 425.050(C)(2).
C. Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this section by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a civil infraction subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.06 of the Municipal Code.
D. Abrogation and Severability. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another ordinances, easements, covenants, or deeds restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
If any subsection, clause, sentence, or phrase of this section is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this section.
E. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be:
    (1) Considered as minimum requirements;
    (2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
    (3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City of Wood Village, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.050 Administration.
A. Establishment of Development Permit. 
    (1) Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 425.040(B). The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in Section 720.030, Definitions, and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in  Section 720.030, Definitions.
    (2) Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Planning Department and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
        (a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
        (b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of floodproofing of any structure;
        (c) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 425.080(C); and
        (d) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Designation of the Local Floodplain Administrator. The City Manager, or designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement this section by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Local Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the local floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
    (1) Development Permit Application and Review. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this section have been satisfied.
        (a) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
        (b) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 425.100 are met.
        (c) Provide to building officials the base flood elevation and freeboard applicable to any building requiring a building permit.
        (d) Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement, as set forth in Section 720.030, Definitions.
    (2) Use of Other Base Flood Data (in A Zones). When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A) in accordance with Section 425.040(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Sections 425.080, Specific Standards, and 425.090, Before Regulatory Floodway.
    (3) Review of Building Permits. Where a FIRM and Flood Insurance Study have not been provided by the Federal Insurance Administration and elevation data is not available from another authoritative source (subsection (C)(2) of this section), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two (2) feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
    (4) Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
        (a) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or required as in subsection (C)(2) of this section, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements and below-grade crawlspaces) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;
        (b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study, FIRM, or as required in subsection (C)(2) of this section;
        (c) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and
        (d) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section;
        (e) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this section.
    (5) Alteration of Watercourses. 
        (a) Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land Conservation and Development and other appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration as required in subsection (C)(6) of this section.
        (b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
    (6) Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. 
        (a) Notify FEMA within six (6) months of project completion when an applicant had obtained a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA, or when development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain boundaries, or modified base flood elevations. This notification shall be provided as a letter of map revision (LOMR).
        (b) The property owner shall be responsible for preparing technical data to support the LOMR application and paying any processing or application fees to FEMA.
        (c) The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign the community acknowledgement form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application, until the applicant demonstrates that the project will or has met the requirements of this section and all applicable state and federal laws.
    (7) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 425.060. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.060 Variance Procedure.
A. Appeal Board. 
    (1) The City Council of the City of Wood Village shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this section.
    (2) The City Council shall decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this section.
    (3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal such decision in accordance with state law.
    (4) In passing upon such applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this section; and
        (a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
        (b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
        (c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
        (d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
        (e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
        (f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
        (g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
        (h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
        (i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
        (j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
    (5) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
    (6) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (A)(4) of this section and the purposes of this section, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section.
    (7) The local floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for Variances. 
    (1) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in subsections (A)(4)(a) through (j) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
    (2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures listed without regard to the procedures set forth in this section; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure” and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
    (3) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
    (4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
    (5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
        (a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
        (b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
        (c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws, or codes.
    (6) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances.
    (7) Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (B)(1) of this section, and otherwise complies with Section 425.070(A) through (C) of the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
    (8) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be permanently maintained with the floodplain development permit. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.070 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
A. General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
    (1) Anchoring. 
        (a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
        (b) All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored according to Section 425.080(D).
B. Construction Materials and Methods. 
    (1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
    (2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
    (3) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
C. Utilities. 
    (1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
    (2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
    (3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.
D. Subdivision Proposals. 
    (1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
    (2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
    (3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
    (4) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
E. AH and AO Zone Drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.080 Specific Standards.
A. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided (Zones A1-30, AH, and AE) as set forth in Section 425.040(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or Section 425.050(C)(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data (in A and V Zones), the following provisions are required:
    (1) Residential construction;
    (2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
B. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
    (1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
    (2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
    (3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
    (4) If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area below the lowest floor, each area shall be equipped with adequate flood openings.
C. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum according to ASCE 24; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
    (1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
    (2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
    (3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 425.050(C)(4)(d);
    (4) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (B) of this section;
    (5) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one (1) foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one (1) foot below);
    (6) Applicants shall supply a maintenance plan for the entire structure to include but not limited to: exterior envelope of structure; all penetrations to the exterior of the structure; all shields, gates, barriers, or components designed to provide floodproofing protection to the structure; all seals or gaskets for shields, gates, barriers, or components; and, the location of all shields, gates, barriers, and components as well as all associated hardware, and any materials or specialized tools necessary to seal the structure;
    (7) Applicants shall supply an emergency action plan (EAP) for the installation and sealing of the structure prior to a flooding event that clearly identifies what triggers the EAP and who is responsible for enacting the EAP.
D. Manufactured Dwellings. 
    (1) Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply with subsection (B) of this section;
    (2) The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones (excluding coastal A zones), shall be at or above BFE;
    (3) The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques); and
    (4) Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches above BFE.
E. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to:
    (1) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
    (2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
    (3) Meet the requirements of subsection (D) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.090 Before Regulatory Floodway.
In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, and where the Flood Insurance Study indicates that it is possible to calculate a floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

425.100 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 425.040(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in base flood or floodway elevations when compared to pre-project conditions.
B. If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 425.070, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction, or ASCE 24, whichever is more stringent. (Ord. 2-2018 § 2 (Att. B))

Section 430 Water Quality Resource Area Protection

General Provisions

430.100 Intent.
A. In addition to the standards in the Stormwater and Water Master Plans for the City, the purpose of this Section is to protect and improve water quality resources in Wood Village under Statewide Land Use Planning Goal 6 and Sections 1-4 of Title 3 of the Metro Urban Growth Management Functional Plan (UGMFP). The Water Quality Resource Area Protection (this Section) provisions also provide protection for designated natural resources that have been identified for the purposes of implementing Statewide Planning Goal 5 relating to significant natural riparian, wildlife, and wetland resources and Title 13 of the UGMFP.
B. These regulations seek to minimize additional adverse impacts and to restore and improve resources, where possible, while balancing property rights and development needs of the city.
C. It is also the intent of this Section to:
    (1) Designate water quality resources (WQR) to protect the functions and values of riparian and wetland resources at the time of development.
    (2) To protect and improve water quality, to support the designated beneficial water uses, to protect the functions and values of existing and newly established Water Quality Resource Areas (WQRA), which include, but are not limited to:
        (a) A vegetated corridor to separate Protected Water Features from development;
        (b) Microclimate and shade;
        (c) Stream flow moderation and water storage;
        (d) Water filtration, infiltration and natural purification;
        (e) Bank stabilization, sediment and pollution control;
        (f) Large wood recruitment and retention;
        (g) Natural channel dynamics;
        (h) Organic material resources.
    (3) Designate habitat conservation areas (HCA) to implement the performance standards of Title 13 of the UGMFP for riparian areas and fish and wildlife habitat, and to protect significant local Goal 5 resources such as wetlands.
    (4) Provide nondiscretionary (clear and objective) standards, as well as a discretionary review process, applicable to development in an HCA, in accordance with Goal 5.
    (5) Allow and encourage habitat-friendly development while minimizing the impact on water quality, fish and wildlife habitat functions.
    (6) Provide mitigation standards for the replacement of ecological functions and values lost through development in a WQR and HCA. This includes restoration of designated natural resources that are temporarily disturbed during development, as well as mitigation for permanent disturbance of those areas as a result of development.
    (7) Preserve existing native vegetation against removal and replacement with lawns, gardens or other nonnative plantings.
D. This Section allows development in situations where adverse impacts from the development can be avoided or mitigated and where the strict application of these rules would deny reasonable economic use of property.
E. It is not the intent of this Section to:
    (1) Impose any obligation on property owners to restore existing developed sites to predevelopment or natural conditions when no new activity is proposed.
    (2) Impose any unreasonable hardship against the continued maintenance of existing legal site conditions.
    (3) Apply to activities that do not affect a WQR or HCA.
    (4) Prohibit normal lawn and yard landscape planting and maintenance that does not involve removal and replacement of existing native vegetation. Normal lawn and yard planting and maintenance does not include the planting of invasive nonnative or noxious vegetation, including, but not limited to plants that are a nuisance species.

430.110 Coordination with Other Regulations.
A. Implementation of this Section is in addition to, and shall be coordinated with the entirety of the Wood Village Zoning and Development Code, the Wood Village Comprehensive Plan and the City of Wood Village Construction Standards.
B. Nonconforming development shall be subject to the provisions of the Wood Village Zoning and Development Code (ZDC) Chapter 640.
C. The requirements of this Section apply in addition to all applicable local, regional, state, and federal regulations, including those for wetlands and flood management areas. Where this Section imposes restrictions that are more stringent than regional, state, and federal regulations, the requirements of this Section shall govern.
D. Development in or near wetlands and streams may require permits from the Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps). If a federal permit is required, a water quality certification from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) may also be required. The City shall notify DSL and the Corps when an application for development within streams and wetlands is submitted. Because these agencies may have more restrictive regulations than the City, applicants are encouraged to contact them before preparing development plans.
E. A document or other list used to identify native, nuisance and prohibited plants shall be maintained by the Wood Village Public Works Department from the following sources – The Wood Village Tree and Plant List and the Portland Plant List, hereafter referred to as the City Plant List.

430.120 Map Administration.
A. Intent. The purpose of this Subsection is to provide a process for amending the Water Quality (WQ) map to add wetlands and correct the location of Protected Water Features and the WQRA.
B. Map Corrections. 
    (1) Within 90 days of receiving information establishing a possible error in the existence or location of a Protected Water Feature or WQRA, the City shall provide notice to interested parties of a public hearing at which the City will review the information.
    (2) The City shall amend the WQ map if the information demonstrates:
        (a) That a Primary or Secondary Protected Water Feature no longer exists because the area has been legally filled, culverted or developed prior to July 14, 1999; or
        (b) The boundaries of the WQRA have changed since adoption of the WQ map.
C. Modification of the Water Quality Resource Area. To modify the WQRA identified on the WQ Map, the applicant shall demonstrate that the modification will offer the same or better protection of the Protected Water Feature and WQRA by:
    (1) Preserving a vegetated corridor that will separate the Protected Water Feature from proposed development; and
    (2) Preserving existing vegetated cover or enhancing the WQRA sufficient to assist in maintaining or reducing water temperatures in the adjacent Protected Water Feature; and
    (3) Enhancing the WQRA sufficient to minimize erosion, nutrient and pollutant loading into the adjacent Protected Water Feature; and
    (4) Protecting the vegetated corridor sufficient to provide filtration, infiltration and natural water purification for the adjacent Protected Water Feature; and
    (5) Stabilizing slopes adjacent to the Protected Water Feature.
D. Adding Title 3 Wetlands
    (1) Within 90 days of receiving evidence that wetland meets any of one of the criteria in D.2. below, the City shall provide notice to interested parties of a public hearing at which the City will review the evidence.
    (2) A wetland shall be protected by the standards set forth in this Section if the wetland meets any one of the following criteria:
        (a) The wetland is fed by surface flows, sheet flows or precipitation, and has evidence of flooding during the growing season, and has 60 percent or greater vegetated cover, and is over one-half acre in size; or the wetland qualifies as having “intact water quality function” under the 1996 Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology; or
        (b) The wetland is in the Flood Management Area, and has evidence of flooding during the growing season, and is five acres or more in size, and has a restricted outlet or no outlet; or the wetland qualifies as having “intact hydrological control function” under the 1996 Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology; or
        (c) The wetland or a portion of the wetland is within a horizontal distance of less than one-fourth mile from a water body which meets the Department of Environmental Quality definition of “water quality limited water body” in OAR Chapter 340, Division 41 (1996).
        [IMAGE: <430.120_Water-Quality-Resource-Protection-Boundaries.png>]
        [IMAGE: <430.120_City-of-wood-village.png>]

430.130 Water Quality Resource Areas.
A. The purpose of this Section is to protect and improve the beneficial water uses, functions and values of a WQRA.
B. These provisions establish a WQRA, which is delineated on the WQ Map attached and incorporated by reference as part of this Section.
C. The WQRA is the vegetated corridor and the Protected Water Feature. The width of the vegetated corridor is specified in Table 1 below. At least three slope measurements along the water feature, at no more than 100-foot increments, shall be made for each property for which development is proposed. Depending on the width of the property, the width of the vegetated corridor will vary.
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
| Protected Water Feature |  Slope Adjacent to  |  Starting Point for  |   Width of Vegetated   |
| Type (see definitions)  |   Protected Water   |  Measurements from   |        Corridor        |
|                         |       Feature       |    Water Feature     |                        |
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
| Primary Protected       | < 25%               | ∙ Edge of bankful    | 50 feet                |
| Water Features1         |                     | flow or 2-year storm |                        |
| (Arata Creek)           |                     | level;               |                        |
|                         |                     | ∙ Delineated edge    |                        |
|                         |                     | of Title 3 wetland   |                        |
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
| Primary Protected       | ≥ 25% for 150 feet  | ∙ Edge of bankful    | 200 feet               |
| Water Features1         | or more5            | flow or 2-year storm |                        |
|                         |                     | level;               |                        |
|                         |                     | ∙ Delineated edge    |                        |
|                         |                     | of Title 3 wetland   |                        |
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
| Primary Protected       | ≥ 25% for less than | ∙ Edge of bankful    | Distance from starting |
| Water Features1         | 150 feet5           | flow or 2-year storm | point of measurement   |
|                         |                     | level;               | to top of ravine       |
|                         |                     | ∙ Delineated edge    | (break in ≥ 25%        |
|                         |                     | of Title 3 wetland   | slope)3 plus 50        |
|                         |                     |                      | feet4                  |
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
| Secondary Protected     | < 25%               | ∙ Edge of bankful    | 15 feet                |
| Water Features2         |                     | flow or 2-year storm |                        |
| (No-name Creek)         |                     | level;               |                        |
|                         |                     | ∙ Delineated edge    |                        |
|                         |                     | of Title 3 wetland   |                        |
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
| Secondary Protected     | ≥ 25%5              | ∙ Edge of bankful    | 50 feet                |
| Water Features2         |                     | flow or 2-year storm |                        |
|                         |                     | level;               |                        |
|                         |                     | ∙ Delineated edge    |                        |
|                         |                     | of Title 3 wetland   |                        |
+-------------------------+---------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
1Primary Protected Water Features include: all perennial streams and streams draining greater than 100 acres, Title 3 wetlands, natural lakes and springs.
2Secondary Protected Water Features include intermittent streams draining 50-100 acres.
3Where the Protected Water Feature is confined by a ravine or gully, the top of the ravine is the break in the ≥ 25% slope (see slope measurement in Appendix).
4A maximum reduction of 25 feet may be permitted in the width of vegetated corridor beyond the slope break if a geotechnical report demonstrates that slope is stable. To establish the width of the vegetated corridor, slope should be measured in 25-foot increments away from the water feature until slope is less than 25% (top of ravine).
5Vegetated corridors in excess of 50-feet for primary protected features, or in excess of 15-feet for secondary protected features, apply on steep slopes only in the uphill direction from the protected water feature.
(Note: The following methodology is an alternative for the purposes of substantial compliance: a jurisdiction can meet the performance standards in Title 3 by applying the following method to the water quality resource area: for areas with zero slope (as measured parallel to the ground) the buffer will be 50 feet from top of waterway bank, but for every one percent (1%) slope after that point, add six (6) feet).

Use Regulations

430.140 Applicability.
A. The regulations in this Section apply to all properties that contain, or are within 100 ft of a WQR and/or HCA (including any locally significant Goal 5 wetlands or habitat areas identified by the City) as shown on the WQ Map.
B. For properties that do not contain, but are within 100 ft of a WQR and/or HCA, as shown on the WQ Map, and where an activity not listed as exempt in Section 430.150 A. will disturb more than 500 sq ft, a Construction Management Plan is required in accordance with Section 430.190.
C. The WQ Map, which shows a WQR and an HCA, is adopted by reference. The WQ Map shall be used to determine the applicability of this Section and shall be administered in accordance with Section 430.120.
D. Designated natural resources are shown on the WQ Map as follows:
    (1) A WQR includes protected water features and their associated vegetated corridors, as specified in Table 1. The vegetated corridor is a buffer around each protected water feature established to prevent damage to the water feature. The width of the vegetated corridor varies depending on the type of protected water feature, upstream drainage area served, and slope adjacent to the protected water feature. The WQ Map is a general indicator of the location of vegetated corridors. The specific location of vegetated corridors shall be determined in the field in accordance with Table 2.
    (2) An HCA includes significant Goal 5 wetlands, riparian areas, and fish and wildlife habitat. An HCA is designated based on a combination of inventory of vegetative cover, analysis of habitat value and urban development value. HCA locations on the WQ Map are assumed to be correct unless demonstrated otherwise; verifications and corrections shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established in Table 1.
E. To determine whether a proposed activity on a given property will trigger any requirements of this Section, the City shall use the latest available aerial photographs; a copy of the applicable section of the WQ Map; and, in the case of a WQR, the parameters established in Table 1. If a property owner or applicant believes that the WQ Map is inaccurate, they may propose corrections according to the standards established in Section 430.120.
F. In the context of designated natural resources, a "disturbance" is a condition or result of an act that "disturbs" as noted below.
    (1) Temporary disturbances are those that occur during an allowed or approved development or activity but will not persist beyond completion of the project. Temporary disturbances include, but are not limited to, accessways for construction equipment; material staging and stockpile areas; and excavation areas for building foundations, utilities, stormwater facilities, etc.
    (2) Permanent disturbances are those that remain in place after an allowed or approved development or activity is completed. Permanent disturbances include, but are not limited to, buildings, driveways, walkways, and other permanent structures.
G. If more than 500 sq ft of area will be disturbed in conjunction with a proposed activity listed as exempt in Subsection 430.150, a Construction Management Plan shall be submitted according to the provisions of Subsection 430.190. This requirement applies even when the proposed activity will not occur within a designated natural resource but is within at least 100 ft of the resource, in accordance with Table 1.
H. Proposed activities that are listed as exempt or occur more than 100 ft from a WQR or HCA, as shown on the WQ Map or determined in accordance with Table 1 do not require review under the provisions of this Section.
I. Those portions of streams, creeks and other protected water features that appear on the WQ Map, but are enclosed in pipes, culverts or similar structures, are not subject to the provisions of this Section, except where a proposed activity will expose or directly disturb the protected water feature, such as with excavation.
J. The requirements of this Section apply to both properties that include a WQR and/or an HCA, and to properties that do not include a WQR or HCA, but where an activity is proposed within 100 ft of a WQR or HCA.

430.150 Exempt Activities.
A. Outright Exemptions. The following activities in a WQR or HCA are exempt from the provisions of this Section:
    (1) Action taken on a building permit for any portion of a phased development project for which the applicant has previously met the applicable requirements of this Section, including the provision of a Construction Management Plan. This exemption applies so long as the building site for new construction was identified on the original application, no new portion of the WQR and/or HCA will be disturbed, and no related land use approvals have expired.
    (2) Stream, wetland, riparian, and upland enhancement or restoration projects and development in compliance with a Natural Resource Management Plan or mitigation plan approved by the City, State or Federal agency.
    (3) Emergency procedures or activities undertaken that are necessary to remove or abate hazards to person or property, provided that the timeframe for such remedial or preventative action is too short to allow for compliance with the requirements of this Section. After the emergency, the person or agency undertaking the action shall repair any impacts to the designated natural resource resulting from the emergency action; e.g., remove any temporary flood protection such as sandbags, restore hydrologic connections, or replant disturbed areas with native vegetation.
    (4) The planting or propagation of plants categorized as native species on the City Plant List.
    (5) Removal of plants categorized as nuisance species as listed in the City Plant List. After removal, all open soil areas shall be replanted and/or protected from erosion.
    (6) Removal of trees under any of the following circumstances:
        (a) The tree has been downed by natural causes, and no more than 500 sq ft of earth disturbance will occur in the process of removing the tree.
        (b) The tree is categorized as a nuisance species and no more than 3 such trees will be removed from one property during any 12-month period, and no more than 500 sq ft of earth disturbance will occur in the process of removing the tree(s).
        (c) The tree presents an emergency situation with immediate danger to persons or property. Emergency situations may include, but are not limited to, situations in which a tree or portion of a tree has been compromised and has damage, or is damaging structures or utilities on private or public property, or where a tree or portion of a tree is prohibiting safe passage in the public right-of-way. Examples are trees that have fallen into or against a house or other occupied building, or trees downed across power lines or roadways. This exemption is limited to removal of the tree or portion of the tree as necessary to eliminate the hazard. Any damage or impacts to the designated natural resource shall be repaired after the emergency has been resolved.
        (d) Removal of the tree is in accordance with an approved Natural Resource Management Plan per Section 430.200.
        (e) Major pruning of trees and shrubs within 10 ft of existing structures.
    (7) Landscaping and maintenance of existing landscaping and gardens. This exemption extends to:
        (a) The installation of new irrigation and drainage facilities.
        (b) Erosion control features.
        (c) Landscaping activities that do not involve the removal of native plants or plants required as mitigation.
        (d) Landscaping activities that do not involve the planting of any vegetation identified as a nuisance species.
        (e) Landscaping activities that do not produce anything that increases impervious area.
        (f) Other changes that do not result in increased direct stormwater discharges to the WQR.
    (8) Additional disturbance for outdoor uses, such as gardens and play areas, where the new disturbance area does not exceed 500 sq ft; does not involve the removal of any trees of larger than 6-in diameter; and is located at least 30 ft from the top of bank of a stream or drainage and at least 50 ft from the edge of a wetland.
    (9) Routine repair and maintenance, alteration, demolition, and/or change of use of existing legal structures, provided that the following criteria are met:
        (a) There is no change in the location or increase in the footprint of any portion of a building, impervious surface or outdoor storage area within a WQR or HCA.
        (b) No other site changes are proposed that could result in increased direct stormwater discharges to a WQR. If the project will result in increased direct stormwater discharges, the proposal is subject to the Type II review process established in ZDC Chapter 630 Design Review.
    (10) Routine repair and maintenance, alteration, and/or total replacement of existing utility facilities, accesses, streets, driveways, trails, walkways, and parking improvements (including asphalt overlays); provided that there is no new disturbance of the WQR or HCA, no increase in impervious area, no reduction in landscaped areas or tree cover, and no other change that could result in increased direct stormwater discharges to the WQR.
    (11) Routine repair and maintenance of public and private stormwater facilities in accordance with a stormwater management plan approved by the City.
    (12) Existing agricultural practices or uses, excluding buildings and structures, provided that such activities or uses do not result in increased direct stormwater discharges to WQR.
    (13) Removal of debris.
    (14) Change of ownership.
    (15) Lot consolidations, as defined in ZDC Chapter 450 Subdivisions and Land Partitions.
    (16) Activities and improvements in existing public rights-of-way.
    (17) Establishment and maintenance of trails in accordance with the following standards:
        (a) Trails shall be confined to a single ownership or within a public trail easement.
        (b) Trails shall be located at least 15 ft from the top of bank of all water bodies.

430.160 Limited Exemptions Within an HCA.
The following activities within an HCA are exempt from the provisions of this Section except that a Construction Management Plan is required where the activity disturbs a total of more than 500 sq ft:
1. The alteration and/or total replacement of existing structures, provided that both of the following standards are met:
    (a) The alteration and/or replacement shall not intrude more than 500 sq ft into the HCA, beyond the area defined as the building footprint.
    (b) The alteration and/or replacement shall not result in increased direct stormwater discharges to a WQR.
2. Minor encroachments, not to exceed 500 sq ft for residential and nonresidential zones, for new features such as accessory buildings, patios, walkways, or retaining walls.
3. Temporary and minor clearing, excavation, or other disturbances, not to exceed 500 sq ft, for the purpose of: site investigations or preparation of soil profiles; installation of underground utility facilities or other infrastructure; routine repair and maintenance and/or alteration of existing utility facilities, access, streets, driveways, and parking improvements; or similar activities, provided that such disturbed areas are restored to their original condition when the activity is complete.
4. Low-impact outdoor recreation facilities for public use—including, but not limited to, multi-use paths, accessways, trails, picnic areas, or interpretive and educational displays and overlooks that include benches and outdoor furniture—provided that such facilities contain no more than 500 sq ft of new impervious surface.
5. Facilities that infiltrate stormwater on the site, including the associated piping, so long as the forest canopy and the areas within the driplines of the trees are not disturbed. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, vegetated swales, rain gardens, vegetated filter strips, and vegetated infiltration basins. Native or nonnative vegetation may be planted in these facilities, provided that none of the plantings are identified as a nuisance species.

430.170 Prohibited Activities.
This Section is comprised of regulations that deal with the use of land; it does not extend into the broader realm of laws that regulate personal activities unrelated to land use and development. Given such limitations, the following activities are prohibited within a WQR and an HCA:
A. New structures, development or landscaping activity other than those allowed by Subsection 430.150 and 430.160.
B. Uncontained areas of hazardous materials as defined by the Department of Environmental Quality.
C. Planting any vegetation listed as a nuisance species.
D. Outside storage of materials unless such storage is approved according to the applicable provisions of this Section.
E. Application of pesticides or herbicides with any of the active ingredients listed on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 2011 Banned or Severely Restricted Pesticides List.

Review Procedures

430.180 Activities Requiring City Review.
In accordance with Subsection 430.140, except as specifically exempted in Subsections 430.150 and 430.160, within either a WQR or an HCA, the following activities and items are subject to Administrative Review (Type I) or Planning Commission (Type II) review if required by other sections of the ZDC:
A. The activities listed below are subject to a Type I review procedure in accordance with Subsection 510.100 except as otherwise provided in this Section.
    (1) Construction Management Plans
    (2) Tree Removal or Pruning
    (3) Natural Resource Management Plans
    (4) Maintenance of Existing Utility Facilities
    (5) Utility Connections
    (6) Nuisance Abatement
    (7) Boundary Verification
    (8) Special Uses. 
        (a) Improvement or construction of public or private utility facilities
        (b) New stormwater facilities
        (c) Walkways and bike paths
    (9) Stormwater Management Plans
    (10) Other Uses and Activities with Minimal Impacts to WQR
    (11) New agricultural practices or uses, excluding buildings and structures that result in increased direct stormwater discharges to WQR.
    (12) Landscaping and maintenance of existing landscaping that would increase impervious area within a WQR by no more than 500 sq ft and/or would result in increased direct stormwater discharges to the WQR.
    (13) Routine repair and maintenance, alteration, and/or total replacement of existing legal buildings or structures that increases the disturbance area by no more than 500 sq ft within the WQR.
    (14) Routine repair and maintenance, alteration, and/or total replacement of existing utility facilities, accesses, streets, driveways, and parking improvements that disturbs no more than 500 sq ft within the WQR. Activities approved under this subsection shall be subject to the following requirements:
        (i) Restore the disturbed portion of the WQR.
        (ii) Within the disturbed portion of the WQR, remove any vegetation categorized as a nuisance species and replace it with native vegetation recommended on the City Plant List.
B. The activities listed below are subject to a Type II review procedure in accordance with Section 520.100 except as otherwise provided in this Section:
    (1) Partitions or Subdivisions
    (2) Design Review

Development Standards

430.190 Construction Management Plans.
Prior to issuing any permits in a WQRA a Construction Management Plan must be submitted to the City as follows:
A. Construction Management Plans are subject to Type I review per ZDC Chapter 510 and the City of Wood Village Construction Standards.
B. Construction Management Plans shall provide the following information:
    (1) Determination of a WQRA and description of work to be done in compliance with the requirements listed in Table 2.
    (2) Scaled site plan showing a demarcation of a WQR and/or an HCA and the location of excavation areas for building foundations, utilities, stormwater facilities, etc.
    (3) Location of site access and egress that construction equipment will use.
    (4) Equipment, material staging and stockpile areas.
    (5) Erosion and sediment control measures.
    (6) Measures to protect trees and other vegetation located within the potentially affected WQR and/or HCA. A root protection zone shall be established around each tree in the WQR or HCA that is adjacent to any approved work area. The root protection zone shall extend from the trunk to the outer edge of the tree’s canopy, or as close to the outer edge of the canopy as is practicable for the approved project. The perimeter of the root protection zone shall be flagged, fenced, or otherwise marked and shall remain undisturbed. Material storage and construction access is prohibited within the perimeter. The root protection zone shall be maintained until construction is complete.
    When required for a property that does not include a designated natural resource, the Construction Management Plan shall show the protective measures that will be established on the applicant’s property.

430.200 Natural Resource Management Plans.
Prior to issuing any permits in a WQRA a Natural Resource Management Plan must be submitted to the City as follows:
Natural Resource Management Plans or restoration plans that authorize limited disturbance within the WQR or HCA may be approved with a Type I or II review, subject to the following standards:
A. Plans Eligible for Type I Review. The plan has already been approved by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW), DSL, Oregon Watershed Enhancement Board (OWEB), Metro, East Multnomah County Soil and Water Conservation District, or other agency approved by the City Administrator.
B. Plans Eligible for Type II Review. The plan has been prepared in accordance with particular standards and guidelines promulgated by a natural resource agency, such as OWEB’s Oregon Aquatic Habitat Restoration and Enhancement Guide, ODFW’s Western Oregon Stream Restoration Program, DSL’s Hydrogeomorphic (HGM) approach of assessment for wetland and riparian functions, or other standards approved by the City Administrator.
C. Approval Criteria. Every plan prepared for approval in this Section shall demonstrate that it encourages restoration activities that have any of the following effects:
    (1) Changes the trend of habitat function from one of a diminishing ability to support salmonids and other organisms to one that supports a complex, self-sustaining system.
    (2) Corrects or improves conditions caused by past management and/or disturbance events.
    (3) Maximizes beneficial habitat in the short term where watershed degradation has been extensive and natural processes will need substantial time to restore habitat.
    (4) Creates beneficial habitat and restores stream function and hydrology to the fullest extent practicable within developed areas where there is no reasonable expectation of returning to natural conditions.
D. Construction Management Plans. A Construction Management Plan (Section 430.190) is required with each Natural Resource Management Plan.
E. Ongoing Maintenance. Natural Resource Management Plans shall demonstrate how ongoing maintenance is part of the associated restoration or enhancement activities.
F. Expiration of Plans. The approval of a Natural Resource Management Plan shall be valid for 5 years. Approved plans may be renewed through the Type I review process by demonstrating that the original approved plan still meets the criteria provided in this Section. Plans that demonstrate an adaptive management component and/or that involve partnership with one of the agencies noted in this Section may be approved as valid for up to 20 years upon request.
+-------------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
|   Existing Condition    |     Requirements if Water      |   Requirements if Water Quality Resource    |
|    of Water Quality     |     Quality Resource Area      |    Area is Disturbed During Construction    |
|      Resource Area      |   Remains Undisturbed During   |                                             |
|                         |          Construction          |                                             |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Good Existing Corridor: | Provide certification          | Prior to construction, a biologist          |
| Combination of trees,   | by registered professional     | or landscape architect shall prepare        |
| shrubs and ground       | engineer, landscape architect, | and submit an inventory of vegetation       |
| cover are 80% present,  | or biologist or other          | in areas proposed to be disturbed           |
| and there is more       | person trained or certified    | and a plan for mitigating water             |
| than 50% tree canopy    | in riparian or wetland         | quality impacts related to the              |
| coverage in the         | delineation that vegetated     | development, including:                     |
| vegetated corridor.     | corridor meets the standards   | Sediments, temperature and nutrients,       |
|                         | of this ordinance.             | sediment control, temperature               |
|                         | Inventory and remove debris    | control, or addressing any other            |
|                         | and noxious materials.         | condition that may have caused              |
|                         |                                | the Protected Water Feature to              |
|                         |                                | be listed on DEQ’s 303 (d) list.            |
|                         |                                | Inventory and remove debris and             |
|                         |                                | noxious materials.                          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Marginal Existing       | Provide certification          | Vegetate disturbed and bare areas           |
| Vegetated Corridor:     | by registered professional     | with, non-nuisance plantings from           |
| Combination of trees,   | engineer, landscape architect, | the City Plant List.                        |
| shrubs and groundcover  | or biologist or other          | Inventory and remove debris and             |
| are 80% present,        | person trained or certified    | noxious materials.                          |
| and 25-50% canopy       | in riparian or wetland         | Revegetate with native species              |
| coverage in the         | delineation that vegetated     | using a City/County approved plan           |
| vegetated corridor.     | corridor meets the standards   | developed to represent the vegetative       |
|                         | of this ordinance.             | composition that would naturally            |
|                         | Inventory and remove debris    | occur on the site. Seeding may              |
|                         | and noxious materials.         | be required prior to establishing           |
|                         |                                | plants for site stabilization.              |
|                         |                                | Revegetation must occur during              |
|                         |                                | the next planting season following          |
|                         |                                | site disturbance. Annual replacement        |
|                         |                                | of plants that do not survive               |
|                         |                                | is required until vegetation representative |
|                         |                                | of natural conditions is established        |
|                         |                                | on the site.                                |
|                         |                                | Restore and mitigate according              |
|                         |                                | to approved plan using non-nuisance         |
|                         |                                | plantings from the City Plant               |
|                         |                                | List.                                       |
|                         |                                | Inventory and remove debris noxious         |
|                         |                                | materials.                                  |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Degraded Existing       | Vegetate bare areas with       | Vegetate disturbed and bare areas           |
| Vegetated Corridor:     | plantings from approved        | with appropriate plants from the            |
| Combination of trees,   | Native Plant List.             | City Plant List.                            |
| shrubs, and ground      | Remove non-native species      | Remove non-native species and revegetate    |
| cover are less          | and revegetate with plantings  | with non-nuisance plantings from            |
| than 80% present        | from approved Native           | the City Plant List.                        |
| and/or less than        | Plants List.                   | Plant and seed to provide 100 percent       |
| 25% canopy coverage     | Inventory and remove debris    | coverage.                                   |
| in vegetated corridor.  | and noxious materials.         | Restore and mitigate according              |
|                         |                                | to approved plan using non-nuisance         |
|                         |                                | plantings from the City Plant               |
|                         |                                | List.                                       |
|                         |                                | Inventory and remove debris and             |
|                         |                                | noxious materials.                          |
+-------------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+

430.210 Site Development Protection and Mitigation.
A. Protection of Natural Resources During Site Development. During development of any site containing a designated natural resource, the following standards shall apply:
    (1) Work areas shall be marked to reduce potential damage to the WQR and/or HCA.
    (2) Trees in a WQR or HCA shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing construction equipment.
    (3) Native soils disturbed during development shall be conserved on the property.
    (4) An erosion and sediment control plan is required and shall be prepared in compliance with requirements set forth in Subsection 430.220 and the City of Wood Village Public Works Standards.
    (5) Site preparation and construction practices shall be followed that prevent drainage of hazardous materials or erosion, pollution, or sedimentation to any WQR adjacent to the project area.
    (6) Stormwater flows that result from proposed development within and to natural drainage courses shall not exceed predevelopment flows.
    (7) Prior to construction, the WQR and/or HCA that is to remain undeveloped shall be flagged, fenced or otherwise marked and shall remain undisturbed. Such markings shall be maintained until construction is complete.
    (8) The construction phase of the development shall be done in such a manner as to safeguard the resource portions of the site that have not been approved for development.
    (9) Where practicable, lights shall be placed so that they do not shine directly into any WQR and/or HCA location. The type, size and intensity of lighting shall be selected so that impacts to habitat functions are minimized.
    (10) All work on the property shall conform to a Construction Management Plan prepared according to Section 430.190.
B. General Standards for Required Mitigation. Where mitigation is required by this Section for disturbance to a WQR and/or HCA, the applicable sections of Table 2 and the following general standards shall apply:
    (1) Disturbance. 
        (a) Designated natural resources that are affected by temporary disturbances shall be restored, and those affected by permanent disturbances shall be mitigated as applicable.
        (b) Landscape plantings are not considered to be disturbances, except for those plantings that are part of a non-exempt stormwater facility; e.g., raingarden or bioswale.
    (2) Required Plants. Unless specified elsewhere in this Section, all trees, shrubs and ground cover planted as mitigation shall be native plants, as identified on the City Plant List. Applicants are encouraged to choose particular native species that are appropriately suited for the specific conditions of the planting site; e.g., shade, soil type, moisture, topography, etc. Plant size, spacing and diversity will be approved through discretionary review by the City. The minimum ratio of mitigation shall be 2:1.
    (3) Location of Mitigation Area. 
        (a) On-Site Mitigation. All mitigation vegetation shall be planted on the applicant’s site within the designated natural resource that is disturbed, or in an area contiguous to the resource area; however, if the vegetation is planted outside of the resource area, the applicant shall preserve the contiguous planting area by executing a deed restriction, such as a restrictive covenant.
        (b) Off-Site Mitigation. 
    (1) For disturbances allowed within a WQR, off-site mitigation shall not be used to meet the mitigation requirements of this Chapter.
    (2) For disturbances allowed within an HCA, off-site mitigation vegetation may be planted within an area contiguous to the subject-property HCA, provided there is documentation that the applicant possesses legal authority to conduct and maintain the mitigation, such as having a sufficient ownership interest in the mitigation site. If the off-site mitigation is not within an HCA, the applicant shall document that the mitigation site will be protected after the monitoring period expires, such as through the use of a restrictive covenant.
    (4) Invasive Vegetation. Invasive nonnative or noxious vegetation shall be removed within the mitigation area prior to planting, including, but not limited to, species identified as nuisance plants on the City Plant List.
    (5) Ground Cover. Bare or open soil areas remaining after the required tree and shrub plantings shall be planted or seeded to 100% surface coverage with grasses or other ground cover species identified as native on the City Plant List. Revegetation shall occur during the next planting season following the site disturbance.
    (6) Tree and Shrub Survival. A minimum of 80% of the trees and shrubs planted shall remain alive on the second anniversary of the date that the mitigation planting is completed.
        (a) Required Practices. To enhance survival of the mitigation plantings, the following practices are required:
            1. Mulch new plantings to a minimum of 3-in depth and 18-in diameter to retain moisture and discourage weed growth.
            2. Remove or control nonnative or noxious vegetation throughout the maintenance period.
        (b) Recommended Practices. To enhance survival of tree replacement and vegetation plantings, the following practices are recommended:
            1. Plant bare root trees between December 1 and April 15; plant potted plants between October 15 and April 30.
            2. Use plant sleeves or fencing to protect trees and shrubs against wildlife browsing and the resulting damage to plants.
            3. Water new plantings at a rate of 1 inch per week between June 15 and October 15 for the first 2 years following planting.
        (c) Monitoring and Reporting. Monitoring of the mitigation site is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner. Plants that die shall be replaced in kind as needed to ensure the minimum 80% survival rate. The City may require a maintenance bond to cover the continued health and survival of all plantings. A maintenance bond shall not be required for land use applications related to owner-occupied single-family residential projects. An annual report on the survival rate of all plantings shall be submitted for 2 years.
    (7) Light Impacts. Where practicable, lights shall be placed so that they do not shine directly into any WQR and/or HCA location. The type, size and intensity of lighting shall be selected so that impacts to habitat functions are minimized and are subject to City review.
C. Mitigation Requirements for Disturbance within WQR. 
    (1) The requirements for mitigation vary depending on the existing condition of the WQR on the project site at the time of application which will be assessed in accordance with the categories established in Table 2. When disturbances within a WQR is approved according to the standards of this Section, the disturbance shall be mitigated according to the requirements outlined in Table 3 and the standards established in Section 430.190 E. Limitations and Mitigation for Disturbance of an HCA.
    When disturbances within an HCA are allowed, the City shall remove the HCA designation from such disturbance areas on the WQ Map.
    (2) Mitigation Requirements for Disturbance in an HCA. To achieve the goal of reestablishing forested canopy that meets ecological values and functions when development intrudes into an HCA, tree replacement and vegetation planting is required according to the following standards, unless the planting is also subject to wetlands mitigation requirements imposed by state and federal law.
    These mitigation options apply to tree removal and/or site disturbance in conjunction with development activities that are otherwise permitted. They do not apply to situations in which tree removal is exempt.
    An applicant shall meet the requirement of Mitigation Option 1 or 2, whichever results in more tree plantings; except that where the disturbance area is 1 acre or more, the applicant shall comply with Mitigation Option 2 as shown in Table 3 below.
    Wastewater treatment plants, raw water intakes, pump stations, transmission mains, conduits or service lines, terminal storage reservoirs, and outfall devices may be built, expanded, repaired, maintained, reconfigured, rehabilitated, replaced, or upsized in accordance with the following criteria:
        (a) Such projects shall not be required to avoid the resource area provided that, where practicable, the project does not encroach closer to a protected water feature than existing operations and development; or, for new projects where there are no existing operations or development, provided that the project does not encroach closer to a protected water feature than practicable.
        (b) Best management practices will be employed that accomplish all of the following:
            1. Account for watershed assessment information in project design.
            2. Minimize the trench area and tree removal within the resource area.
            3. Utilize and maintain erosion controls until other site stabilization measures are established, post-construction.
            4. Replant immediately after backfilling, or as soon as effective.
            5. Preserve wetland soils and retain soil profiles.
            6. Minimize compactions and the duration of the work within the resource area.
            7. Complete in-water construction during appropriate seasons, or as approved within requisite federal or State permits.
            8. Monitor water quality during the construction phases, if applicable.
            9. Implement a full inspection and monitoring program during and after project completion, if applicable.
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
            | Size of Tree to be Removed (inches | Number of Trees and Shrubs to be |
            | in diameter)                       | Planted                          |
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
            | 6 to 12                            | 2 trees and 3 shrubs             |
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
            | 13 to 18                           | 3 trees and 6 shrubs             |
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
            | 19 to 24                           | 5 trees and 12 shrubs            |
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
            | 25 to 30                           | 7 trees and 18 shrubs            |
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
            | over 30                            | 10 trees and 30 shrubs           |
            +------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
        (c) Mitigation Option 1. This mitigation requirement is calculated based on the number and size of trees that are removed from the site. Trees that are removed from the site shall be replaced as shown in Table 3. Conifers shall be replaced with conifers. Bare ground shall be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs. Nonnative sterile wheat grass may also be planted or seeded, in equal or lesser proportion to the native grasses or herbs.
        (d) Mitigation Option 2. This mitigation requirement is calculated based on the size of the disturbance area within an HCA. Native trees and shrubs are required to be planted at a rate of 5 trees and 25 shrubs per 500 sq ft of disturbance area. This is calculated by dividing the number of square feet of disturbance area by 500, multiplying that result times 5 trees and 25 shrubs, and rounding all fractions to the nearest whole number of trees and shrubs.
        For example:
        For 330 sq ft of disturbance area: 330 ÷ 500 = 0.66, and 0.66 x 5 = 3.3, so 3 trees must be planted. 0.66 x 25 = 16.5, so 17 shrubs must be planted. Bare ground shall be planted or seeded with native grasses or herbs. Nonnative sterile wheat grass may also be planted or seeded, in equal or lesser proportion to native grasses or herbs.
D. Limitations and Mitigation for Disturbance of HCA. 
    (1) Discretionary Review to Approve Additional Disturbance within an HCA. An applicant seeking discretionary approval to disturb more of an HCA than is allowed shall submit an Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis and shall be subject to the approval criteria provided in ZDC Chapter 510.100 Type I Administrative Process.
    (2) Discretionary Review to Approve Mitigation that Varies the Number and Size of Trees and Shrubs within an HCA. An applicant seeking discretionary approval to proportionally vary the number and size of trees and shrubs required to be planted, but who will comply with all other applicable provisions, shall be subject to the following process:
        (a) The applicant shall submit the following information:
            1. A calculation of the number and size of trees and shrubs the applicant would be required to plant according to this Section.
            2. The number and size of trees and shrubs that the applicant proposes to plant.
            3. An explanation of how the proposed number and size of trees and shrubs will achieve, at the end of the third year after initial planting, comparable or better mitigation results than would be achieved if the applicant complied with all of the requirements of this Section. Such explanation shall be prepared and signed by a knowledgeable and qualified natural resource professional or a certified landscape architect. It shall include discussion of site preparation including soil additives, removal of invasive and noxious vegetation, plant diversity, plant spacing, and planting season; and immediate post-planting care, including mulching, irrigation, wildlife protection, and weed control.
            4. A mitigation, site-monitoring, and site-reporting plan.
        (b) Approval of the request shall be based on consideration of the following:
            1. Whether the proposed planting will achieve, at the end of the third year after initial planting, comparable or better mitigation results than would be achieved if the applicant complied with all of the requirements of this Section.
            2. Whether the proposed mitigation adequately addresses the plant diversity, plant survival, and monitoring practices established in this Section.

430.220 Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control.
A. The purpose of this Subsection is to require erosion prevention measures and sediment control practices for all development inside and outside the WQRA during construction to prevent and restrict the discharge of sediments, and to require final permanent erosion prevention measures, which may include landscaping, after development is completed. Erosion prevention techniques shall be designed to protect soil particles from the force of water and wind so that they will not be transported from the site. Sediment control measures shall be designed to capture soil particles after they have become dislodged by erosion and attempt to retain the soil particles on site.
B. Prior to, or contemporaneous with, approval of an application that may cause visible or measurable erosion, the applicant must obtain an Erosion and Sediment Control Permit.
C. An application for an Erosion and Sediment Control Permit shall include an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, which contains methods and interim measures to be used during and following construction to prevent or control erosion. The plan shall demonstrate the following:
    (1) The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan meets the requirements of the Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plans, Technical Guidance Handbook (Handbook) and incorporated by reference as part of this section;
    (2) The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan will:
        (a) Prevent erosion by employing prevention practices such as non-disturbance, construction schedules, erosion blankets and mulch covers; or
        (b) Ensure that where erosion cannot be completely avoided, the sediment control measures will be adequate to prevent erosion from entering the public stormwater system, surface water system, and WQRA; and
        (c) Allow no more than a ten percent cumulative increase in natural stream turbidities, as measured relative to a control point immediately upstream of the turbidity causing activity. However, limited duration activities necessary to address an emergency or to accommodate essential dredging, construction or other legitimate activities, and that cause the standard to be exceeded may be authorized provided all practicable turbidity control techniques have been applied.
    (3) The applicant will actively manage and maintain erosion control measures and utilize techniques described in the Permit to prevent or control erosion during and following development. Erosion and sediment control measures required by the Permit shall remain in place until disturbed soil areas are permanently stabilized by landscaping, grass, approved mulch or other permanent soil stabilizing measures;
    (4) No mud, dirt, rock or other debris will be deposited upon a public street or any part of the public stormwater system, surface water system, WQRA, or any part of a private stormwater system or surface water system that drains or connects to the public stormwater or surface water system.
D. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be reviewed in conjunction with the requested development approval. If the development does not require review under Sections 430.150 and 430.160, the Public Works Director may approve or deny the permit with notice of the decision to the applicant.
E. The City may inspect the development site to determine compliance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Permit.
F. Erosion that occurs on a development site that does not have an Erosion and Sediment Control Permit, or that results from a failure to comply with the terms of such a Permit, constitutes a violation of this code section.
G. If the Public Works Director finds that the facilities and techniques approved in an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Permit are not sufficient to prevent erosion, the Director shall notify the permittee. Upon receiving notice, the permittee shall immediately install interim erosion sediment control measures as specified in the Handbook. Within three days from the date of notice, the permittee shall submit a revised Erosion and Sediment Control Plan to the City. Upon approval of the revised plan and issuance of an amended Permit, the permittee shall immediately implement the revised plan.

430.230 Subdivisions and Partitions.
A. The standards for land divisions in WQRA shall apply in addition to the requirements of ZDC Section 450 Subdivision and Land Partitions.
B. Prior to preliminary plat approval, the WQRA shall be shown as a separate tract, which shall not be a part of any parcel used for construction of a dwelling unit.
C. Prior to final plat approval, ownership of the WQRA tract shall be identified to distinguish it from lots intended for sale. The tract may be identified as any one of the following:
    (1) Private open space held by the owner or homeowners association; or
    (2) For residential land divisions, private open space subject to an easement conveying storm and surface water management rights to the city and preventing the owner of the tract from activities and uses inconsistent with the purpose of this section; or
    (3) At the owner’s option, public open space where the tract has been dedicated to the city or other governmental unit; or
    (4) Any other ownership proposed by the owner and approved by the Planning Commission.
D. Where the WQRA tract is dedicated to the city or other governmental unit, development shall be subject to a minimum 3-foot setback from the WQRA.

430.240 Density Transfers.
A. The purpose of this Section is to allow density accruing to portions of a property within the WQRA to be transferred outside the WQRA.
B. Development applications that request a density transfer must provide the following information:
    (1) A map showing the net buildable area to which the density will be transferred.
    (2) Calculations justifying the requested density increase.
C. Density transfers shall be allowed if the applicant demonstrates compliance with the following standards:
    (1) The density proposed for the lot receiving the density is not increased to more than two (2) times the permitted density of the base zone. Fractional units shall be rounded down to the next whole number.
    (2) Minimum density standards will not increase due to the density transfers.
D. The area of land contained in a WQRA may be excluded from the calculations for determining compliance with the zone’s minimum density requirements.
E. All standards of the base zone other than density requirements continue to apply.
F. Density transfers shall be recorded on the title of the lot in the WQRA and on the title of the transfer lot.
G. Once density is transferred from a lot in the WQRA, the density increase allocated to the transfer lot may not be transferred to any other lot.

430.250 Variances.
To encourage applicants to avoid or minimize impacts to a WQR and/or HCA, variances are available for use on any property that includes a WQR or an HCA.
Requests to vary any standards shall be subject to the review process and approval criteria for variances established in ZDC Chapter 660 Variances.
In granting any variance request related to this Section, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to minimize adverse impacts that may result from granting the variance. Examples of such conditions include, but are not limited to, maintaining a minimum width of the vegetated corridor alongside a primary protected water feature and limiting the amount of a WQR for which the adjacent vegetated corridor width can be reduced.

Section 450 Subdivision and Land Partitions

450.010 Definitions.
Section 720.

450.020 Scope of Regulations and Procedures.
Subdivision plats and Land Partitions shall be approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Code and applicable provisions of State law (ORS 92).
Subdivision and partition approvals by the Planning Commission as herein set forth, shall be subject to formal approval of the preliminary and final plat before they become effective. No partitioning and no subdivision within the City of Wood Village shall become effective or be recorded until such approval by the Planning Commission be granted thereto. A person desiring to subdivide land or desiring to partition land shall submit tentative plans and final documents for approval as provided in this Code and the State law.

450.030 Submission of Tentative Subdivision Plan.
A subdivider shall prepare a tentative plan together with such improvement plans and other supplementary material as may be required to indicate the general program and objectives of the project, and shall submit fifteen copies of the tentative plan to the City Recorder's office at least 45 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which consideration of the plan is desired. Final determination as to the needed information and materials to be submitted shall rest with the Planning Commission.
A. Scale: The tentative plan of a subdivision shall be drawn on a sheet 18 by 24 inches in size or a multiple thereof at a scale of such size as required by the County surveyor.
B. General Information: The following general information shall be shown on the tentative plan of a subdivision:
    (1) Proposed name of the subdivision: This name shall not duplicate nor resemble the name of another subdivision in the county and shall be approved by the Planning Commission and the Multnomah County Assessor's Office.
    (2) Date, north point and scale of drawing.
    (3) Appropriate identification of the drawing as a tentative plan.
    (4) Location of the subdivision sufficient to define its location and boundaries and a legal description of the tract boundaries.
    (5) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and engineer or surveyor.
C. Existing Conditions: The following existing conditions shall be shown on the tentative plan:
    (1) The location, widths and names of both opened and unopened streets within or adjacent to the tract, together with easements and other important features such as section lines, section corners, city boundary lines and monuments.
    (2) Contour lines related to some established bench mark or other datum approved by the City engineer and having minimum intervals as follows:
        (a) For slopes of less than five percent: show the direction of a slope by means of arrows or other suitable symbol together with not less than four spot elevations per acre, evenly distributed, one-foot contours.
        (b) For slopes of five percent to 15 percent: two-foot contours.
        (c) For slopes of 15 percent to 20 percent: five-foot contours.
        (d) For slopes of over 20 percent: ten-foot contours.
    (3) The location of at least one temporary bench mark within the subdivision boundaries.
    (4) The location and direction of water courses and the location of areas subject to flooding.
    (5) Natural features, such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wooded areas and isolated preservable trees.
    (6) Existing uses of the property and location of existing structures to remain on the property after platting.
D. Proposed Plan of Subdivision: The following information shall be included on the tentative plan of a subdivision:
    (1) The location, width, names, approximate grades and radii of curves of proposed streets. The relationship of streets to projected streets as shown on any development plan or, if no complete development plan is in effect in the area, as suggested by the Planning Commission to assure adequate traffic circulation.
    (2) The location of possible street connections, (except where prevented by topography, lot dimensions, barriers or environmental constraints), at intervals of no more than 530 feet, both within the development and to adjacent land in compliance with City, County and Regional Transportation Plans. Street connections at intervals of no more than 330 feet are recommended in areas planned for the highest density.
    (3) The location of pedestrian, bicycle and emergency vehicle accessways with spacing between street connections or accessways of no more than 330 feet, except where prevented by topography, barriers or environmental constraints.
    (4) The location, width and purpose of proposed easements.
    (5) The location and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and the proposed lot and block numbers.
    (6) Proposed sites, if any, allocated for purposes other than single-family dwellings.
    (7) Cul-de-sacs shall be designed in accordance with City and emergency access standards. Cul-de-sacs should be provided with a landscaped island designed to improve storm water retention. The property owners and the City shall enter into an agreement for maintenance of the island, whereby the property owners will provide on-going maintenance, and the City will provide periodic storm water system maintenance. Plant materials should be native and/or drought tolerant, but may be determined by the adjoining property owners.
E. Partial Development: If the subdivision proposal pertains to only part of the tract owned or controlled by the subdivider, the Planning Commission may require a sketch of a tentative layout for streets in the unsubdivided portion.
F. Explanatory Information with Tentative Plan: Any of the following information may be required by the Planning Commission and, if it cannot be shown practicably on the tentative plan of a subdivision, it shall be submitted in separate statements accompanying the plan.
    (1) A vicinity map showing existing subdivisions and undivided land ownerships adjacent to the proposed subdivision and showing how proposed streets and utilities may be extended to connect to existing streets and utilities.
    (2) Proposed deed restrictions, if any, in outline form.
    (3) The location within the subdivision and in the adjoining streets and property of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, drain pipes and electric lines.
    (4) For developments that are likely to generate more than 400 average daily motor vehicle trips (ADT’s), the applicant shall provide adequate information, such as a traffic impact study or traffic counts, to demonstrate the level of impact to the surrounding street system. The scope of the study or analysis shall be determined by the agency responsible for the affected roadway.
    (5) The location of water resources as identified on the City Water Quality Map and in accordance with Section 430.300.
G. Supplemental Proposals with Tentative Plan: Any of the following may be required by the Planning Commission to supplement the plan of subdivision.
    (1) Approximate center line profiles with extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision showing the finished grade of streets and the nature and extent of street construction.
    (2) A plan for domestic water supply lines and related water service facilities.
    (3) Proposals for sewage disposal, storm water drainage and flood control, including profiles of proposed drainage ways.
    (4) If lot areas are to be graded, a plan showing the nature of cuts and fills and information on the character of the soil.
    (5) Proposals for other improvements such as electric utilities and sidewalks.
H. Preliminary Review of Tentative Plan: Upon receipt, the City Administrator shall furnish one copy of a tentative plan and supplementary material to the City Engineer and such other agencies such as ODOT, Multnomah County, Tri-Met, Metro and the Fire Marshall. Other agencies believed to have an interest shall be provided notice of the proposal. These officials and agencies shall be given a reasonable time to review the plan and to suggest revisions that appear to be in the public interest.

450.040 Approval of Tentative Subdivision Plan.
A. Approval of a Tentative Subdivision Plan shall be in accordance with Section 520.100 Type II Procedures. Within 45 days from the first regular Planning Commission meeting following submission of a tentative plan of a subdivision, the Planning Commission shall review the plan and the reports of appropriate officials and agencies.
B. Required Findings: No tentative plan shall be approved unless:
    (1) Streets and roads conform to plats approved for adjoining properties as to widths, alignments, grades, and other standards, unless the Commission determines that the public interest is served by modifying streets or road patterns.
    (2) Streets and roads held for private use are clearly indicated on the plat and all reservations or restrictions relating to such private roads and streets are set forth thereon.
    (3) The plat complies with the Comprehensive Plan, the City, County and Regional Transportation Plans, the City Stormwater and Water Master Plans, and applicable zoning district regulations. Further, ODOT access permit approval is required on abutting state roadways prior to subdivision approval by the City.
    (4) Adequate water, sanitary sewer, and other public facilities exist to support the use of land proposed in the plat.
    (5) Development of additional, contiguous property under the same ownership can be accomplished in accordance with this Code.
    (6) Adjoining land can either be developed independently or is provided access that will allow development in accordance with this Code.
C. Conditions of Approval. Conditions and/or restrictions may be applied to the approval of a tentative subdivision plan in order to assure code compliance and mitigate transportation or public facility impacts and to protect those facilities.
D. The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on three copies of the tentative plan, including reference to any attached documents describing conditions.
E. Approval of the tentative plan by the Planning Commission shall indicate approval of the final plat if there is no change in the plat of the subdivision and if the subdivider complies with the requirements of this Code.

450.050 Submission of Final Subdivision Plat.
A. Within one year after approval of the tentative plan, the subdivider shall cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a plat prepared in conformance with the tentative plan as approved. The subdivider shall submit the original drawing, five prints, and any supplementary information to the City. If the subdivider wishes to proceed with the subdivision after the expiration of the one-year period following the approval of the tentative plan, he must submit a new tentative plan and make any revision necessary to meet changed conditions as determined by the Planning Commission.
B. Extension of time in which to submit the supportive documents and material without submission of a new tentative plan may be granted for an additional period of one year only, and then only upon application to and approval by the Planning Commission.
C. Information on Plat: In addition to that required for the tentative plan or otherwise specified by law, the following information shall be shown on the final plat:
    (1) Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the plat by distances and bearings, and referenced to a field book or map as follows:
        (a) Stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground and used to determine the boundaries of the subdivision.
        (b) Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivision.
        (c) Other monuments found or established in making the survey of the subdivision or required to be installed by provisions of this Code.
    (2) The exact location and width of streets and easements intercepting the boundary of the tract.
    (3) Tract, block and lot boundary lines and street right-of-way and center lines, with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings. Normal high water lines for any creek or other body of water. Tract boundaries and street bearings shall be shown to the nearest .01 second with basis of bearings. Distances shall be shown to the nearest 0.01 feet. No ditto marks shall be used.
    (4) The width of the portion of streets being dedicated and the width of existing right-of-way. For streets on curvature, curve data shall be based on the street center line. In addition to the center line dimensions, the radius and central angle shall be indicated.
    (5) Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified and, if already of record, their recorded reference. If an easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of the easement shall be given. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the easement with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificates of dedication.
    (6) Lot numbers beginning with the number "1" and numbered consecutively in each block.
    (7) Block numbers beginning with the number "1" and continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision. The numbers shall be solid, of sufficient size and thickness to stand out and so placed as not to obliterate any figure. Block numbers in an addition to a subdivision of the same name shall be a continuation of the numbering in the original subdivision.
    (8) Identification of land to be dedicated for any purpose, public or private, to distinguish it from lots intended for sale.
    (9) Building setback lines, if any, are to be made a part of the subdivision restrictions.
    (10) The following certificates which may be combined where appropriate:
        (a) A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat.
        (b) A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all land intended for public use except land which is intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants.
        (c) A certificate with the seal of and signed by the engineer or the surveyor responsible for the survey and final map.
        (d) Other certificates now or hereafter required by law.
D. Supplemental Information with Plat: The following data shall accompany the plat:
    (1) A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in the premises.
    (2) Sheets and drawings showing the following:
        (a) Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision and ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and showing the error of closure, if any.
        (b) The computation of distances, angles and courses shown on the plat.
        (c) Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions, street corners and state highway stationing.
    (3) A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision.
    (4) A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.
    (5) A list of all taxes and assessments on the tract which have become a lien on the tract.
E. Technical Plat Review:
    (1) Upon receipt by the City, the plat and other data shall be reviewed by the City Engineer who shall examine them to determine that the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plan and that there has been compliance with provisions of the law and of this Code.
    (2) The City Engineer may make such checks in the field as are desirable to verify that the map is sufficiently correct on the ground and his representatives may enter the property for this purpose.
    (3) If the City Engineer determines that full conformity has not been made, he shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to make the changes or additions.

450.060 Approval of Plat.
A. Upon receipt of the plat with the approval of the City Engineer, the Planning Commission shall determine whether it conforms with the approved tentative plan and with these regulations. If the Planning Commission does not approve the plat, it shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford him an opportunity to make corrections. If the Planning Commission determines that the plat conforms to all requirements it shall give its approval, provided supplemental documents and provisions for required improvements are satisfactory. Approval shall be indicated by the signature of the president of the Planning Commission. The approval of the plat does not constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other easement shown on the plat.
B. Required Findings: No final subdivision plat shall be approved unless:
    (1) All required public streets are dedicated without any reservation or restriction other than easements for public utilities and facilities.
    (2) Streets and roads held for private use have been approved by the City.
    (3) The plat complies with the standards of the underlying zoning district and other applicable standards of this Code and is in conformity with the approved preliminary plat.
    (4) The plat dedicates to the public all required common improvements and areas, including but not limited to streets, floodplains, parks, and sanitary sewer, storm water, and water supply systems.
    (5) Adequate water, sanitary sewer and other public facilities exist to support the proposed use of the subdivided land, as determined by the City and are in compliance with City standards. For the purposes of this section:
        (a) Adequate water service shall be deemed to be connection to the City water supply system.
        (b) Adequate sanitary sewer service shall be deemed to be connection to the City sewer system.
        (c) The adequacy of other public facilities such as storm water and streets shall be determined by the Commission based on applicable City policies, plans, and standards for said facilities.
    (6) Adjoining land can be developed, or is provided access that will allow future development, in accordance with this Code.
C. Filing of Plat: A subdivider shall, without delay, submit the plat for signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 90 days after the date the last required approving signature has been obtained. Subdivision approval shall become final upon the recording with the County of the approved subdivision plat or partition map together with any required documents. Development permits may be issued only after final approval, except for activities at the preliminary plat phase, specifically authorized by this Code.
D. Creation of Streets:
    (1) Approval. The final plat shall provide for the dedication of all streets for which approval has been given by the City. Approval of the final plat shall constitute acceptance of street dedications.
    (2) Exceptions. The Planning Commission may approve the creation and dedication of a street without full compliance with this Code. The applicant may be required to submit additional information and justification necessary to determine the proposal's acceptability. The City may attach such conditions as necessary to provide conformation to the standards of this Code. One or more of the following conditions must apply:
        (a) The street creation is required by the City and is essential to general traffic circulation.
        (b) The tract in which the road or street is to be dedicated is an isolated ownership of one (1) acre or less.

450.070 Land Partitions.
A. Approval Required: A tract of land or contiguous tracts under a single ownership shall not be partitioned into two (2) or more parcels until a partition application has been approved by the City.
B. Partitioning Procedures: A partition shall be submitted under the following procedure:
    (1) There shall be submitted to the City a tracing of a tentative plan 18 by 24 inches in size with the following information:
        (a) The date, north point, scale and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the tract to be partitioned and its location.
        (b) Name and address of the record owner and of the person who prepared the tentative plan.
        (c) Approximate acreage of the land under a single ownership or, if more than one ownership is involved, the total contiguous acreage of the landowners directly involved in the partitioning.
        (d) For land adjacent to and within the tract to be partitioned, the locations, names and existing widths of streets; location, width and purpose of other existing easements; and location and size of sewer and water lines and drainage ways and the location of power poles.
        (e) Outline and location of existing buildings to remain in place.
        (f) Parcel layout, showing size and relationship to existing or proposed streets and utility easements.
        (g) Such additional information as required by the Planning Commission.
    (2) The Planning Commission may define the circumstances under which an application for partitioning may be given routine administrative review and approval. Under this procedure, the City Administrator shall check the proposal against the development plan and may approve the proposal without submitting it to the Planning Commission.
    (3) If the location or type of land is not such as has been defined for routine administrative approval or if the proposed partitioning does not appear to comply with the requirements for routine administrative approval, the tentative plan shall be submitted for Planning Commission review and determination that the proposal will comply with this Code. The Planning Commission may require dedication of land and easements and may specify conditions or modifications in the tentative plan as necessary. In no event, however, shall the Planning Commission require greater dedications or conditions than could be required if the tract were subdivided.
    (4) When a tentative plan has been approved, all copies shall be marked with the date and conditions, if any, of approval. When compliance with conditions has been assured, the plan shall be marked approved and then becomes the partition map.
    (5) In the event that the tentative plan and partition is not approved by the Planning Commission, the same shall be returned to the City Recorder for appropriate action in conformance therewith.
B. Flag Lot Partitions in Residential Zones – Partitions involving the creation of flag lots in residential zones shall be approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the partition approval procedure if the following conditions are satisfied:
    (1) Findings for Partition Approval have been met.
    (2) The partition does not cause undue harm to adjacent property owners.
    (3) 
        (a) The access for flag lots shall comply with Section 460.030 B. of this Code and shall have a minimum of 15 foot width paved driving surface. For drives serving two lots, there shall be a minimum of 15 feet width of driving surface to the back of the first lot, and 12 feet width respectively, for the rear lot. Drives shared by adjacent properties shall have a 15 foot width paved driving surface.
        (b) Flag drives shall be constructed so as to prevent surface drainage from flowing over sidewalks or other public ways. Flag drives shall be in the same ownership as the flag lots served. If a drive is shared between owners, there shall be provided a joint driveway access easement and maintenance agreement to ensure legal access and adequate maintenance of the drive.
        (c) Flag drives shall not exceed a minimum grade of 15 %.
        (d) Flag drives greater than 250 feet in length shall provide an adequate turnaround for emergency vehicles.
    (4) A site plan of the flag lot partition shall be submitted illustrating the following:
        (a) The location of all proposed structures in the partition.
        (b) The location of driveways, turnarounds and parking spaces.
        (c) Landscaping or screening adjoining the drive.
    (5) No more than two (2) lots are to be served by the flag drive.
    (6) For the purpose of meeting the lot area requirement, the lot area, exclusive of the flag drive area, must meet the minimum square footage requirements of the zoning district.

450.080 Required Findings for Partition Approval.
Partitions shall not be approved unless:
A. No new rights-of-way, roads, or streets are created, except for widening of existing rights-of-way. Partitions creating such new streets shall be processed as subdivisions.
B. The partition complies with the standards of the underlying zoning district and other applicable standards of this Code.
C. The partition dedicates to the public all required common improvements and areas including but not limited to streets, parks, floodplains, and sanitary sewer, storm water, and water supply systems.
D. Adequate water, sanitary sewer and other public facilities exist to support the proposed use of the partitioned land, as determined by the City and are in compliance with City standards and in accordance with the City Stormwater and Water Master Plans and Transportation Plan.
E. Adjoining land can be developed, or is provided access that will allow future development, in accordance with this Code.

450.090 Future Developability.
In addition to the findings required by Section 450.080, the Commission must find, for any partition creating lots averaging one (1) acre or more, that the lots may be repartitioned or resubdivided in the future in full compliance with the standards of this Code. The Commission may require the applicant to submit partition drawings or other data confirming that the property can be resubdivided. If repartitioning or resubdividing in full compliance with this Code is determined not to be feasible, the Commission shall either deny the proposed partition, require its redesign, or make a finding and condition of approval that no further partitioning or subdivision may occur, said condition to be recorded against the property.

450.100 Subdivision Compliance.
GenerallyIf a partition exceeds two (2) acres and within one (1) year is repartitioned into more than two (2) parcels, and any single parcel is less than one (1) acre in size, full compliance with the subdivision regulations of this Code may be required.

450.110 Dedications.
A. Generally. The City's requirements for dedication of public lands as per this Code, including road rights-of-way shall apply to partitions. Actual public improvements may not be required at the time of partition, at the Commission's discretion.
B. Dedications Acceptance. The City Administrator shall accept all public dedications by his or her signature on the partition plat prior to filing with the County.
C. Owner Declaration. If a property is being dedicated or donated for public use, the mortgage of trust deed holder of the property shall sign a declaration to that effect on the partition plat, or file an affidavit consenting to the plat.

450.120 Filing Requirements.
A. Generally. Within twelve (12) months after City approval of a land partition, a partition plat shall be submitted to Multnomah County in accordance with its final partition plat and recording requirements.
B. Extension. After expiration of the twelve (12) months period following partition approval, the partition must be resubmitted for new approval. The Commission may upon written request by the applicant, grant an extension up to twelve (12) months upon a written finding that the facts have not changed to an extent sufficient to warrant refiling of the partition and that no other development approval would be affected.

450.130 Property Line Adjustments.
A. Generally. The City Administrator may approve a property line adjustment without public notice or a public hearing provided that no new lots are created and that the adjusted lots comply with the applicable zone requirements. If the property line adjustment is processed with another development application, all applicable standards of the Code shall apply.
B. Filing Requirements. If a property line adjustment is approved by the City, it does not become final until reviewed and approved by Multnomah County in accordance with its property line adjustment recording requirements.

450.140 Improvement Agreement Required.
A. No final plat shall be approved unless the City has received adequate assurances that the subdivider or partitioner has agreed to make all public improvements which are required as conditions of approval of the tentative plan, including, but not limited to streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and storm drainage, sewer and water systems. The following constitute acceptable adequate assurances:
    (1) Certification by the City Engineer that all required improvements, both public and private, are completed and accepted by the City Council, and a maintenance agreement and guarantee have been executed pursuant to Section 450.155 of this Code; or
    (2) An executed improvement agreement between the City and the developer, executed and filed with the City, requiring the developer to complete all required improvements within one (1) year of the approval of the tentative plan. The agreement shall also provide for reimbursement of the City for the cost of inspection by the City. The agreement shall include a performance guarantee as set forth in Section 450.150, and an agreement to file a one year maintenance agreement and performance guarantee as set forth in Section 450.155. The agreement may be continued for an additional one (1) year period, provided that the performance guarantee is modified to reflect any changes in the cost of construction. The agreement shall state that, should all improvements not be completed within the term of the agreement or its extension, the City shall estimate the cost of completing the work, call upon the performance guarantee as necessary to cover the cost, and complete the improvement from funds collected under the performance guarantee. If the funds collected under the performance guarantee are insufficient to install the required improvements, the City may:
        (a) Hold the collected funds until additional funds are authorized for the improvement;
        (b) Expend the funds on a revised improvement or on a portion of the improvement as determined to be reasonable by the City Engineer; or
        (c) Complete the project. Upon completion, the excess amount due to the City, plus a 10% administrative charge, shall become a lien on the real property subject to the performance agreement. The lien shall attach upon entry in the City lien docket and the giving of notice of the claim for the amount due for the completion of the project pursuant to the performance agreement. The notice shall demand the amount due, allege the insufficiency of the bond or other security to compensate the City fully for the cost of the fulfillment of the obligation, and allege the applicant's failure to complete the public improvements as required by the improvement agreement. The lien may be foreclosed in the manner prescribed in ORS Chapter 223 for foreclosing liens on real property.
B. If a developer has begun construction pursuant to the tentative plan but fails to submit the final plat for approval within one year of approval of the tentative plan as required by Section 450.050(A) of this Code, the City may require execution of an improvement agreement and performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection A(2) of this section as a condition of granting an extension of time pursuant to Section 450.050(B).

450.150 Performance Guarantee Required.
A. When required pursuant to Section 450.140 above, the developer shall file one of the following to insure the full and faithful performance of all terms of the improvement agreement:
    (1) A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon, in a form approved by the City Attorney, in an amount equal to 110 percent of the construction cost of the required improvements as verified by the City Engineer.
    (2) A deposit with the City or, at the option of the City, a verified deposit with a responsible escrow agent or trust company, of case or negotiable bonds in an amount equal to 110 percent of the construction costs of the required improvements, together with an agreement that the deposit may be disbursed only upon approval by the City Administrator. The agreement shall include a provision that the City allow release of the deposit in such amounts and at such times as a corresponding portion of the required improvements are completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, following inspection by the Director or the Director's designee.
    (3) An agreement between the City, developer and one or more financial or lending institutions pledging that funds equal to 110 percent of the construction cost of all required improvements are available to the developer and are guaranteed for payment of the improvements. An irrevocable letter of credit is acceptable.
If the applicant fails to complete all improvements, the City may call on the performance guarantee as provided in Section 450.140(A)(2) of this Code.

450.155 Maintenance Agreement and Guarantee Required.
A. At the time of submittal of the final plat pursuant to Section 450.140(A)(1) or at the time of City acceptance of the public improvements pursuant to Section 450.150(A)(2), the developer shall execute a maintenance agreement agreeing to maintain the public facilities for a period of one year following the date of acceptance of the public facilities by the City. The developer shall be responsible for correcting all deficiencies in construction and maintenance brought to the attention of the developer during the one-year warranty period. The agreement shall state that, should the developer fail to maintain the facilities or correct any defects brought to the developers attention, the City shall estimate the cost of completing the work, call upon the performance guarantee as necessary to cover the cost, and complete the improvement from funds collected under the performance guarantee. If the funds collected under the performance guarantee are insufficient to make the required improvements, the City may:
    (a) Hold the collected funds until additional funds are authorized for the improvement;
    (b) Expend the funds on a revised improvement or on a portion of the improvement as determined to be reasonable by the City Engineer; or
    (c) Complete the project and seek reimbursement from the developer.
The developer shall post a maintenance guarantee in the amount of ten percent of the cost of the public improvements accepted by the City to insure this obligation. The maintenance guarantee shall be in the form set forth in Section 450.150(A). At the end of the one-year period, the City shall release any remaining maintenance guarantee.

450.160 Easements.
A. Utility Lines: Easements for sewers, water mains, electric lines or other public utilities shall be dedicated wherever necessary. The easements shall be at least 12 feet wide and centered on lot or parcel lines, except for utility pole tieback easements which may be reduced to six feet in width.
B. Water Courses: If a tract is traversed by a water course such as a drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the water course, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose. Streets or parkways parallel to the major water courses may be required.
C. Pedestrian and Bicycle Ways: In compliance with the Transportation Plan, a pedestrian or bicycle way may be required to connect to a cul-de-sac or to pass through an unusually long or oddly shaped block or otherwise provide appropriate circulation, as per Section 460.100 E. and F. Bicycle lanes on County streets shall comply with County bicycle lane standards.

Section 460 Transportation and Utility Design Standards

460.010 Streets.
A. Generally. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets and the public interest. The street system shall assure an adequate traffic circulation system with intersection angles, grades, tangents and curves appropriate for the traffic to be carried considering the terrain. Where location is not shown in a development plan, the arrangement of streets shall either:
    (1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
    (2) Conform to the Transportation System Plan or to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
B. Creation or Extension of Public Street Outside Subdivision:
    (1) The creation or extension of a public street and the resultant separate land parcels shall be in conformance with requirements for subdivisions except, however, the Planning Commission shall approve the creation or extension of a public street to be established by deed without full compliance with the regulations applicable to subdivisions provided any of the following conditions exist:
        (a) The establishment or extension of the public street is initiated by the City Council and is declared essential for the purpose of general traffic circulation and the partitioning of land is an incidental effect rather than the primary objective of the street.
        (b) The tract in which the street, new or extension, is to be dedicated is a major partition within an isolated ownership either of not over one acre or of such size and characteristics as to make it impossible to develop building sites for more than three dwelling units.
    (2) In those cases where approval of a public street or extension is to be without full compliance with the regulations applicable to subdivision, a copy of a tentative plan and the proposed deed shall be submitted to the City at least fifteen days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The plan, deed and such information as may be submitted shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and, if not in conflict with the standards of Section 460 of this Code, shall be approved with conditions necessary to preserve these standards.
    (3) In those cases in which the Planning Commission has granted approval to a proposal for a street or extension thereof under B(1) above the same shall thereafter be submitted to the City Council, which shall within thirty days of such submission, make determination by appropriate resolution that said street or extension thereof is in the public interest. Such determination by the Council shall be required before any street or extension thereof created under B(1) above be effective. If the City Council finds that such street proposal is not in the public interest, it shall indicate the same by appropriate resolution, setting forth reasons for its determination, which shall be submitted to the applicant for such street or extension.
C. Creation of Private Street Outside a Subdivision: A street which is created in order to allow the partitioning of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, whether immediate or future, shall be in the form of a street in a subdivision or as provided in B above, except that a private street to be established by deed without full compliance with these regulations shall be approved by the Planning Commission provided it is the only reasonable method by which the rear portion of an unusually deep land parcel of a size to warrant partitioning into not over two parcels may be provided with access. A copy of the tentative plan to create the street and partition the tract shall be submitted to the City at least fifteen days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which consideration is desired. The document and such information as may be submitted shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and, if assurance of adequate utility and vehicular access is indicated, shall be approved.
    (1) In the event the Planning Commission shall grant approval to said proposal under this Section, the same shall thereafter be submitted to the City Council for its approval or disapproval for the reason and in the manner indicated in B(3) above.
C. Minimum right-of-way and roadway width: Unless otherwise indicated on the development plan approved by the City, the street right-of-way and roadway widths shall not be less than the minimum width in feet shown in the following table and as illustrated in Section 730.120.
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
|     Type of Street     | Minimum Right-of-Way Width | Minimum Roadway Width |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Major Arterial         | 80-115 feet                | 66-84 feet            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Minor Arterial         | 80-105 feet                | 44-73 feet            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Major Collector        | 60-98 feet                 | 40-65 feet            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Neighborhood Collector | 50 feet                    | 32 feet               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Standard Local Street  | 55-60 feet                 | 32 feet               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Local “Skinny” Street  | 40 feet                    | 26 feet               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
| Alleys                 | 20 feet                    | 20 feet               |
+------------------------+----------------------------+-----------------------+
Note: Typical rights-of-way and ultimate roadway widths shown. Additional width may be needed to accommodate additional turn lanes at intersections or as needed to address circulation needs. The need for additional width will be based on an engineering study and approved by the Public Works Director.
Local Skinny Street standards may only be utilized where maximum block length does not exceed 330 feet, or where the street is less than 2,400 feet in length and cannot be connected or extended.
E. Reserve strips: Reserve strips or street plugs controlling access to streets will not be approved unless necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights and in these cases they may be required. The control and disposal of the land comprising such strips shall be placed within the jurisdiction of the City under conditions approved by the Planning Commission.
F. Alignment: As far as is practical, streets other than minor streets shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the center lines thereof. Staggered street alignment resulting in "T" intersections shall, wherever practical, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the center lines of streets having approximately the same direction and, in no case, shall be less than 100 feet.
G. Future Extensions of Streets: Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future division of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary of the subdivision or partition and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved without a turn-around. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to preserve the objectives of street extensions. Stubbed streets shall be limited to 200 feet in length and have no more than 25 dwelling units. The street end shall be posted identifying it as the site for possible street extension when there is future development.
H. Intersection Angles: Streets shall be laid out to intersect at angles as near to right angles as practical except where topography requires a lesser angle, but in no case shall the acute angle be less than 80o degrees unless there is a special intersection design. An arterial or collector street intersecting with another street shall have at least 100 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. Other streets, except alleys, shall have at least 50 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance. Intersections which contain an acute angle of less than 80o degrees or which include an arterial street shall have a minimum corner radius sufficient to allow for a roadway radius of 20 feet and maintain a uniform width between the roadway and the right-of-way line. Ordinarily, the intersection of more than two streets at any one point will not be approved.
I. Existing Streets: Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of the land division.
J. Half Streets: Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where essential to the reasonable development of the development, subdivision or partition when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and when the Planning Commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is divided. Whenever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be divided, the other half of the street shall be provided within such tract. Reserve strips and street plugs may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets.
K. Cul-de-sac: In order to improve connectivity in the city, cul-de-sacs shall generally be prohibited. When environmental or topographical constraints or existing development patterns preclude local street connectivity, a cul-de-sac shall be as short as possible and shall have a maximum length of 200 feet (except for long narrow lots on Glisan Street where cul-de-sacs may not exceed 400 feet) and serve building sites for not more than 25 dwelling units. A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a circular turn-around.
L. Street Names: Except for extensions of existing streets, no street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the City and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
M. Grades and Curves: Grades shall not exceed six percent on arterials, ten percent on collector streets or 12 percent on other streets. Center line radii of curves shall not be less than 300 feet on major arterials, 200 feet on secondary arterials or 100 feet on other streets. Where existing conditions, particularly the topography, make it otherwise impractical to provide buildable sites, the Planning Commission may accept steeper grades and sharper curves. In flat areas, allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope, preferably, of at least 0.5 percent.
N. Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way: Wherever the proposed land division contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, provision may be required for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land between the streets and the railroad. The distance shall be determined with due consideration at cross streets.
O. Marginal Access Streets: Where a land division abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear or side property line, or other treatment necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
P. Alleys: Alleys may be provided in any zoning district, unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are approved by the Planning Commission. The corners of alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet.
Q. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed on all public streets adjacent to the proposed development. Planning Commission may recommend approval for development without sidewalks if a variance application is submitted, alternative pedestrian routes are planned or available, and if it can be shown that the proposed routes adequately provides for pedestrian circulation within, and connectivity to and from, the development. On local City streets, concrete sidewalks, planter strips or furnishing zones, and street trees shall be provided as shown in the cross-sections in the City Transportation System Plan. On County streets, sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with Multnomah County Street Standards and regional street design standards. In all cases, at least five feet shall be clear for through travel on sidewalks.
R. Multi-use pathways: Multi-use pathways shall be eight (8) feet wide, surfaced with asphalt, concrete, turf pavers, low-impact pavers, compacted gravel, engineered wood fiber, or other City approved materials to meet ADA standards. Pathways shall be located in a 20 foot wide public easement. Pathway width and easements or rights-of-way may be altered with the specific approval of the City if such pathway alternatives are constrained by existing right-of-way, easements, topography, and as specifically directed in the water quality resource area overlay zone Section 430 of this code. In all cases, at least five feet shall be clear for through travel on pathways.

460.020 Block Requirements.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall take into account the need for adequate building site size and street width and shall recognize the limitations of the topography.
B. Size: No block shall be more than 530 feet in length between street corner lines unless it is adjacent to an arterial street or unless the topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies an exception. A block shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of building sites unless topography or the location of adjoining streets, or a similar constraint justifies an exception. Where existing street spacing is non-conforming, or a variance to the street spacing standards is proposed, a pedestrian and bicycle multi-use pathway shall be provided with spacing no more than 330 feet except where impracticable due to factors such as topography, environmental features, or existing development.
Block size for the use of the Local “Skinny” Street standard shall not exceed 330 lineal feet in any dimension without connection to street corner lines. However, where constrained by topography, environmental features, or existing development, the Local “Skinny” Street standard may be used in any roadway less than 2,400 feet in length and for which extension or connection to other streets is not possible.

460.030 Building Sites.
A. Sizes and Shape: The size, width, shape and orientation of building sites shall be appropriate for the location of the land division and for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall be consistent with the residential lot size provisions of this Code with the following exceptions:
    (1) In areas that will not be served by a public sewer, minimum lot and parcel sizes shall permit compliance with the requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality and shall take into consideration problems of sewage disposal, particularly problems of soil structure and water table as related to sewage disposal by septic tank.
    (2) Where property is zoned and planned for business or industrial use, other widths and areas may be permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
    (3) Under no circumstances shall the basic areas provided under (1) and (2) above be less than the minimum required by the pertinent provisions of this Code or be less than the standards set forth therein and at all times such requirements as provided in (1) and (2) above shall be equal to the minimum requirement of other applicable ordinances of the City relating to sewers, sewer connections and sewer service for the disposal of sewage effluence and storm and surface drainage.
B. Access: Except as set forth in Section 460.010 (C) each lot and parcel shall abut upon a street other than an alley for a width of 20 feet, or 15 feet for flag lots.
    (1) Pedestrian access;
        (a) Pedestrian connections to adjoining properties shall be provided except where such a connection cannot be reasonably accommodated due to existing development, topography, or environmental constraints. Pedestrian connections shall connect the on-site circulation system to existing or proposed streets, walkways, and driveways that abut the property. Where adjacent properties are undeveloped or have potential for redevelopment, streets, accessways and walkways on site shall be laid out or stubbed to allow for extension to the adjoining property;
    (2) Access to transit: Proposed development within 600 feet of an existing or planned transit route or stop shall provide for pedestrian access to transit through the following measures:
        (a) Locate building for the primary use within 20 feet of an existing or planned transit stop, a street with existing or planned transit service, or an intersecting street;
        (b) Provide a direct pedestrian connection between the transit facility and building entrances on the site;
        (c) Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons;
        (d) Provide an easement or dedication for a passenger shelter if requested by the transit provider; and
        (e) Provide lighting to a transit facility, if located on site;
C. Pedestrian Circulation. 
    (1) Walkways shall be provided connecting building entrances and streets adjoining the site;
    (2) Connections shall be direct and driveway crossings minimized; and
    (3) Walkways shall be at least five-feet-wide, raised, include curbing, or have different paving material when crossing driveways.
D. Through Lots and Parcels: Through lots and parcels shall be avoided except where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or adjacent non-residential activities or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement at least ten feet wide and across which there shall be no right of access may be required along the line of building sites abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use.
E. Lot and Parcel Side Lines: The lines of lots and parcels, as far as is practicable, shall run at right angles to the street upon which they face, except that on curved streets they shall be radial to the curve.

460.040 Grading of Building Sites.
Grading of building sites shall conform to the following standards unless physical conditions demonstrate the propriety of other standards.
A. Cut slopes shall not exceed one and one-half feet horizontally to one foot vertically.
B. Fill slopes shall not exceed two feet horizontally to one foot vertically.
C. The character of soil for fill and the characteristics of lots and parcels made usable by fill shall be suitable for the purpose intended.

460.050 Building Lines.
If special building setback lines are to be established in a subdivision, they shall be shown on the subdivision plat or, if temporary in nature, they shall be included in the deed restrictions.

460.060 Large Building Sites.
In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some future time are likely to be redivided, the Planning Commission may require that the blocks be of such size and shape, be so divided into building sites and contain such site restrictions as will provide for extension and opening of streets at intervals which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller size.

460.070 Land for Public Purposes.
If the City has an interest in acquiring a portion of a proposed subdivision for a public purpose, or if the City has been advised of such interest by a school district or other public agency, and there is reasonable assurance that steps will be taken to acquire the land, then the Planning Commission may require that those portions of the subdivision be reserved for public acquisition, for a period not to exceed one year, at a cost not to exceed the value of the land prior to subdivision.
Within or adjacent to a subdivision, a parcel of land of not less than six percent of the gross area of the subdivision shall be set aside and dedicated to the public by the subdivider. The parcel shall be approved by the Planning Commission as being suitable and adaptable for park and recreation uses. In the event no such area is suitable for park and recreation purposes, the subdivider shall, in lieu of setting aside land, pay into a public land acquisition fund a sum of money equal to current comparable assessed value. The sums so contributed shall be used to aid in securing suitable areas for park and recreation purposes to serve the area containing the subdivision. If the nature of the subdivision is such that over 34 percent of the tract to be subdivided is being dedicated to the public for streets, the requirements of this section shall be reduced so that the total obligation of the subdivider does not exceed 40 percent.

460.080 Improvement Procedures.
In addition to other requirements, improvements installed by a land divider either as a requirement of these regulations or at his own option, shall conform to the requirements of this Code and improvement standards and specifications followed by the City in accordance with the City Stormwater Master Plan and Water Master Plan, and shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved by the City. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the proposal, the plans may be required before approval of the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition.
B. Improvement work shall not commence until after the City is notified, and if work is discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until after the City is notified.
C. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the City. The City may require changes in typical sections and details in the public interest if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant the change.
D. Underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets. Stubs for service connections for underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed to the length obviating the necessity for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.
E. A map showing public improvements as built shall be filed with the City upon completion of the improvements.

460.090 Specifications for Improvements.
The Public Works Director shall prepare and submit to the City Council specifications to supplement the standards of this Code based on engineering standards appropriate for the improvements concerned. Specifications shall be prepared for the design and construction of required public improvements, such other public facilities as a developer may elect to install, and private streets.

460.100 Improvements in Subdivisions.
The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider and at the time of subdivision.
A. Streets: Public streets, including alleys, within the subdivision and public streets adjacent but only partially within the subdivision shall be improved. Catch basins shall be installed and connected to drainage tile leading to storm sewers or drainage ways. Upon completion of the street improvement, monuments shall be reestablished and protected in monument boxes at every public street intersection and all points of curvature and points of tangency of their center lines.
B. Surface Drainage and Storm Sewer System: Drainage facilities shall be provided within the subdivision and to connect the subdivision drainage to drainage ways or storm sewers outside the subdivision. Design of drainage within the subdivision, as provided by the City Engineer, shall take into account the capacity and grade necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from areas draining through the subdivision and to allow extension of the system to serve such areas.
C. Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve the subdivision and to connect the subdivision to existing mains. In the event it is impractical to connect the subdivision to the City trunk system, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council and the City Council may authorize by appropriate ordinance to which the emergency clause will not be attached after public hearing before the Council, if public need and necessity be shown, the use of septic tanks if lot areas are adequate considering the physical characteristics of the areas and if sewer laterals designed for future connection to a sewage disposal system are installed and sealed. Design by the City Engineer shall take into account the capacity and grade to allow for desirable extension beyond the subdivision.
If required sewer facilities will without further sewer construction directly serve property outside the subdivision, the following agreements will be made to equitably distribute the cost:
    (1) If the area outside the subdivision to be directly served by the sewer line has reached a state of development to justify sewer installation at the time, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council construction as an assessment project with such arrangement with the subdivider as is desirable to assure financing his share of the construction.
D. Water System: Water lines and fire hydrants serving each building site in the subdivision and connecting the subdivision to City mains shall be installed. The City Engineer's design shall take into account provisions for extension beyond the subdivision and to adequately grid the City system.
E. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public street and in any special pedestrian way within a development or a subdivision, except that in the case of primary or secondary arterials, or special type industrial districts, the Planning Commission may approve a subdivision without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian routes are available and if they provide safe, convenient and reasonably direct pedestrian circulation. On local City streets concrete sidewalks, five (5) feet wide (6 feet in commercial areas), separated from the street by a 4-5 foot wide planter strip for approved, uniformly planted street trees, are required. In the event a pathway is preferable for access, multi-use pathways shall be eight (8) feet wide, asphalted or compacted gravel to meet ADA standards. Pathways shall be located in a 20 foot wide public easement. On County streets, sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with Multnomah County Street Standards and regional street design standards.
F. Bicycle Routes: If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle routes, existing or planned in compliance with the City, County or Regional Transportation Plans, the Planning Commission may require the installation of separate bicycle lanes within streets and separate bicycle paths. Existing and planned bicycle routes in the City as illustrated in the City Transportation System Plan, shall be built to Multnomah County bicycle path standards.
G. Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections in a manner provided by pertinent City regulations.
H. Street Lights: Street lights shall be installed by the developer and shall be served from an underground source of supply. Street light style shall be approved by the City.
I. Other: The developer shall make necessary arrangements with utility companies or other persons or corporations affected for the installation of underground lines and facilities. Electrical lines and other wires, including but not limited to communication, street lighting and cable television, shall be placed underground.

460.110 Improvements in Partitions.
The same improvements shall be installed to serve each building site of a partition as is required for a subdivision. However, if the Planning Commission finds that the nature of development in the vicinity of the partition makes installation of some improvements unreasonable, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council such exception as appears necessary. The City Council shall, within 30 days after date of submission of such recommendation, approve or disapprove said recommendation. In lieu of accepting an improvement, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that the improvement be installed in the area under special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of the City.

Section 500 LAND USE REVIEW PROCEDURES
            APPLICATION PROCEDURES
            ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS
SECTION 520  QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCESS
SECTION 530  PUBLIC HEARINGS
SECTION 540  DECISION
SECTION 550  APPEALS
            LEGISLATIVE PROCESS

Application Procedures

500.100 Land Use Application Procedures.
1. A land use application shall be processed under a Type I, II or III procedure, as described in this Section.
2. Where there is a question as to the appropriate type of procedure, the City Administrator shall determine the type of procedure to be utilized based upon the most similar land use application procedure specified by this Code or other established policy.
3. Where a proposal involves more than one application for the same property, the applicant(s) may submit concurrent applications which shall be processed simultaneously in accordance with the highest number procedure specified. When concurrent applications are so received and accepted as completed, the 120-day requirement of Section 500.130(2) shall apply as if a single application had been made.

500.105 Coordination of Land Use Application Procedure.
The City Administrator shall be responsible for coordination of the land use application and decision-making procedure. The City Administrator shall issue a land use approval for applications and proposed developments that are in compliance with the provisions of this Code. Before issuing the approval, the City Administrator shall be provided with the information required to determine full compliance with the requirements of this Code.

500.110 Application Contents.
A land use application shall consist of the following:
1. Explanation of intent, nature and proposed use of the development, pertinent background information and other information that may have a bearing in determining the action to be taken, including submission of detailed findings where such are required by the provisions of this Code.
2. Signed statement indicating that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership or control of the applicant, or that the applicant has the consent of all partners in ownership of the affected property.
3. Property description and assessor map parcel number(s).
4. Drawings which show the site plan including all structures (both existing and proposed), vehicular and pedestrian access, landscaping, on-site parking and other information necessary to review the application.
5. Additional information required by other sections of this Code because of the type of development proposal or the area involved.
6. Duplicates of the above information as required by the City Administrator.
7. Submission of application fees as established by the City Council.

500.115 Submission of Land Use Applications.
1. Application materials shall be submitted to the City Administrator who shall have the date of submission indicated on each copy of the materials submitted.
2. Land use applications requiring a public hearing shall be submitted at least 45 days in advance of the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the hearings body unless waived by the City Administrator when adequate notice can otherwise be achieved. All documents or evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be submitted to the City Administrator and made available to the public at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. If additional documents, evidence or written materials are provided in support of that application less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, any party shall be entitled to a continuance of the hearing. Such a continuance shall not be subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178.
3. Within thirty (30) calendar days the City Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete. The City Administrator shall notify the applicant when the application is found to be incomplete and identify what additional information is needed. An application which has been determined to be incomplete may be supplemented, amended or resubmitted, at the City Administrator's discretion.
4. Upon request, the application file shall be made available to the public for inspection at no cost and copies will be provided at reasonable cost.

500.120 Referral and Review of Land Use Applications.
Within five (5) working days of accepting an application as complete, the City Administrator shall do the following:
1. Provide appropriate information to all government agencies and private utilities identified by the City Administrator as having possible interest in reviewing and commenting on the development proposal. If the government agency or private utility does not comment by the date of the first hearing the government agency or private utility is presumed to have no comments or objections.
2. Provide for notices to be given and hearings to be established as required under Type II or III procedures established in this Section.

500.130 Land Use Application Decision.
1. Within five (5) days of final action on a land use application, the City Administrator shall provide written notice of the decision to the applicant and any other parties entitled to notice. The notice shall state the effective date of the decision, describe the right of appeal, and summarize the reasons for the decision and any conditions of approval or indicate where such can be reviewed in detail.
2. The City shall take final action on all land use requests which are wholly within the authority and control of the City within 120 days of receipt of a completed application. However, by agreement with the applicant, this deadline may be extended for any reasonable length of time.

500.140 Action on Resubmission of Denied Application.
An applicant may make appropriate alterations to a proposal which has previously been denied and resubmit it with a payment of any required fee.

Administrative Process

Type I Procedure

510.100 Purpose.
The purpose of the Type I procedure is to provide for land use review based on standards specified in this Code which do not require interpretation or the exercise of policy or legal judgement. Approval of a Type I land use application is not a land use decision. (See definitions).

510.110 No Hearing or Notifications Required.
Under the Type I procedure, an application shall be processed by the City Administrator without need for public hearing or notification.

510.120 Examples.
Examples of applications processed through a Type I procedure include, but are not limited to: detached single family dwellings and residential accessory buildings.

Section 520 Quasi-Judicial Process

Type II Procedure

520.100 Purpose.
The purpose of the Type II procedure is to provide for the review of certain applications within the City by the Planning Commission or Design Review Board at a public hearing.

520.110 Notification.
Under the Type II procedure, an application is scheduled for public hearing before either the Planning Commission or the Design Review Board. The City Administrator shall notify all property owners within 150 feet of the subject property and any recognized neighborhood organization whose boundaries include the site. For proposals located adjacent to a state or county roadway or where proposals are expected to have an impact on a state or county transportation facility, notice shall also be sent to ODOT or Multnomah County as appropriate.

520.120 Hearing.
The review body shall:
a. review the request and any written comments and testimony;
b. adopt findings based on the established criteria; and,
c. make a decision by approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application.
Conditions and/or restrictions may be applied to the approval of any land use application granted under a Type II procedure in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Code.

520.130 Examples.
Examples of applications processed through a Type II procedure include, but are not limited to Design Review and certain non-conforming use reviews.

Type III Procedure

520.140 Purpose.
The purpose of the Type III procedure is to provide for the review of certain land use applications by the Planning Commission at a public hearing. These decisions are usually complex in nature, and require the interpretation of the Comprehensive Plan policies and the criteria of this Code.

520.150 Notification.
Under the Type III Procedure, an application is scheduled for public hearing before the Planning Commission. The City Administrator shall notify all property owners within 250 feet of the subject property. The City Administrator shall post notices of the requested review and public meeting on the subject site and any recognized neighborhood organization whose boundaries include the site. For proposals located adjacent to a state or county roadway or where proposals are expected to have an impact on a state or county transportation facility, notice shall also be sent to ODOT or Multnomah County as appropriate.

520.160 Hearing.
The Planning Commission shall:
a. review the request and any written comments and testimony;
b. adopt findings based on the established criteria; and
c. make a decision by approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application.
Conditions and/or restrictions may be applied to the approval of any land use application granted under a Type III procedure in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Code.

520.170 Examples.
Examples of applications processed through a Type III procedure include, but are not limited to Zone changes, Comprehensive Plan amendments and conditional uses.

Section 530 Public Hearings

530.100 Responsibility for Hearings.
The City Administrator shall carry out the following duties pertaining to a hearing, all in accordance with other provisions of this Code:
1. Schedule and assign the matter for review and hearing.
2. Conduct the correspondence of the review body.
3. Provide notices of public hearings as required by the Code and state law.
4. Maintain a record and enter into the record relevant dates such as those of giving notice, hearings, postponement, and continuances and a summary of action taken by the review body.
5. Prepare minutes to include the decision on the matter heard and the reasons given for the decision.
6. Reduce the decisions of the review body to writing and maintain permanent record of such.
7. Provide advance notice of all hearings and written decisions to persons requesting the same and not entitled to such by the section provided that such persons pay the actual cost for the service provided as established by the City (applicants excepted).

530.110 Hearing Record.
The hearing proceedings will be recorded either stenographically or electronically.
1. When an electronic recording is made, testimony shall be transcribed at the expense of the requesting party if required for judicial review or local appeal proceedings. The transcribing fee may include all actual costs up to $500 plus one-half the actual costs over $500 or as authorized by state law.
2. The review body shall, where practical, retain as part of the hearing record each item of physical or documentary evidence presented and shall have the items marked to show the identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on behalf of a proponent or opponent. Exhibits received into evidence shall be retained in the hearing file until after all appeal periods have expired, at which time the exhibits may be released. Any physical evidence presented at the public hearing shall be submitted to the review body staff, distributed to members, and shall become part of the record.
3. If a staff report and recommendation are made, they shall be included in the record.
4. A person shall have access to the record of the proceedings at reasonable times, places, and circumstances. A person shall be entitled to make copies of the record at the person's own expense.

530.120 Mailed Notice.
1. Addresses for a mailed notice required by this Code shall be taken from current County Assessor records. Any deficiency in the form of notice prescribed in this section or a failure of a property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate an action if a good faith attempt was made to comply with the requirements of this Code for notice.
2. In addition to persons receiving notice as required by the matter under consideration, the City Administrator may provide notice to others he has reason to believe are affected or otherwise represent an interest that may be affected by the proposed development.
3. The cost of notice mailings shall be included in the land use application fee.
4. Notice of public hearing shall be sent by mail at least twenty (20) days before the hearing and shall contain the following information:
    (a) The reviewing body, the date, time, and place of the hearing.
    (b) The street address or other easily understood geographic reference to the subject property.
    (c) The nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be authorized.
    (d) Where information may be examined and when and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the review body may be submitted.
    (e) A list of the applicable criteria from the ordinance and/or the plan that apply to the application.
    (f) A statement that failure to raise an issue, including constitutional or other issues regarding proposed conditions of approval, accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issues precludes appeal to the City Council or Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue, or to seek damages in circuit court due to a condition of approval.
    (g) The name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained.
    (h) A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and copies will be provided at reasonable cost.
    (i) A statement that a copy of any staff report that might be produced will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost.
    (j) A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony and that only those making an appearance of record, either in person or in writing, shall be entitled to appeal.
    (k) A general explanation of the procedure for the conduct of hearings.

530.125 Posted Notice.
The sites that are the subject of Type III quasi-judicial public hearings shall be posted. At the discretion of the City Administrator the applicant may be responsible for providing a sign frame for the notice and also responsible for posting the notice at the correct time and location. The actual notice shall be provided by the City. The posting shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The notice frame shall be a minimum of 1 ½ feet by 2 feet.
2. The notice shall be posted in a location which is visible from a traveled public road or street abutting the property. If no public street abuts the property, the notice shall be placed in such a manner to be generally visible to the public.
3. The notice shall be posted for at least seven (7) consecutive days prior to the first scheduled public hearing on the matter.
4. If the subject property is a corner lot, then two signs are required in locations defined in (2) above.
5. When the applicant is required to post the notice, an affidavit of posting shall be filed with the City Administrator at least five (5) days before any hearing.
6. If the subject property is not properly posted as set forth in this section, the hearing may be postponed by the City Administrator until such provisions are met.
7. The posted notice shall display the nature of the application and a telephone number for more information. The posted notice shall also include a photocopy of the original mailed notice sent to affected property owners.

530.130 Compliance and Waiver of Notice.
1. Notice by mail shall be deemed received three calendar days after the notice is deposited with the US Postal Service, first class postage, fully prepaid, for mailing to the addressee at the addressee's last known mailing address. Failure of the addressee to actually receive notice shall not invalidate the proceeding.
2. Posted notice is deemed given when the sign is first posted.
3. The requirement for notice shall be deemed satisfied as to any person who, in any manner, obtains actual knowledge of the time, place, and subject matter of the hearing prior thereto.
4. Appearance and testimony or comment on the merits of the proposed action by any person at a hearing, or submission by any person of written comment directed to the merits of the proposed action at or prior to the hearing and after the proceedings was initiated, shall be deemed a waiver of such person of any defect in notice.

530.140 Challenges to Impartiality.
A party to a hearing or a member of a review body may challenge the qualifications of a member of the review body to participate in the hearing and decision regarding the matter. The challenge shall be incorporated into the record at the time of the hearing.

530.145 Disqualification.
No member of a review body shall participate in a discussion of the proposal without removing himself or herself from the bench or shall vote on the proposal when any of the following conditions exist:
1. Any of the following have a direct or substantial financial interest in the proposal: the review body member or the member's spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which the member is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or in which the member is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment or is otherwise in a position of conflict of interest as determined by state law.
2. The member has a direct private interest in the proposal.
3. Any other valid reason for which the member has determined that participation in the hearing and decision cannot be in an impartial manner.

530.150 Participation by Interested Officer or Employee.
No officer or employee of the City who has a financial or other private interest in a proposal shall participate in discussion with or give an official opinion or staff report to the review body on the proposal without first declaring for the record the nature and extent of such interest.

530.155 Ex Parte Contacts.
The general public has a right to have review body members free from pre-hearing or ex parte contacts on matters heard by them. It is recognized that a countervailing public right is free access to public officials on any matter. Should ex parte communication occur, at the beginning of the hearing, the review body member shall reveal the source and substance of any significant pre-hearing or ex parte contacts regarding any matter at the commencement of the public hearing on such and the presiding officer shall allow for rebuttal of any information received through such ex parte contact. If such contacts have not impaired the member's impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall so state and shall participate or abstain in accordance with the following section.

530.160 Abstention or Disqualification.
1. An abstaining or disqualified member of the review body may be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. A member who represents personal interest at a hearing may do so only by making full disclosure of his or her status and position at the time of addressing the review body, removing himself or herself from the seat on the hearing body and physically joining the audience.
2. If a quorum of a review body abstains or is disqualified, all members present after stating their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall automatically be requalified and proceed to resolve the issues necessary to hear the matter before them.
3. A member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or final decision regarding the matter of the hearing unless the member has reviewed the evidence received and so states on the record.

530.170 Burden and Nature of Proof.
The burden of proof is upon the proponent or appellant. The more drastic the change or the greater the impact of the proposal in the area, the greater is the burden upon the proponent. The proposal must be supported by proof that it conforms to the applicable provisions of this Code, especially the specific criteria set forth for the particular type of decision under consideration.

530.180 Hearing Procedures.
Hearing procedures will depend in part on the nature of the hearing. The following may be supplemented by appropriate rules announced by the presiding officer:
1. The presiding officer will state the case and call the public hearing to order, informing those present that testimony and evidence is to be directed towards the applicable criteria for the case and that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-makers and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issues precludes appeal to the State Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue. The presiding officer may establish the time allowed for the presentation of information.
2. Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted in the record.
3. Any abstentions or disqualifications shall be determined. Members shall announce all conflicts of interest and shall disclose the time, place, and nature of any ex parte contacts they have had. Parties to the case shall have the opportunity to rebut any information contained in the ex parte contact.
4. The review body may view the area under consideration for purposes of evaluating the proposal, but shall state the place, time, manner, and circumstances of such viewing in the record.
5. The presiding officer at the hearing may take official notice of known information related to the issue, such as provisions of federal or state law, or of an ordinance, resolution, official policy or charter of the City.
6. Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the review body in the determination of the matters. Parties requesting official notice shall do so on the record.
7. Presentation of staff report when one is provided, including a list of the criteria applying to the issue(s) being heard. City staff may also present additional information whenever allowed by the presiding officer during the proceedings.
8. Presentation of information by the applicant or those representing the applicant.
9. Presentation of evidence or inquiries by those persons who support the proposed change.
10. Presentation of evidence or inquiries by those persons who oppose the proposed change.
11. Presentation of evidence or inquires by those persons who do not necessarily support or oppose the proposed change.
12. If additional documents or evidence are provided in support of an application, any party shall, upon request, be entitled to a continuance of the hearing to allow for adequate preparation of rebuttal. Such a continuance shall not be subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178.
13. Only the applicant shall have the right to present rebuttal testimony. If the presiding officer allows rebuttal by an opponent, the proponent or applicant shall have the right to an additional and final rebuttal.
14. The presiding officer may approve or deny a request to ask a question from a person attending the hearing. Unless the presiding officer specifies otherwise, the presiding officer will direct the question to the person who has submitted testimony.
15. At the close of presentation of information the presiding officer shall declare that the hearing is closed unless a continuance has been granted.
16. Unless there is a continuance, if a participant so requests before the conclusion of the first evidentiary hearing, the record shall remain open for at least seven (7) calendar days after the hearing.
17. When the hearing has ended, the review body may openly discuss the issue and may further question a person submitting information or the staff if opportunity for rebuttal is provided.
18. If the hearing is closed, it shall be reopened only upon a majority vote of the review body.
19. Upon reopening a hearing, any person may raise new issues which relate to the new evidence, testimony, or criteria for decision-making which apply to the matter at issue.

Section 540 Decision

540.100 Findings.
The review body shall make a decision and adopt findings based upon the information accompanying the application, staff report, and/or evidence presented at the hearing. The finding shall address:
1. Applicable Zoning and Development Code criteria.
2. For approval, a statement of the facts establishing compliance with each applicable policy or criteria. For denial, a statement of the facts establishing non-compliance with any required policy or criteria.
3. Conditions of approval may be attached to a land use decision. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, a time limit, a termination date, a requirement for a performance bond or other type of security, and other conditions which meet one of the following criteria:
    (a) the condition is required to protect the public from the potentially deleterious effects from the proposed use;
    (b) the condition is required to fulfill the public service or public facility demand created by the proposed use; or
    (c) the condition is required to carry out the policies of an adopted City policy, plan or ordinance provision.

540.110 Notice of Decision.
1. The City Administrator shall provide written notice of the decision of final action on a land use application, to the applicant and any other parties entitled to notice. The notice shall state the effective date of the decision, describe the right of appeal, and summarize the reasons for the decision and any conditions of approval or indicate where such can be reviewed in detail.
2. The City shall take final action on all land use requests which are wholly within the authority and control of the City within 120 days of receipt of a completed application. However, by agreement with the applicant, this deadline may be extended for any reasonable length of time.

540.120 Effective Date of Decision.
The Planning Commission or Design Review Board decision in any land use review becomes effective one day after the last day on which an appeal can be filed.

Section 550 Appeals

550.100 Appeal Procedures.
1. A decision of the Planning Commission or Design Review Board may be appealed to the City Council by an affected party by filing a "Notice of Appeal" within 14 days of the date the notice of decision is mailed.
2. For any appeal proceeding, the City Administrator shall cause notice to be provided in the same manner as provided for the original decision, those testifying and any other parties to the proceedings who request notice in writing.
3. A decision of the City Council may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals by filing a notice of intent to appeal not later than 21 days after the decision becomes final.

550.110 Requirements of Notice of Appeal.
A "Notice of Appeal" shall contain:
1. An identification of the decision sought to be reviewed, including the date of the decision.
2. The name, address, signature, phone number and a statement of the interest of the person seeking review and that he/she was a party to the initial proceedings.
3. A statement of which approval criteria the decision violates.
4. Any required fee as established by the City Council.

550.120 De Novo Hearing.
The City Council shall hear an appeal as a "de novo hearing" on the merits of the case. "De novo hearing" shall mean a hearing by the City Council as if the request had not been previously heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence, and other material from the record of the previous consideration may be included in the record of the review.

550.130 City Council Decision.
Upon review, the City Council may affirm, remand, reverse, or modify in whole or part a determination or requirement of the decision that is under review. When the City Council modifies or renders a decision that reverses a decision of the review body, the City Council shall set forth its findings and state its reasons for taking the action. When the City Council elects to remand the matter back to the previous review body for such further consideration as the City Council deems necessary, it may include a statement explaining the error found to have materially affected the outcome of the original decision and the action necessary to rectify such.

550.140 Effective Date of Decision.
The decision by City Council in any land use matter becomes effective seven (7) days after the "Notice of Decision" (as described in Section 540.110) is mailed.

Legislative Process

560.100 Purpose.
The legislative process provides for the establishment and modification of land use plans, policies, regulations and guidelines. A required public hearing provides an opportunity for public comment and input on actions which may affect large areas of the City.

560.110 Initiation.
1. The City Council may make changes in the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning and Development Code provisions and designations by legislative act where such changes affect a large number of persons, properties, or situations and are applied over a large area.
2. The City Council, Planning Commission, or the Design Review Board may initiate a review on any legislative matter.

560.120 Hearing Required.
The Planning Commission and City Council must hold at least one public hearing before recommending action on a legislative matter.

560.130 Hearing Notice.
1. The City Administrator may inform persons believed to have a particular interest and provide the general public with reasonable opportunity to be aware of the hearings on the proposal. For proposals located adjacent to a state or county roadway or where proposals are expected to have an impact on a state or county transportation facility, notice shall also be sent to ODOT or Multnomah County as appropriate.
2. Notice shall be posted in public places at least one week prior to the hearing and additionally as may be required by state law for a particular proceeding.
3. Posted notice shall include the following information:
    (a) The reviewing body, the date, time, and place of hearing.
    (b) The nature of the proposed amendment.
    (c) The name and telephone number of the staff member to contact for more information.
4. Mailed notice to individual property owners shall be provided as follows:
    (a) At least 20 days and not more than 40 days before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend an existing comprehensive plan or an element thereof, or to adopt a new comprehensive plan, the City shall cause a written individual notice of land use change to be mailed to each owner whose property would have to be rezoned in order to comply with the amended or new comprehensive plan if the ordinance becomes effective.
    (b) In addition, at least 20 days but not more than 40 days before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to rezone the property, the City shall send a written notice of land use change to be mailed to the owner of each lot or parcel of property that the new ordinance proposes to rezone.
    (c) The notice shall describe in detail how the proposed ordinance would affect the use of the property. The notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the affected property owner at the address shown on the last available complete tax assessment roll. The notice shall contain the following language in boldfaced type at the top of the page:This is to notify you that the City of Wood Village has proposed a land use regulation that will affect the permissible uses of your land. On _______ (date of public hearing) the City Council of Wood Village will hold a public hearing regarding the adoption of Ordinance # _____. The City Council has determined that adoption of the ordinance will affect the permissible uses of your property and may reduce the value of your property. Ordinance # ______ is available for inspection at City Hall located at 2055 NE 238th Drive, Wood Village, Oregon. A copy of Ordinance # ______ also is available for purchase at the cost of copying the document. For additional information concerning Ordinance # ______ you may call City Hall at 503-667-6211.
    (d) Notice for Periodic Review. At least 30 days before the adoption or amendment of a comprehensive plan or land use regulation by the City of Wood Village pursuant to a requirement of periodic review of the comprehensive plan, the City shall send a written individual notice of the land use change to the owner of each lot or parcel that will be rezoned as a result of adoption or enactment. The notice shall describe in detail how the ordinance or plan amendment will affect the use of the property. The notice shall contain the following language in boldfaced type across the top of the page:This is to notify you that the City of Wood Village has proposed a land use regulation that will affect the permissible uses of your land. As a result of an order of the Land Conservation and Development Commission, Wood Village has proposed Ordinance # _____. Wood Village has determined that the adoption of this ordinance will affect the permissible uses of your property and may reduce the value of your property. Ordinance # _____ will become effective on (date). Ordinance # ______ is available for inspection at City Hall located at 2055 NE 238th Drive, Wood Village, Oregon. A copy of Ordinance # ______ also is available for purchase at the cost of copying the document. For additional information concerning Ordinance # ______ you may call City Hall at 503-667-6211.

560.140 Hearing Procedures.
Interested persons may submit written recommendations and comments in advance of the hearing and this information shall be available for public inspection. At the hearing, written recommendations and other information will be received and oral statements will be permitted. The presiding officer may establish a time limit for presentation of information.

560.150 Planning Commission Recommendation.
In preparing its recommendation to the City Council, the Planning Commission shall do the following:
1. Evaluate the proposal based on the relevant Zoning and Development Code criteria.
2. Prepare a recommendation and make findings in support of such recommendation.

560.160 City Council Action.
1. In reaching a decision on a legislative matter, the Council shall adopt findings applicable to the relevant policies and criteria in support of the decision.
The City Council may:
    (a) Enact, amend or defeat all or part of the proposal under consideration, or
    (b) Refer some or all of the proposal back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.

560.170 Notice to DLCD on Legislative Matters.
1. The City Administrator shall notify Department of Land Conservation and Development for adoption of or amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning and Development Code, or any other land use regulations. The notice shall be provided at least 45 days before the proposed first hearing on adoption and the notice shall contain information sufficient to inform the Department as to the effect of the proposal.
2. If the City determines that the statewide goals do not apply to a particular proposed amendment or new regulation, notice under subsection (1) of this section is not required. In addition, the City may consider an amendment or new regulation with less than 45 days notice if the City Council determines that there are emergency circumstances requiring expedited review.

560.180 Decision Notice Requirements.
1. Within five (5) working days following adoption of an amendment or new land use regulation, the City Administrator shall forward to the Department of Land Conservation and Development a copy of the adopted text and findings and notify the Department of any substantial changes which may have occurred in the proposal since any previous notification to the Department.
2. Within five (5) working days, the City Administrator shall also notify any person who participated in the proceedings leading to the decision. Such notice shall briefly describe the final action taken, state the date and effective date of the decision, and explain the requirements for appealing the action under ORS 197.830 to 197.845.

560.190 Appeal.
A legislative land use decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals.

Section 600 LAND USE REVIEW CRITERIA
            REVIEW CRITERIA
SECTION 610  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS
SECTION 620  CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION 630  DESIGN REVIEW
SECTION 640  NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
SECTION 650  VACATIONS
SECTION 660  VARIANCES
SECTION 670  ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS
SECTION 680  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

Review Criteria

600.010 Overview.
The Zoning and Development Code provides a combination of non- discretionary and discretionary standards for the City to use in evaluating land use proposals for compliance with the use and development requirements of the Code. The non-discretionary criteria provide the certainty needed in most situations by providing straightforward, clear, and objective standards. Discretionary criteria provide needed flexibility by allowing more subjective standards and objectives, and provide for the modification of regulations in response to specific site conditions. This chapter contains the criteria of the following land use applications:
•Adjustments
•Nonconforming Situations
•Comprehensive Plan Amendments
•Vacations
•Conditional Uses
•Variances
•Design Review
•Zoning and Development
•Zoning Map Amendments Code Amendments

600.020 Function of Review Criteria.
The review criteria that are listed with a specific review reflect the findings which must be made to approve the request.
A. Review criteria set the bounds for the issues that must be addressed by the applicant and which may be raised by the City or affected parties. A proposal that complies with all the criteria will be approved. A proposal that can comply with the criteria with mitigation measures or limitations will be approved with conditions. A proposal that cannot comply with the criteria outright or cannot comply with mitigation measures will be denied.
B. The review criteria have been derived from and are based on the Comprehensive Plan. Reviews against the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan are not required unless specifically stated. Fulfillment of all requirements and review criteria means the proposal is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
C. When review criteria refer to the request's meeting a specific threshold, such as adequate services or no significant detrimental environmental impacts, the threshold includes any proposed improvements, mitigation measures, or limitations. All proposed improvements, mitigation measures, and limitations must be identified prior to a final decision by a review body.

600.030 Burden of Proof.
The burden of proof is on the applicant to show that the review criteria are met. The burden is not on the City or other parties to show that the criteria have not been met.

600.040 Conditions of Approval.
The City may attach conditions to the approval of a land use decision in accordance with Section 540.100 (3) - Findings.

600.050 Relationship to Other Regulations.
Approval of a land use application based on review criteria in this Code does not relieve the applicant of responsibility for compliance with other applicable codes, ordinances, statutes or regulations.

Section 610 Comprehensive Plan Amendments

610.010 Purpose.
The Comprehensive Plan is the official and controlling land use document of the City, providing guidance to both public and private activities which affect the growth, development, and livability of the community. The Plan is intended to be a flexible document, reflecting changing circumstances and community attitudes through occasional amendments. This section provides a process whereby the Comprehensive Plan may be amended without violating the integrity of the Plan or frustrating its basic purposes. This process applies to proposed changes to the Comprehensive Plan map designations, and text.

610.020 Initiating a Comprehensive Plan Amendment.
Comprehensive Plan amendments which are legislative in nature can be initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. The City Administrator and others may request the Planning Commission to consider an initiation. Requests for Comprehensive Plan amendments which are quasi- judicial in nature may be initiated by an applicant, the Planning Commission or the City Council initiations by the Planning Commission or City Council are made without prejudice towards the outcome.

610.030 Procedure.
Requests for Plan amendments determined by the City Administrator to be legislative in nature are reviewed through the legislative procedures stated in Section 560 - Legislative Process. Quasi-judicial requests are reviewed through the Type III procedure of Section 520 - Quasi-Judicial Process.

610.040 Review Criteria.
Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan will be approved if the Council finds that the applicant has shown that the following applicable criteria are met:
A. A legislative amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the statewide planning goals, and any relevant area plan adopted by the City Council.
B. A legislative amendment is needed to meet changing conditions or new laws.
C. The requested designation for a quasi-judicial map amendment meets all of the following tests:
    (1) The requested designation for the site has been evaluated against relevant Comprehensive Plan policies and on balance has been found to be more supportive of the Comprehensive Plan as a whole than the old designation.
    (2) The requested designation is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan map pattern.
    (3) The requested designation is consistent with the Statewide Planning Goals.
D. The review body shall find that:
The transportation system is capable of supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area and will not significantly affect a transportation facility. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements, neighborhood impacts and pedestrian safety.
“Significantly” affect the transportation facility means the proposal would:
    (1) As measured at the end of the Wood Village TSP planning period or 15 years, whichever is greater, the proposal would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or
    (2) Reduce the performance of an existing of planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable; or
    (3) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable.
E. Amendments that Affect Transportation Facilities. Except as provided in Subsection F, amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the Wood Village TSP. This shall be accomplished by one of the following:
    (1) Adopting measures that demonstrate that allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility; or
    (2) Amending the Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan to provide transportation facilities improvements, or services adequate to support the proposed land uses; such amendments shall include a funding plan to ensure the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period; or
    (3) Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
    (4) Amending the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility; or
    (5) Providing other measures as a condition for development or through a development agreement or similar funding method, specifying when such measures will be provided.
F. Exceptions. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation with a significant effect on a transportation facility, where the facility is already performing below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Wood Village TSP or the Regional Transportation Plan, may be approved when all of the following criteria are met:
    (1) The amendment does not include property located in an interchange areas, as defined under applicable law;
    (2) The currently planned facilities, improvements or services are not adequate to achieve the standard;
    (3) Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigate the impacts of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of the development; and
    (4) The road authority provides a written statement that the proposed funding and timing for the proposed development mitigation are sufficient to avoid further degradation to the facility.

610.050 Corrections to the Comprehensive Plan Map.
The City Administrator may initiate a review through the Type II procedure for the types of corrections to the Comprehensive Plan Map listed below:
A. The correction may be made for mapping errors such as:
    (1) A map line that was intended to follow a topographical feature does not do so. Topographical features include the tops and bottoms of hillsides, the banks of water bodies, and center lines of creeks or drainage ditches;
    (2) The line on the map does not match the legal description or map shown or references in the ordinance which applied to the designation; or
    (3) When there is a discrepancy between maps and there is a clear legislative intent for where the line should be.
B. The correction may be made when a map line is based on the location of a reference item that has since been moved. Reference items are rights-of-way, tentative rights-of-way, utility easements and similar items. Map line changes in these cases must not be more than a minor change to the map pattern and must not result in any significant impacts to abutting lots.

Section 620 Conditional Uses

620.010 Purpose.
Certain uses are conditional uses instead of being allowed outright, although they may have beneficial effects and serve important public interests. They are subject to the conditional use regulations because they may, but not necessarily do, have significant adverse effects on the environment, overburden public services, change the desired character of an area, or create major nuisances. A review of these proposed uses is necessary due to the potential individual or cumulative impacts they may have on the surrounding area or neighborhood. The conditional use process provides an opportunity to allow the use when there are minimal impacts, to allow the use but impose conditions to address identified concerns, or to deny the use if the concerns cannot be resolved.
Uses identified in Sections 200 and 300 as requiring Conditional Use approvals may be permitted, enlarged or altered in accordance with the provisions of this Section. In addition, where a use is not authorized in any district or where ambiguity exists concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use or type of development within the intent of this Code, the use or type of development may be established by Conditional Use approval in accordance with this Section.

620.020 Scope.
Approval of a conditional use permit shall not constitute a zone change and shall be granted only for the specific use requested. Any change of use or modification of a limitation or condition shall be subject to Planning Commission approval under the Conditional Use review process.

620.030 Procedure.
Conditional Use applications or modifications to an existing Conditional Use Permit are reviewed as a Type III procedure.

620.040 Review Criteria.
Requests for Conditional Uses will be approved if the review body finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following criteria have been met, either outright, or with conditions that bring the proposal into compliance:
A. The use is listed as a conditional use in the base zone or is approved by the Planning Commission for consideration as a conditional use.
B. The proposed use will be compatible with existing or anticipated uses in terms of size, building scale and style, intensity, setbacks, and landscaping or the proposal calls for mitigation of difference in appearance or scale through such means as setbacks, screening, landscaping or other design features.
C. The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area in a manner which substantially limits, impairs, or precludes the use of surrounding properties for the primary uses in the zone.
D. The transportation system is capable of supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area and will not significantly affect a transportation facility. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements, neighborhood impacts and pedestrian safety.
“Significantly” affect the transportation facility means the proposal would:
    (1) As measured at the end of the Wood Village TSP planning period or 15 years, whichever is greater, the proposal would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or
    (2) Reduce the performance of an existing of planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable; or
    (3) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable.
    If it is determined that a proposed land use significantly affects a transportation facility, the applicant shall assure that the allowed uses are consistent with the function, capacity and level of service of the facility by one of the following methods:
        (a) Alter land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
        (b) Provide measures demonstrating that the use can be consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility, or provide other measures as a condition of development through a development agreement or similar method, specifying when such measures will be provided.
E. Public service for water, sanitary and storm sewer, water management and for fire and police protection are capable of servicing the proposed use.
F. The proposal will not have significant adverse impact on the livability of nearby residentially zoned lands due to:
    (1) Noise, glare, odor, litter, and hours of operation.
    (2) Privacy and safety issues.
G. Conditional Uses which fall within the Waste Related Use Category (See Section 710.330) must also meet the criteria defined in the Mitigation Agreement for Siting Solid Waste Facilities between Metro and the City.

620.050 Conditions of Approval.
The review body may attach conditions to a conditional use approval to ensure that the proposal will conform to the applicable review criteria. Some of the most frequently imposed conditions relate to but are not limited to, the following: special yards and spaces; fences and walls; street dedications and improvement petitions (or bonds); improvement of public facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, sidewalks, curbs, and fire hydrants; ingress and egress; off-street parking; signs; building textures, colors, architectural features and height; landscaping, screening and buffering noise, vibration, odors or other similar nuisances; hours for certain activities; time period within which the proposed use shall be developed; duration of use; preservation of natural vegetative growth and open space; public safety & crime prevention; and undergrounding of utilities.

620.060 Conditional Use Permit.
A conditional use permit shall be obtained for each approved conditional use before site development begins. The permit shall specify any conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by the Planning Commission in addition to those specifically set forth in this section.

620.070 Expiration.
Approval of a conditional use permit shall be void after two (2) years, or a lesser time as may be specified by the Planning Commission, unless substantial construction has taken place. A one (1) year extension may be granted by the Planning Commission through a Type III procedure if the applicant requests such an extension before the expiration of the initial time limit.

620.080 Building Permit.
A building permit for all or any portion of a conditional use shall be issued only on the basis of the plan as approved by the Planning Commission. Any changes in the approved plan shall be submitted to the City for processing as a modification to a conditional use.

620.090 Revocation.
A conditional use permit shall be subject to revocation by the Planning Commission through a Type III procedure. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show why the conditional use permit should not be revoked. The Planning Commission may revoke the permit if:
1. the application contained false or misleading information; or
2. the conditions of approval have not been met or are not being maintained; or
3. the scope of the use has changed so as to be significantly different than that originally contemplated.
The Planning Commission may also attach new conditions and reapprove the conditional use permit as part of its consideration of a conditional use revocation.

Section 630 Design Review

630.010 Purpose.
Design Review of certain developments and improvements is intended to promote functional, safe, innovative and attractive site development compatible with the natural and man-made environment.

630.020 Design Review Plan.
When required by this Code a Design Review Plan shall be submitted. The elements of a Design Review Plan are: the layout and design of all existing and proposed improvements, including but not limited to, buildings, structures, parking and circulation areas, outdoor storage areas, landscape areas, service and delivery areas, outdoor recreation areas, retaining walls, signs and graphics, cut and fill actions, accessways, pedestrian walkways, buffering and screening measures.

630.030 Design Review Plan Approval Required.
No buildings, grading, parking, land use, sign or other required permit shall be issued for a use subject to this section, nor shall such a use be commenced, enlarged, altered or changed until a final design review plan is approved by the Design Review Board.

630.040 Application of Design Review Regulations.
Except for single family dwellings in Light Residential zones, all new construction, remodeling or alteration of an existing structure or building, parking development or alteration, sign erection or alteration or any land use shall be subject to Design Review under this Section.

630.050 Compliance.
A. Non-compliance by the applicant or his successor in interest with a final approved design review plan, as approved, shall be considered a zoning code violation and enforced as such.
B. The City Council or Planning Commission may, as a condition of approval of land use reviews, require that design review plan approval be obtained prior to issuance of any required permit.

630.060 Procedure.
Requests for Design Review shall be processed under the Type II procedure.

630.070 Design Review Plan Contents.
A. Any preliminary or final design review plan shall be filed on forms provided by the City Administrator and shall be accompanied by such drawings, sketches and descriptions as are necessary to describe the proposed development. A plan shall not be deemed complete unless all information requested is provided.
B. Contents:
    (1) Preliminary Site Development Plan;
    (2) Preliminary Site Analysis Diagram;
    (3) Preliminary Architectural Drawings, indicating floor plans and elevations;
    (4) Preliminary Landscape Plan;
    (5) Design Review Application Fee;
    (6) For developments that generate more than 400 average daily motor vehicle trips (ADT’s), the applicant shall provide adequate information, such as a traffic impact study or traffic counts, to demonstrate the level of impact to the surrounding street system.
C. A preliminary site analysis diagram may be in freehand form and shall generally indicate the following characteristics:
    (1) Relation to adjacent lands;
    (2) Topography;
    (3) Natural drainage;
    (4) Natural features and structures having a visual or other significant relationship with the site.
D. A preliminary site development plan may be in freehand form and shall generally indicate the following as appropriate to the nature of the use:
    (1) Access to site from adjacent rights-of-way, streets, and arterials;
        (a) Pedestrian connections shall be provided pursuant to standards in Section 460.030(B)(1).
    (2) Access to transit, pursuant to standards in Section 460.030(B)(2);
    (3) Parking and circulation areas;
    (4) Location and design of buildings and signs;
    (5) Orientation of windows and doors;
    (6) Entrances and exits;
    (7) Private and shared outdoor recreation spaces;
    (8) Pedestrian circulation, pursuant to standards in Section 460.030(C);
    (9) Outdoor play areas;
    (10) Service areas for uses such as mail delivery, trash disposal, above-ground utilities, loading and delivery;
    (11) Areas to be landscaped;
    (12) Exterior lighting;
    (13) Provisions for handicapped persons; and
    (14) Other site elements and spaces which will assist in the evaluation of site development.
E. The preliminary landscape plan shall indicate:
    (1) The size, species and approximate locations of plant materials to be retained or placed on the site; and
    (2) Proposed site contouring.

630.080 Decision on Design Review Plan.
A. The Design Review Board may approve a design review plan, disapprove it, or approve it with such modifications and conditions as may be consistent with the criteria and standards listed in this section. Conditions and/or restrictions may be applied to the approval of a design review plan in order to assure Code compliance and to mitigate transportation or public facility impacts and to protect those facilities.

630.090 Review Criteria.
A. Approval of a design review plan shall be based on the following criteria:
    (1) Relation of Design Review Plan Elements to Environment. 
        (a) The elements of the design review plan shall relate harmoniously to the natural environment and existing buildings and structures having a visual relationship with the site.
        (b) The elements of the design review plan should promote energy conservation and provide protection from adverse climatic conditions, noise, and air pollution.
        (c) Each element of the design review plan shall effectively, efficiently, and attractively serve its function. The elements shall be on a human scale, inter-related, and shall provide spatial variety and order.
    (2) Safety and Privacy - The design review plan shall be designed to provide a safe environment, while offering appropriate opportunities for privacy and transitions from public to private spaces.
    (3) Special Needs of Disabled Persons - Where appropriate, or required, the design review plan shall provide for the special needs of disabled persons, such as ramps for wheelchairs and Braille signs.
    (4) Preservation of Natural Landscape - The landscape and existing grade shall be preserved to the maximum practical degree, considering development constraints and suitability of the landscape or grade to serve their functions. Preserved trees and shrubs shall be protected during construction.
    (5) Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation and Parking - The location and number of points of access to the site, the interior circulation patterns, the separations between pedestrians and moving and parked vehicles, and the arrangement of parking areas in relation to buildings and structures, shall be designed to maximize safety and convenience and shall be harmonious with proposed and neighboring buildings and structures.
    (6) Drainage - Surface drainage systems shall be designed so as not to adversely affect neighboring properties or streets.
    (7) Buffering and Screening - Areas, structures and facilities for storage, machinery and equipment, services (mail, refuse, utility wires, and the like), loading and parking, and similar accessory areas and structures shall be designed, located, buffered or screened to minimize adverse impacts on the site and neighboring properties.
    (8) Utilities - All utility installations must be located underground and shall be located so as to minimize adverse impacts on the site and neighboring properties. At the time of development, public facilities and services, including public sanitary and storm sewer, water and public streets, shall be extended across a site to facilitate service to adjoining properties, unless determined unreasonable by the Design Review Board.
    (9) Signs and Graphics - The location, texture, lighting, movement, and materials of all exterior signs, graphics or other informational or directional features shall be compatible with the other elements of the design review plan and surrounding properties.
    (10) Plan and Code Compliance – The proposal shall be in compliance with the City, County and Regional Transportation Plans, the City Stormwater Master Plan and the City Water Master Plan. Further, ODOT access permit approval is required abutting a state roadway prior to design review approval by the City.
B. Guidelines designed to assist applications in developing design review plans may be adopted by the Design Review Board.

630.100 Expiration of Approval.
A. Design review approval shall expire in two (2) years from the date of final design review approval if significant construction has not taken place.

Section 640 Nonconforming Situations

640.010 Purpose and Intent.
To carry out the purposes, goals and objectives of the Wood Village Comprehensive Plan, it is necessary and desirable that all uses and structures in each planning district be permitted under certain regulations. It is the purpose of these specific regulations to control incompatible nonconforming uses and structures so that they will be discontinued or brought into conformity with the permitted uses or structures in each planning district.
Where at the time of adoption of these standards, a use of land or structure exists which would not be permitted by the regulations herein and was lawful at the time it was established, the use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful and in compliance with applicable provisions of Section 640.

640.020 Continuation of a Nonconforming Use.
Subject to the provisions of Section 640.030 and 640.090, a nonconforming structure or use may be continued and maintained in reasonable repair but shall not be enlarged or expanded except as specified in Section 640.030. The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a structure which was arranged or designed for the nonconforming use at the time of passage of these provisions is not an enlargement of a nonconforming use.

640.030 Enlargement or Alteration of a Nonconforming Use or Structure.
A. A nonconforming use or structure may not be altered, enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of these provisions, except as provided in subsection B. or C. of this section. No additional structure or building shall be constructed on the lot in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
B. For purposes of this section, enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming use or structure shall not include making repairs when such repairs are necessary to make the structure habitable or safe for occupancy; such as replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, plumbing, or to strengthen or restore to a safe condition a building that has been declared to be unsafe. Further, enlargement or alteration shall not include paving, landscaping and signage improvements to the site of a nonconforming use.
C. A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback, coverage or other zone standards may be altered or extended, providing alteration or extension does not increase the deviation and brings the structure into conformity with the requirement.

640.040 Procedure for Authorization.
The procedure to be followed in an application for and authorization of an expansion of a nonconforming use or structure outside of the limitations described herein shall be the same review procedure as a Variance in accordance with Section 660, a Type II land use procedure.

640.050 Discontinuance or Abandonment of a Nonconforming Use.
If a nonconforming structure or use is discontinued for more than 12 months, further use of the property shall be for a conforming use. For purposes of calculating the 12 month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first day of any of the following events:
A. On the date when the use of the land is physically vacated;
B. On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;
C. On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or
D. On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility provider.

640.060 Change of a Nonconforming Use.
If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming to the regulations of the zone, and after change, it shall not be changed back again to the nonconforming use.

640.070 Destruction of a Nonconforming Structure.
If a nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding seventy (70%) percent of the real market value as recorded by the Multnomah County Assessor, or as determined by an independent professional appraisal in a form satisfactory to the City, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the WVZDC.

640.080 Completion of a Structure.
Nothing contained in these provisions shall require any change in the plans construction, alteration, or designated use of a structure for which a building permit has been issued and construction work has commenced prior to the adoption of these provisions; except that, if the designated use will be nonconforming, it shall, for the purposes of Section 640.050, be a discontinued use if not in operation within two years of the date of issuance of the building permit. (Ord. 13-2010)

Section 650 Vacations

650.010 Purpose.
This section states the procedures and review criteria for the vacation of an easement, right-of-way, or plat.

650.020 Initiation.
A vacation proposal may be initiated by the City Council or by petition of adjoining and area owners in accordance with ORS 271.080.

650.030 Procedure.
Type III procedures as outlined in Section 520 - Quasi-Judicial Process shall be used as supplemented by the provisions of ORS Chapter 271. State law defines the affected area and mandates notice requirements. The City Council shall hear all requests for vacations.

650.040 Review Criteria.
A vacation request may be approved if the City Council finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following review criteria are met:
A. The requested vacation is consistent with relevant Comprehensive Plan policies and with any street plan, city transportation or public facility plan.
B. The requested vacation will not have a negative effect on access between public rights-of-way or to existing properties, potential lots, public facilities or utilities.
C. The requested vacation will not have a negative effect on traffic circulation or emergency service protection.
D. The portion of the right-of-way that is to be vacated will be brought into compliance with Code requirements, such as landscaping, driveway access, and reconstruction of access for fire safety.
E. The public interest, present and future, will be best served by approval of the proposed vacation.

650.050 Zoning of Vacated Right-of-Way.
Except as otherwise provided within the vacation ordinance or where the official City zoning map is not clear as to the zoning of vacated right-of-way, the zoning of each parcel of vacated territory shall be the same as the adjoining property to which the ownership of the parcel automatically reverts.

650.060 Conditions of Approval.
The City may attach conditions to the approval of a vacation request to ensure that the proposal will conform to the review criteria.

Section 660 Variances

660.010 Purpose.
Variances provide flexibility for unusual situations, while continuing to provide certainty and rapid processing for land use applications. Variances are necessary when the applicant requests a deviation from development standards.

660.020 Procedure.
Variance requests shall be reviewed as a Type II procedure.

660.030 Regulations Which May and May Not Be Varied.
A. Unless listed in Subsection B below, all regulations in this Code may be modified using the variance process.
B. Variances are prohibited for the following items:
    (1) To allow a primary or accessory use that is not allowed by the regulations.
    (2) As an exception to any restrictions on uses or development which contain the word "prohibited".
    (3) As an exception to a threshold for a review.
    (4) As an exception to a definition or classification.
    (5) As an exception to the procedural steps of a procedure or to change assigned procedures.

660.040 Review Criteria.
All variance requests will be approved if the Planning Commission finds that the applicant has shown that A. through E. or F. through H. have been met.
A. The proposal will be consistent with the desired character of the area; and
B. If more than one variance is being requested, the cumulative effect of the variances results in a project which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the zone; and
C. Granting the adjustment will equally or better meet the purpose of the regulation to be modified; and
D. Any impacts resulting from the variance are mitigated to the extent practical;
E. The proposal is consistent with the function and designated carrying capacity of City, County and Regional Transportation Plans. or
F. Application of the regulation in question would preclude all reasonable economic use of the site.
G. The requested variance is the minimum necessary to allow use of the site; and
H. Any impacts resulting from the variance are mitigated to the extent practical.

Section 670 Zoning and Development Code Amendments

670.010 Purpose.
The Zoning and Development Code is designed to implement the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, which is a reflection of community values and needs. Because these needs and values may change with time and because new techniques for implementing the Plan may be appropriate, this Code must have some mechanism for response to those changes. Amendments to this Code should occur as needed in order to maintain a close relationship between the Zoning and Development Code and the Comprehensive Plan.

670.020 Procedure.
Code amendments shall be processed in accordance with the legislative procedure in Sections 560 - Legislative Process.

670.030 Review Criteria.
The amendment will be approved if the City Council finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following criteria are met:
A. The proposed amendment(s) better achieves the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan than the existing regulatory language.
B. The proposed amendments are consistent with the Zoning and Development Code purposes and with the purpose statement for the base zone, special district, additional use regulation, or development regulation for which the amendment is proposed.
C. Proposals which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the City, County and Regional Transportation Plans.
D. The review body shall find that:
The transportation system is capable of supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area and will not significantly affect a transportation facility. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements, neighborhood impacts and pedestrian safety.
“Significantly” affect the transportation facility means the proposal would:
    (1) As measured at the end of the Wood Village TSP planning period or 15 years, whichever is greater, the proposal would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or
    (2) Reduce the performance of an existing of planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable; or
    (3) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable.
    If it is determined that a proposed land use significantly affects a transportation facility, the applicant shall assure that the allowed uses are consistent with the function, capacity and level of service of the facility by one of the following methods:
        (a) Alter land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
        (b) Provide measures demonstrating that the use can be consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility, or provide other measures as a condition of development through a development agreement or similar method, specifying when such measures will be provided.
E. Amendments that Affect Transportation Facilities. Except as provided in Subsection F, amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations which significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the Wood Village TSP. This shall be accomplished by one of the following:
    (1) Adopting measures that demonstrate that allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility; or
    (2) Amending the Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan to provide transportation facilities improvements, or services adequate to support the proposed land uses; such amendments shall include a funding plan to ensure the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period; or
    (3) Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
    (4) Amending the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility; or
    (5) Providing other measures as a condition for development or through a development agreement or similar funding method, specifying when such measures will be provided.
F. Exceptions. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation with a significant effect on a transportation facility, where the facility is already performing below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Wood Village TSP or the Regional Transportation Plan, may be approved when all of the following criteria are met:
    (1) The amendment does not include property located in an interchange areas, as defined under applicable law;
    (2) The currently planned facilities, improvements or services are not adequate to achieve the standard;
    (3) Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigate the impacts of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of the development; and
    (4) The road authority provides a written statement that the proposed funding and timing for the proposed development mitigation are sufficient to avoid further degradation to the facility.

Section 680 Zoning Map Amendments

680.010 Purpose.
This section states the procedures and review criteria necessary to process an amendment to the base zones, special districts, and other map symbols of the Zoning Map. The section differentiates between amendments which are processed in a quasi- judicial manner and those processed in a legislative manner.

680.020 Initiation.
A. Quasi-judicial zoning map amendments may be initiated by the property owner, a representative of the owner, the City Administrator, the Planning Commission, or the City Council.
B. Legislative zoning map amendments may be initiated by the City Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council. Citizens may request that the Planning Commission initiate a legislative amendment through written communication.
C. Initiations by a review body are made without prejudice towards the outcome.

680.030 Procedure.
Zoning map amendments will be reviewed through a Type III procedure as outlined in Sections 520 - Quasi-Judicial Process or by legislative action as provided for the Sections 560 - Legislative Process.

680.040 Special Notice Requirements.
If a zone change request would change the zone of property which includes all or part of a manufactured home park, the City shall give written notice by first class mail to each existing mailing address for tenants of the mobile or manufactured home park at least 20 days before the date of the first hearing on the application. The failure of a tenant to receive a notice which was mailed shall not invalidate any zone change.
The review body shall find that:
The transportation system is capable of supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area and will not significantly affect a transportation facility. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements, neighborhood impacts and pedestrian safety.
“Significantly” affect the transportation facility means the proposal would:
1. As measured at the end of the Wood Village TSP planning period or 15 years, whichever is greater, the proposal would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or
2. Reduce the performance of an existing of planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable; or
3. Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable.
If it is determined that a proposed land use significantly affects a transportation facility, the applicant shall assure that the allowed uses are consistent with the function, capacity and level of service of the facility by one of the following methods:
    (a) Alter land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
    (b) Provide measures demonstrating that the use can be consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility, or provide other measures as a condition of development through a development agreement or similar method, specifying when such measures will be provided.

680.050 Review Criteria.
Zoning map amendments will be approved if the Planning Commission finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following criteria are met:
A. The proposed base zone is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan map designation for the entire subject area unless a Plan map amendment has also been applied for in accordance with Sections 610 - Comprehensive Plan Amendments.
B. Existing or anticipated transportation facilities are adequate for uses that are permitted under the proposed zone designation. Proposals that significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity and level of service identified in the City, County and Regional Transportation Plans.
C. Existing or anticipated services (water, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, schools, police and fire protection) can accommodate potential development within the subject area without adverse impact on the affected service area.
D. Any unique natural features or special areas involved such as floodplain, slopes, significant natural vegetation, will not be jeopardized as a result of the proposed rezoning.
E. The intent and purpose of the proposed zoning district best satisfies the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
F. The review body shall find that:
The transportation system is capable of supporting the proposed use in addition to the existing uses in the area and will not significantly affect a transportation facility. Evaluation factors include street capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements, neighborhood impacts and pedestrian safety.
“Significantly” affect the transportation facility means the proposal would:
    (1) As measured at the end of the Wood Village TSP planning period or 15 years, whichever is greater, the proposal would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or
    (2) Reduce the performance of an existing of planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable; or
    (3) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP), Oregon Highway Plan, Wood Village TSP or Comprehensive Plan, as applicable.
    If it is determined that a proposed land use significantly affects a transportation facility, the applicant shall assure that the allowed uses are consistent with the function, capacity and level of service of the facility by one of the following methods:
        (a) Alter land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or
        (b) Provide measures demonstrating that the use can be consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility, or provide other measures as a condition of development through a development agreement or similar method, specifying when such measures will be provided.

680.060 Corrections to the Official Zoning Map.
The City Administrator may initiate a review following the Type II procedure for the types of corrections to the Official Zoning Map listed below:
A. A map line that was intended to follow a topographical feature but does not do so. Topographical features include the tops and bottoms of hillsides, the banks of water bodies, and center lines of creeks and drainage ditches.
B. The line on the map does not match the legal description or map shown or references in the ordinance which applied the designation.
C. There is a discrepancy between maps and there is a clear legislative intent for where the line should be.
D. It can be clearly shown that a map line is based on the location of a reference item that has since been moved. Reference items are rights-of-way, tentative rights-of-way, utility easements and similar type items. Map line changes in these cases must not be more than a trivial change to the map pattern and must not result in any significant impacts to abutting lots.

680.070 Zoning Upon Annexation.
Upon Annexation, the zoning of annexed property shall be determined as a legislative process. The Planning Commission shall determine which City zone most closely matches the zoning which existed before annexation and apply that zone, unless a change of zoning is desired to better fulfill the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.

Section 700 GENERAL TERMS
            INTRODUCTION TO THE USE CATEGORIES
SECTION 710  USE CATEGORIES
SECTION 720  DEFINITIONS
SECTION 730  MEASUREMENTS

Introduction to the Use Categories

710.010 Purpose.
This section classifies land uses and activities into use categories on the basis of common functional, product or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods and services are sold or delivered, and certain site factors. The use categories provide a systematic basis for assignment of present and future uses to zones. The decision to allow or prohibit the use categories in the various zones is based on the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

710.020 Category Titles.
The names of the use categories start with capital letters throughout the Zoning Code.

710.030 Classification of Uses.
A. Consideration. 
    (1) Uses are assigned to the category whose description most closely describes the nature of the primary use. The “Characteristics” subsection of each use category describes the characteristics of each use category. Developments may have more than one primary use. Developments may also have one or more accessory uses. Developments with more than one primary use are addressed in Subsection B. below. Accessory uses are addressed in Subsection C. below.
    (2) The following items are considered to determine what use category the use is in; and whether the activities constitute primary uses or accessory uses:
        •the description of the activity(ies) in relationship to the characteristics of each use category;
        •the relative amount of site or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity;
        •relative amounts of sales from each activity;
        •the customer type for each activity;
        •the number of employees in each activity;
        •hours of operation;
        •building and site arrangement;
        •vehicles used with the activity;
        •the relative number of vehicle trips generated by the activity;
        •signs;
        •how the use advertises itself; and
        •whether the activity would be likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site.
B. Developments with Multiple Primary Uses. When all the primary uses of a development fall within one use category, then the development is assigned to that use category. For example, a development that contains a retail bakery and a café would be classified in the Retail Sales and Service category because all the primary uses are in that category. When the primary uses of a development fall within different use categories, each primary use is classified in the applicable category and is subject to the regulations for that category.
C. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction with the use unless stated otherwise in the regulations. Also unless otherwise stated, they are subject to the same regulations as the primary use. Common accessory uses are listed as examples with the categories.
D. Use of Examples. The “Examples” subsection of each use category provides a list of examples of uses that are included in the use category. The names of uses on the list are generic. They are based on the common meaning of the terms and not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use whose business name is “Wholesale Liquidation” but that sells mostly to consumers, would be included in the Retail Sales and Service category rather than the Wholesale Sales category. This is because the actual activity on the site matches the description of the Retail Sales and Service category.

710.040 Determination of Use Category.
The determination as to the appropriate use category in which a proposal belongs is made by the City Administrator. This decision is not a land use decision but is subject to the provisions of ORS 227.175(11). All use category determinations shall be entered into a registry which is open to the public and includes the following information:
•the street address or other easily understood geographic reference to the subject property;
•the date of the decision; and
•a description of the decision made.
At the option of the applicant the City shall provide notice and hearing through a Type II review as described in Section 520.100 and through 520.130.
A determination of use category decision may be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals subject to the appeal period described in ORS 197.830(4)(b). A determination of use category which is reviewed in a Type II process can be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals within 21 days of the date of the Notice of Decision. No appeal to the Wood Village City Council is allowed.

Section 710 Use Categories

Residential Uses Category

710.100 Household Living.
A. Characteristics. Household Living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit or a structure by a household. The average length of stay is thirty (30) days or longer. (See subsection (C), Exceptions, of this section).
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly found include: recreational activities, raising of household pets, hobbies and parking of occupants’ vehicles. Home occupations are an accessory use subject to additional regulations.
C. Exceptions. 
    (1) Lodging in a dwelling where the average stay is thirty (30) days or less is not Residential Living. (See Retail Sales and Service category for hotels and motels. See Community Service category for drug and alcohol treatment programs, post and alternative incarceration programs, and alternative to prosecution programs). (Ord. 2-2020 § 4 (Att. A))

710.110 Group living.
A. Characteristics. Group living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of 6 or more people who do not meet the definition of Household Living. The average length of stay is 90 days or longer. Uses where people stay, on average, less than 90 days are not considered residential. They are considered to be a form of transient lodging (see exceptions). Generally, Group Living structures have a common eating area for residents. The residents may or may not receive any combination of care, training, or treatment, as long as they also reside at the site.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly found are recreational facilities, parking for autos for the occupants and staff, and parking of vehicles for the facility.
C. Examples. Examples include dormitories; communes; fraternities and sororities; monasteries and convents; nursing and convalescent homes; group homes for the physically disabled, mentally retarded, or emotionally disturbed.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Lodging where the average length of stay is less than 90 days is not Group Living (See Retail Sales and Service Category for Hotels and Motels. See Community Service Category for drug and alcohol treatment programs, post and alternative incarcerations programs and alternative to prosecution program).
    (2) Facilities for people who are under judicial detainment and are under the supervision of sworn officers are included in the Detention Facilities category.

Commercial Use Categories

710.200 Commercial recreation.
A. Characteristics. Commercial Recreation uses are large, generally commercial uses that provide continuous recreation or entertainment oriented activities. They may take place in a number of structures or in an outdoor setting.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include concessions, restaurants, parking, caretaker’s quarters, and maintenance facilities.
C. Examples. Examples include amusement parks, theme parks, gaming, water parks, spas, golf driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, zoos and marinas.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Golf courses are classified as Parks and Open Space.
    (2) Uses which draw large numbers of people to periodic events, rather than on a continuous basis, are classified as Major Event Entertainment.

710.205 Marijuana sales other than medical (See 710.445 for medical marijuana dispensaries).
A. Characteristics. Retail sales of marijuana products as provided by state licensing for the recreational use of marijuana products as permitted by state law.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include sales of foods and other retail commodities.
C. Examples. Examples include a marijuana sales store.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Any such use is subject to regulation for distances from designated youth facilities as provided in the underlying authorization code.

710.210 Quick vehicle servicing.
A. Characteristics. Quick Vehicle Servicing uses provide direct services for motor vehicles where the driver generally waits in the car before and while the service is performed. The development will include a drive-through facility, the area where the service is performed (see Definitions.)
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include auto repair and tire sales.
C. Example. Examples include full-serve and mini-serve gas stations, unattended card key stations, car washes, quick lubrication and tune-up services, and Department of Environmental Quality vehicle emission test sites.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Truck stops are classified as Industrial Service.
    (2) Refueling facilities for the vehicles that belong to a specific use (fleet vehicles) which are on the site where the vehicles are kept, are accessory to the use.
    (3) A fuel service station meeting the specific requirements in Section 710.240(B)(1) through (5) is deemed an Accessory Use to the primary Retail Sales and Service Use.

710.220 Major event entertainment.
A. Characteristics. Major Event Entertainment uses are characterized by activities and structures that draw large numbers of people to specific events or shows. Activities are generally of a spectator nature.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include restaurants, bars, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities.
C. Examples. Examples include stadiums, sports arenas, coliseums, race tracks (horse, dog, etc.), auditoriums, exhibition and meeting areas, and fairgrounds.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Exhibition and meeting areas with less than 20,000 square feet of total event area are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
    (2) Banquet halls that are part of hotels or restaurants are accessory to those uses, which are included in the Retail Sales and Service category.
    (3) Theaters, including drive-in theaters, are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
    (4) Automobile racing tracks are prohibited.

710.225 Restricted access commercial entertainment and recreation.
E. Characteristics. Restricted Access Commercial Entertainment and Recreation uses are characterized by activities and structures that prohibit public access by requiring the purchase of goods or services not directly related to the entertainment or recreational activity.
F. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include any Permitted uses in the base zone, parking, and maintenance facilities.
G. Examples. Examples include water parks accessible only to individuals who are paying guests of a connected hotel or motel, amusement or electronic devise areas available only to individuals purchasing transportation or lodging services.
H. Exceptions. 
    (1) Exhibition, meeting, or entertainment uses which admit members of the public based on payment of an entry fee and without requiring the purchase of other affiliated goods or services, are treated as commercial recreation (Not Restricted Access Commercial Entertainment).
    (2) Banquet halls, lobbies, conference rooms/facilities or meeting spaces that are part of hotels or restaurants are accessory to those uses, may be restricted for access and entertainment purposes, and are not classified as Restricted Access Commercial Entertainment.

710.227 Mobile food cart and food pod.
A. Characteristics. Mobile Food Cart is as any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer. Permanent site improvements may or may not be required; however, the standards and permit processes of this section are intended to ensure that mobile food unit sites are conducted as lawful uses and in a manner that is not detrimental or disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties, residents and pedestrians.
Food Pod: A single site that includes three (3) or more food carts.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include site amenities, restrooms and similar features, but may not include the sale of items other than the food product produced or distributed in the mobile food cart.
C. Examples. Examples include vans, trailers, or individual units constructed for the purpose of the sale of a food product cooked, prepared, or modified in the unit.
5. Exceptions. The sale of commodities or other items not manufactured or distributed through the individual unit.
DEFINITIONS
FOOD CART. Mobile Food Cart is as any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer.
FOOD POD. A single site that includes three (3) or more food carts.

710.230 Office.
A. Characteristics. Office uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical, or financial services.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, health facilities, parking or other amenities primarily for the use of the employees of the firm or building.
C. Examples. Examples include professional services such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, or architects; financial businesses such as lenders, brokerage houses, bank headquarters, or real estate agents; data processing; sales offices; government offices and public utility offices; TV and radio studios; medical and dental clinics, medical and dental labs; and blood-collection facilities.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Offices that are part of and are located with a firm in another category are considered accessory to the firm’s primary activity. Headquarters offices, when in conjunction with or adjacent to a primary use in another category, are considered part of the other category.
    (2) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Office category if equipment and materials are not stored on the site and fabrication, services, or similar work is not carried on at the site.

710.240 Retail sales and service.
A. Characteristics. Retail Sales and Service firms are involved in the sale, lease or rent of new or used products to the general public. They may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, manufacture or repacking of goods for on-site sale, and parking. A retail fuel service station is Accessory to a Retail Sales and Service use if it has all of the following characteristics:
    (1) It is located on the same Commercially-zoned site as the retailer or, in the case of an approved commercial- or mixed-use center in a Commercial or Town Center zone, on another parcel within the same center as the retailer;
    (2) The retailer provides a minimum of four charging stations for electric vehicles within the same commercial site or center;
    (3) The electric charging stations and the fueling station are clearly identified (branded) as integral to the retailer;
    (4) The site area devoted to the fuel service station:
        (a) Is set back a minimum of 150 feet from any perimeter boundary of the site or center where the adjacent property is in a residential zone;
        (b) Is set back a minimum of 150 feet from any street designated as an Arterial; and
        (c) Does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the retailer’s building floor area within the site or center (not counting electric vehicle charging stations).
    (5) “Site area devoted to the fuel service station” means a contiguous portion of the site or center containing fuel station-related above-ground structures, such as:
        (a) Areas under a canopy cover, e.g., pump islands and drive-through aisles;
        (b) Any booth or office or other building for use by fuel station attendant(s) or customers;
        (c) Equipment buildings, vaults, or cabinets; and
        (d) Kiosks providing vehicular needs such as water, compressed air, or vending products such as lubricants, anti-freeze, other fluids, parts or accessories, singly or in any combination. (Ord. 9-2013)
C. Examples. Examples include uses from the four subgroups listed below:
    (1) Product-oriented: Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods including art, art supplies, bicycles, clothing, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants, printed material, stationary, videos, and food sales.
    (2) Personal Service-oriented: Branch banks, urgency medical care, laundromats, photographic studios, photocopy and blueprint services, quick photo finishing; hair, tanning, and personal care services, business, martial arts, and other trade schools, dance or music classes, taxidermists, mortuaries, veterinarians, and animal grooming.
    (3) Entertainment-oriented: Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, taverns and bars; indoor or outdoor continuous entertainment activities such as bowling alleys, ice rinks, game arcades, pool halls, indoor firing ranges, theaters, health clubs, gyms, and membership clubs.
    (4) Repair-oriented: Repair of TV’s. bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, appliances and office equipment, photo or laundry drop-off, quick printing, recycling drop-off, tailor, locksmith, and upholsterer.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Lumber yards and other building material sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as Wholesale Sales.
    (2) Sales of landscape materials, including bark chips and compost, is classified as Industrial Service.
    (3) Sales, rental, lease, repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks is classified as Vehicle Repair. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment, and heavy trucks is classified as Industrial Service. (Ord. 15-2010)
    (4) Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment is classified as Wholesale Sales.
    (5) Hotels, restaurants, and other services which are part of a truck stop are considered an accessory to the truck stop which is classified as Industrial Service.

710.245 Lodging.
A. Characteristics. Lodging shall include hotel, motel, and similar commercial properties engaged in the rental of rooms to tourists or other temporary guests. Along with accommodations, firms in the lodging industry may provide restaurant or other meal provision, meeting rooms and banquet facilities, parking facilities, and accommodations to guests for recreation or other leisure activities while staying at the property.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include office, parking, recreation and convention facilities.
C. Examples. Lodging includes facilities whose primary purpose is the accommodation of travelers, tourists or other temporary stays; however, the duration of tenancy may provide for long-term accommodation (greater than thirty (30) days) for not more than fifty (50) percent of all provided accommodations. See also Short-Term Vacation Rental definition.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Facilities owned and operated exclusively for long term tenancy, with most stays exceeding thirty (30) days. Such facilities shall be identified as multifamily housing, and shall be regulated as residential land uses. (Ord. 2-2020 § 4 (Att. A))

710.250 Self-service storage.
A. Characteristics. Self-Service Storage uses provide storage areas for individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory Uses may include living quarters for a resident manager or security and leasing offices. Use of the storage areas for sales, service and repair operations, or manufacturing is not considered an accessory to the Self-Service Storage use. The rental of trucks or equipment is also not considered an accessory to a Self-Service Storage use.
C. Examples. Examples include single story and multi-story facilities that provide individual storage areas for rent. These uses are also called mini-warehouses.
D. Exceptions. A transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred is the Warehouse and Freight Movement category.

710.260 Vehicle Maintenance.
A. Characteristics. Firms servicing passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed, and most repairs and services last less than a day or two (2). The exterior storage of vehicles and vehicle parts is prohibited.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, and sales of parts/tools.
C. Examples. Examples include under car work including suspension parts/components, alignment, tires, brakes, exhaust, minor repairs and tune-ups such as oil and fluid change, battery, and the replacement of consumable engine items such as belts and hoses, auto upholstery shops, auto detail shops, and stereo and other interior and exterior accessory sales and installation. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Att. A))

710.270 Vehicle Repair.
A. Characteristics. Firms servicing passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. The customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed, and repairs take several days or longer to complete.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of parts, and vehicle storage.
C. Examples. Examples include major vehicle repair and diagnostics, transmission shop, engine repair/rebuilding facilities, auto body shop, and other major repair services.
D. Exceptions. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment, and of heavy trucks; towing and vehicle storage; and vehicle wrecking and salvage are classified as Industrial Service. (Ord. 4-2020 § 1 (Att. A). Formerly 710.260)

Industrial Use Categories

710.300 Industrial service.
A. Characteristics. Industrial Service firms are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or by-products. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site.
B. Accessory Activities. Accessory activities may include office, parking, storage, and rail spur or lead lines.
C. Examples. Examples include welding shops; machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of specific or professional instruments; sales, repair, storage, salvage or wrecking of heavy machinery, metal and building materials; towing and vehicle storage; auto and truck stops; building, heating, plumbing or electrical contractors; printing, publishing and lithography; exterminators; recycling operations; janitorial and building maintenance services; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; research and development laboratories, laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; and photofinishing laboratories.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Office category, if major equipment and materials are not stored at the site, and fabrication, or similar work is not carried on at the site.
    (2) Hotels, restaurants, and other services which are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop.

710.310 Manufacturing and production.
A. Characteristics. Manufacturing and Production firms are involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms and consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site.
B. Accessory Activities. Accessory activities may include offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, rail spur or lead lines, repair facilities, truck fleets, and caretaker’s quarters.
C. Examples. Examples include processing of food and related products; catering establishments; breweries, distilleries, and wineries; meat packing; weaving or production of textiles or apparel; lumber mills, and other wood products manufacturing; woodworking, including cabinet makers; production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products; movie production facilities; ship and barge building; concrete batching and asphalt mixing; production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, including musical instruments, vehicles, appliances, precision items, and other electrical items; production of artwork and toys; sign making; production of prefabricated structures, including mobile homes; and the production of energy.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
    (2) Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material is classified as Waste-Related uses.
    (3) Slaughter houses, animal feed lots, animal dipping, animal rendering and pulp & paper mills are prohibited.
    (4) Marijuana Processing, Marijuana Production, Marijuana Wholesale.

710.320 Warehouse and freight movement.
A. Characteristics. Warehouse and Freight Movement firms are involved in the storage, or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include office, truck fleet parking and maintenance areas, rail spur or lead lines, docks, and repackaging of goods.
C. Examples. Examples include separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; household moving and general freight storage; cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; storage of weapons and ammunition; major wholesale distribution centers; truck, marine, or air freight terminals; bus barns and light rail barns; parcel services; major post office; grain terminals; and the stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as Waste-Related uses.
    (2) Miniwarehouses are classified as Self-Service Storage uses.
    (3) Marijuana Wholesale is a separate category of use.

710.330 Waste related.
A. Characteristics. Waste Related uses are characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid waste from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses which collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material. Waste related uses also include uses which receive hazardous wastes from others and which are subject to the regulations of OAR 340.100-110, Hazardous Waste Management.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory Uses may include recycling of materials, offices, and repackaging and transshipment of by-products.
C. Examples. Examples include sanitary landfills, limited use landfills, waste composting, energy recovery plants, sewer treatment plants, portable sanitary collection equipment storage and pumping, and hazardous waste collection sites.
D. Exceptions. Disposal of dirt, concrete, asphalt, and similar non-decomposable materials is considered a fill.

710.340 Wholesale sales.
A. Characteristics. Wholesale Sales firms are involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on the site or delivered to the customer.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, parking, minor fabrication services, and repackaging of goods.
C. Examples. Examples include sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
    (2) Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement.
    (3) Marijuana Wholesale is a separate category of use.

710.350 Light industrial.
A. Characteristics. Light Industrial uses involve the manufacturing, processing, assembling, packaging and treatment of products that have been previously prepared from raw materials. Because they are located in close proximity to commercial and residential uses, they are characterized by an absence of objectionable external features. Uses are clean and employee intensive industrial uses that have limited off-site impacts in terms of noise, odor, hazardous substances, glare, lights, vibration, smoke or dust. Products are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on-site.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory activities may include office, parking, interior storage and truck fleets.
C. Examples. Examples include research services; business support services; assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, including the manufacturing of small parts such as coils, condensers and transformers; photographic film processing, photoengraving, photocopying and photostatting; woodworking, including cabinet makers; weaving or production of textiles or apparel; production of artwork and toys; signmaking; packaging and processing.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site to the general public are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
    (2) Manufacturing and processing of goods which have off-site impacts incompatible with commercial and residential uses are classified as manufacturing and production.

710.360 Marijuana processor.
A. Characteristics. This is a business that will transform marijuana into another product, extract or cannabinoid concentrate, including cannabinoid edible, liquids or similar materials. Any person that processes marijuana within the definitions of the Oregon State Statutory provisions or Administrative Rules shall be identified as a marijuana processing facility.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory activities may include office, parking, interior storage and truck fleets.
C. Examples. Examples include companies that accept raw marijuana and utilize a mechanical, chemical, or pressurized system to create any food or potable liquate from which a cannabinoid material is a contributing component. This will include drying of materials, creation of topical cannabinoid products, and creation of any hemp product not specifically exempted from regulation by Federal regulations.
D. Exceptions. Specific drying and packaging of marijuana products may be completed by a Recreational Marijuana Producer only as permitted within the licensing authority provided by permit from the State of Oregon.

710.370 Marijuana wholesale.
A. Characteristics. This is a business that purchases marijuana items from a producer, processor or other wholesale licensee and stores, transports, and delivers such products to a retailer, another wholesaler, or processor.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory activities may include office, parking, interior storage and truck fleets.
C. Examples. Any firm functioning to accept orders from retail outlets or similar sales organizations that sell directly to consumers, delivering in quantities to licensed retail outlets, other whole sale operations, or to processors.
D. Exceptions. No packaging, processing or other treatment or modification of delivered products may take place at these facilities as the same is regulated by Oregon State Statute and Administrative Rule.

710.380 Marijuana producer.
A. Characteristics. This is a business that plants, cultivates, grows, harvests and dries marijuana in accord with the provisions of Oregon law, excepting outdoor production.. A producer may engage in the growing of marijuana in indoor or outdoor production facilities, and may sell or deliver only to a marijuana processor, wholesaler, retailer, laboratory or research certificate holder. Specific limitations of production size shall be only as provided by Oregon State law or administrative rule.
B. Accessory Uses. Green houses, storage buildings for agricultural implements, office and parking.
C. Examples. A business fully within an industrial structure utilizing artificial light and growing medium, a facility utilizing green houses or other structures, and outdoor agricultural operations specifically screened and protected as required by Oregon Law.
D. Exceptions. No packaging, processing or other treatment or modification of products may take place at these facilities as the same is regulated by Oregon State Statute and Administrative Rule. No outdoor production of Marijuana is permitted.

Institutional Use Categories

710.400 Basic utilities.
A. Characteristics. Basic Utilities are infrastructure services which need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. Basic Utility uses generally do not have regular employees at the site. Services may be public or privately provided.
B. Examples. Examples include water and sewer pump stations; electrical substations; water towers and reservoirs; stormwater retention and detention facilities; telephone exchanges; mass transit stops or turnarounds and park-and-ride facilities for mass transit.
C. Exceptions. 
    (1) Services where people are generally present, such as fire stations and police stations, are classified as Community Services.
    (2) Utility offices where employees or customers are generally present are classified as Offices.
    (3) Bus and light rail barns are classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement.
    (4) Regional power lines and utility pipelines are classified as Rail Lines and Utility Corridors.

710.410 Colleges.
A. Characteristics. This category includes colleges and other institutions of higher learning which offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree. They are certified by the State Board of Higher Education or by a recognized accrediting agency. Colleges tend to be in campus-like settings or on multiple blocks.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, housing for students, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, parking, maintenance facilities, and support commercial.
C. Examples. Examples include universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital, and seminaries.
D. Exceptions. Business and trade schools are classified as Retail Sales and Service.

710.420 Community services.
A. Characteristics. Community Services are uses of a public, non-profit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community. Generally, they provide the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special events. Community centers or facilities that have membership provisions are open to the general public to join at any time (for instance, any senior citizen could join a senior center). The use can also provide special counseling, education, training or supervision on a residential or outpatient basis of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices; meeting areas; food preparation areas; parking, health and therapy areas; daycare uses; and athletic facilities.
C. Examples. Examples include libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, publicly owned swimming pools, youth club facilities, hospices, police stations, fire stations, ambulance stations, drug and alcohol treatment centers, social service facilities for post or alternative incarceration or for alternative to prosecution programs, vocational training for the physically or mentally disabled, crematoriums, columbariums, and mausoleums.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Private lodges, clubs, and private or commercial athletic or health clubs are classified as Retail Sales and Service. Commercial museums (such as a wax museum) are in Retail Sales and Service.
    (2) Parks are in Park and Open Areas.
    (3) Social service agencies that primarily engage in providing on-site food or overnight shelter beds are classified as Essential Service Providers.

710.430 Daycare.
A. Characteristics. Daycare use includes day or evening care of two or more children outside of the children’s homes, for a fee. Daycare uses also include the daytime care of teenagers or adults who need assistance or supervision.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, play areas, and parking.
C. Examples. Examples include preschools, nursery schools, latch key programs, and adult daycare programs.
D. Exceptions. Daycare use does not include care given by the parents, guardians, or relatives of the children, or babysitters. Daycare use also does not include care given by a “family daycare” provider as defined by ORS 418.805 if the care is given to 12 or fewer children at any one time including the children of the provider. Family daycare is care regularly given in the family living quarters of the provider’s home.

710.440 Essential service provider.
A. Characteristics. Essential Service Provider uses (ESP’s) are primarily engaged in providing on-site food or shelter beds, for free or at significantly below market rates.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, counseling, and facilities for recreation, restrooms, bathing, and washing of clothes.
C. Examples. Examples include temporary or permanent emergency shelters, night time shelters, rescue missions, soup kitchens, and surplus food-distribution centers.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Uses or functions run by or for an ESP use, but where there is no direct ESP service provided, are not in this category. Examples are administrative office, retail outlets, daytime drop-in centers, and counseling and vocational training facilities.
    (2) Uses which provide food on-site as an accessory use are not included if the service is provided less than 5 days a week. For example, a church that provides a free or low cost meal once a week would not be classified as an ESP use.

710.445 Medical marijuana dispensaries.
A. Characteristics. Dispensing of marijuana products to individuals with appropriate state authorized credentials for the intake and use of marijuana for prescribed purpose. All such facilities shall be in accord with the Oregon Health Authority regulations and shall have appropriate licenses and authorizations for dispensing marijuana.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include sales of foods and other retail commodities.
C. Examples. Examples include a marijuana dispensary.
D. Exemptions. 
    (1) Any medical marijuana dispensary is subject to regulation for distances from designated youth facilities as provided in the underlying authorization code.

710.450 Medical centers.
A. Characteristics. Medical Centers includes uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering overnight care. Medical centers tend to be on multiple blocks or in campus settings.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory Uses include out-patient clinics, offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking, maintenance facilities, and housing facilities for staff or trainees.
C. Examples. Examples include hospitals and medical complexes that include hospitals.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Uses that provide extensive care and planned treatment or training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, are classified in the Residential Living or Community Service Categories.
    (2) Medical clinics that provide care where patients are not kept overnight are classified as Office.
    (3) Urgency medical care clinics are classified as Retail Sales and Service.

710.460 Parks and open areas.
A. Characteristics. Parks and Open Areas are uses of land focusing on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares. These lands tend to have few structures.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include club houses, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker’s quarters, and parking.
C. Examples. Examples include parks, golf courses, cemeteries, public squares, plazas, recreational trails, botanical gardens, nature preserves, and land used for grazing that is not part of a farm or ranch.

710.470 Religious institutions.
A. Characteristics. Religious Institutions are intended to primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include Sunday School facilities, parking, caretaker’s housing, one transitional housing unit, and group living facilities such as convents. A transitional housing unit is a housing unit for Residential Living where the average length of stay is less than 90 days.
C. Examples. Examples include churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques.

710.480 Schools.
A. Characteristics. This category includes public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide state mandated basic education.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, and before or after-school daycare.
C. Examples. Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding schools and military academies.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Preschools are classified as Daycare uses.
    (2) Business and trade schools are classified as Retail Sales and Service.

Other Use Categories

710.510 Detention facilities.
A. Characteristics. Detention Facilities includes facilities for the judicially required detention or incarceration of people. Inmates and detainees are under supervision by sworn officers, except when on an approved leave.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, recreational and health facilities, therapy facilities, maintenance facilities, and hobby and manufacturing activities.
C. Examples. Examples include prisons, jails, probation centers, and juvenile detention homes.
D. Exceptions. Programs that provide care and training or treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, but where patients are not supervised by sworn officers are classified as Residential Living, if the average stay is 90 days or longer and as Community Service if less than 90 days. Programs that provide transitional living experience for former offenders, such as halfway houses, where residents are not supervised by sworn officers, are also classified as Residential Living or Community Service depending on the length of stay.

710.520 Mining.
A. Characteristics. Mining includes mining or extraction of mineral or aggregate resources from the ground for off-site use.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include storage, sorting, stockpiling, or transfer off-site of the mined mineral.
C. Examples. Examples include quarrying or dredging for sand, gravel or other aggregate materials; mining; and oil, gas, or geothermal drilling.

710.530 Radio and television broadcast facilities.
A. Characteristics. Radio and Television Broadcast Facilities includes all devices, equipment, machinery, structures or supporting elements necessary to produce nonionizing electromagnetic radiation within the range of frequencies from 100 KHz to 300 GHz and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message for commercial purposes. Towers may be self supporting, guyed, or mounted on poles or buildings.
B. Accessory Uses. Accessory use may include transmitter facility buildings.
C. Examples. Examples include broadcast towers, communication towers, cellular telephone towers, and point-to-point microwave towers.
D. Exceptions. 
    (1) Receive-only antenna are not included in this category.
    (2) Radio and television studios are classified in the Office category.

710.540 Rail lines and utility corridors.
A. Characteristics. This category includes railroad tracks and lines for the movement of trains. The land may be owned or leased by the railroad. The category also includes public or private passageways, including easements, for the express purpose of transmitting electricity, gas, oil, water, sewage, communication signals, or other similar services on a regional level.
B. Examples. Examples include rail trunk and feeder lines; regional electrical transmission lines; and regional gas and oil pipelines.
C. Exceptions. 
    (1) Railroad lead and spur lines for delivery of rail cars to sites or for unloading of rail cars on specific sites are classified as accessory to the primary use of the site.
    (2) Rail lines and utility corridors that are located within motor vehicle right-of-way are not included.
    (3) Light rail lines are not included.
    (4) Railroad yards.

Section 720 Definitions

720.010 Defining Words.
Words used in this Code have their normal dictionary meaning unless they are listed in 720.030 - Definitions. Words listed in 720.030 - Definitions have the specific meaning stated, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.

720.020 Use of Terms.
Information about the use of terms is stated in Section 100.060 - Interpretation.

720.030 Definitions.
The definitions of words with specific meaning in the zoning code are as follows:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A habitable living unit that provides the basic requirements for shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation, in compliance with the Uniform Building Code.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures may be attached or detached from the primary structure. Examples of accessory structures include: garages, decks, fences, trellises, flag poles, stairways, heat pumps, small-scale residential energy equipment serving only the residents on the site, awnings, and other structures. See also Primary Structure.
ACCESSORY USE. A use or activity which is a subordinate part of a primary use and which is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site.
ALTERNATIVE OR POST INCARCERATION FACILITY. A residential use where the residents are on probation or parole.
APPLICANT. A person who applies for a land use review or building permit. An applicant can be the owner of the property or someone who is representing the owner such as a builder, developer, optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.
ATTACHED STRUCTURE. Any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall, by a roof, or by structural connections that allow pedestrian access to both structures. For example, decks or stairways are attached structures when they are connected to another structure. A garage may be attached to another structure by sharing a wall or by a breezeway. Structures connected by an "I" beam or similar connections are not considered attached.
BUILDABLE LAND. Lands in urban and urbanized areas available for development.
BUILDING. A structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50 percent of the area of its sides.
BUILDING COVERAGE. The area that is covered by buildings or other roofed structures, including eaves.
BUILDING LINE. A building limit fixed at a specific distance from the front, rear or side boundaries of a lot beyond which a structure cannot lawfully extend, except as provided for in this ordinance.
CHORD. Means a straight line joining the ends of an arc.
CITY. The City of Wood Village, Oregon.
CITY MANAGER. The appointed chief administrative officer of the City who is generally responsible for the administration of all City ordinances.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The current adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Wood Village.
CONCEPT PLAN REGULATING DIAGRAM. The Concept Plan Regulating Diagram refers to Figure 235 – 1, which, along with requirements in Chapter 235 and other applicable chapters and sections of Wood Village Zoning and Development Code, establishes the requirements for development within the Town Center Zone area.
The Concept Plan Regulating Diagram adopted in 2017 replaces and supersedes any Town Center Master Plan adopted prior to that date, and may be modified as provided in Chapter 235.
COUNCIL. The City Council of Wood Village, Oregon.
DAYS. Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days.
DESIRED CHARACTER. The preferred and envisioned character (usually of an area) based on the purpose statement or character statement of the base zone, overlay zone, or plan district. It also includes the preferred and envisioned character based on any adopted area plans or design guidelines for an area.
DEVELOPMENT RELATED DEFINITIONS
    •ALTERATION. A physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. Alteration does include the following:
    - Changes to the facade of a building;
    - Changes to the interior of a building;
    - Increases or decreases in floor area of a building;
    - Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;
    - Changes to exterior improvements;
    - Changes to landscaping; and
    - Changes in the topography of the site.
    See also Structural alteration of a sign, under Sign-Related Definitions.
    •DEVELOP. To construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land including excavations and fills.
    •DEVELOPMENT. All improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved land.
    •EXTERIOR ALTERATION. A physical change to a site that is outside of any buildings. Exterior alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. Exterior alteration does include the following:
    - Changes to the facade of a building;
    - Increases or decreases in floor area that result in changes to the exterior of a building;
    - Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;
    - Changes to exterior improvements;
    - Changes to landscaping; and
    - Changes in the topography of the site.
    •EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS. All improvements except buildings or other roofed structures. Exterior improvements include surface parking and load areas, paved and graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. It includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include vegetation landscaping, natural geologic forms, or unimproved land. See also Development.
    •NEW DEVELOPMENT. Development of a site that was previously unimproved or that has had previously existing buildings demolished.
    •STRUCTURE. Any object constructed in or on the ground. Structure includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetation landscaping materials.
DISABLED PERSON. For the purposes of this Code, a disabled person is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1991 and state law.
DRIVEWAYS. The area that provides vehicular access to a site. A driveway is the same width as the curb cut excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb site. A driveway begins at the property line and extends into the site. Driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking areas.
DUPLEX. See Residential Structure Types.
EMPLOYMENT RELATED DEFINITIONS
    •COMPETITIVE SHORT TERM SUPPLY OF LAND: means the short term supply of land provides a range of site sizes and locations to accommodate the market needs of a variety of industrial and other employment uses.
    •INDUSTRIAL USE: means employment activities generating income from the production, handling, or distribution of goods. Industrial uses include but are not limited to: manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, storage, logistics, importation and transshipment, research and development. Industrial uses may have external impacts on surrounding uses and may cluster in traditional areas where they are segregated from other non industrial activities.
    •OTHER EMPLOYMENT USE: Means all non industrial employment activities including the widest range of retail, wholesale, service, non-profit, business headquarters, administrative and governmental employment activities that are accommodated in retail, office and flexible building types. Other employment uses also include employment activities of an entity or organization that serve the medical, educational, social service, recreation and security needs of the community typically in large buildings or multi-purpose building campuses.
    •VACANT LAND - means lot or parcel that is either:
    - Equal to or larger than one half-acre not currently containing permanent building or improvements; or,
    - Equal to or larger than five acres where less than one-half acre is occupied by permanent buildings or improvements.
EXCAVATING OR FILLING. The removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and similar non-decomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. Excavating or filling does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or aggregate resources. Excavating or filling includes the terms grading, preloading, surcharging, and stockpiling.
EXTERIOR ALTERATION. See Development-Related Definitions.
EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS. See Development-Related Definitions.
EXTERIOR DISPLAY. Exterior display includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. Exterior display is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different products, brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales, and plant nurseries. Exterior display does not include goods that area being stored or parked outside. It does not include damaged vehicles, vehicles or equipment being services, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products. See Exterior Work Activities and Exterior Storage.
EXTERIOR STORAGE. Exterior storage includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no differentiation by type. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals, gravel; building materials, packing materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; and other similar items. Examples are lumber yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, and the storage of goods used in manufacturing. Damaged or inoperable vehicles or vehicles which have missing parts, that are kept outside, are included as exterior storage. The storage of motor vehicles which do not have any missing parts or damage that is visible from the outside of the vehicle is considered parking rather than exterior storage. The storage of motor vehicles that have minor dents or other minor defects in the body is also considered parking rather than storage if the motor vehicle is in working order. (See Exterior Display and Exterior Work Activities).
EXTERIOR WORK ACTIVITIES. Exterior work activities include the outdoor processing, assembly, or fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. Exterior work activities do not include normal pick-up and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor recreation, or outdoor markets. (See Exterior Display and Exterior Storage).
FLOOR AREA. The total floor area of the portion of a building that is above ground. Floor area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Floor area includes the area devoted to structured parking that is above ground level. Floor area does not include the following:
- Areas where the elevation of the floor is 4 feet or more below the lowest elevation of an adjacent right-of-way;
- Roof area;
- Roof top mechanical equipment; and
- Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter.
FLOOR AREA RATIO. The amount of Floor Area in square feet divided by the amount of Net Land Area in square feet.
FOOD CART. Mobile Food Cart is as any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer.
FOOD POD. A single site that includes three (3) or more food carts.
FRONTAGE. That portion of a lot abutting on a street; i.e., the front lot line. On corner or through lots the frontage may be designated by the owner but it should be consistent with the orientation of the other lots and improvements on the same side of the street. In the Town Center Zone (Section 235), frontage is defined as the portion of a lot, block, parcel or other property that abuts a public street or public easement.
GAMING. Means any and all establishments that offer legalized gambling authorized where any one of the following characteristics applies:
- The establishment is referred as a “Gaming establishment”, or makes any reference to legalized gambling by signage, advertisement or by name; and/or:
- Five or more gambling machines are on premises; and/or
- A card table is on the premises.
GARAGES. A covered structure intended to provide shelter for passenger vehicles that is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, or mobile homes. It includes carports. A garage may be attached or detached from another structure.
GRADE. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE. (Adjacent Ground Elevation) The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, pacing or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or when the property line is more than 5 feet from the building between the building and a line 5 feet from the building.
GRADE, FINISHED. The final or finish elevation of the ground surface after the development.
GRADE, NATURAL. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.
GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition.
GROUP LIVING STRUCTURE. See Residential Structure Types.
HOME OCCUPATION. A business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the Household Living use on the site.
HOUSE. See Residential Structure Type.
HOUSEHOLD.
    (1) One or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship living together as a single housekeeping unit; or
    (2) One or more handicapped individuals as defined in the federal Fair Housing Act, or persons associated with such handicapped individuals, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or
    (3) A group of not more than 5 persons who are not related, or handicapped or associated with a handicapped individual, as defined above, living together as a single housekeeping unit.
INTENSITY. The amount or magnitude of a use on a site or allowed in a zone. Generally, it is measured by floor area. It may also be measured by such things as number of employees, amount of production, trip generation, or hours of operation. See also Density.
KENNEL. Any location where 5 or more dogs or cats aged 6 months or older, are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores are not classified as kennels.
LAND AREA, NET. The net area for a site is defined as the proposed development project area minus any unbuildable area. The following areas are deemed unbuildable for the purposes of calculating Net Land Area:
    (1) In the Town Center Zone, specific dedications for roadways and pathways required by the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram or other mandatory provisions, whether publicly dedicated or privately held; and identified as Main Street, Local Street, or Universal Street, along with the Multi-use Path/Trail shall be treated as unbuildable.
    (2) Environmentally constrained lands, such as open water areas, floodplains, water quality facilities, wetlands, natural resource areas, tree preservation areas, and vegetated corridor (buffer) areas, when identified for protection from development on an approved site plan or set aside in a conservation easement, a separate tract, or dedicated to a public entity; and
    (3) Land set aside for plazas or open space, or in separate tracts, or dedicated to a public entity for schools, parks, or open space purposes; and
    (4) At the Applicant’s discretion, up to 100 percent of the area of topographical features with a slope equal to or greater than 25 percent within a landslide hazard area, and
    (5) At the Applicant’s discretion, up to 50 percent of the area of topographical features with a slope equal to or greater than 15 percent within a landslide hazard area.
LAND DIVISION. A lot or parcel of land created through the process of dividing land.
LAND USE APPROVAL. A land use decision for approval or approval with conditions. It includes any time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision.
LANDSCAPE FRONTAGE. A Landscape Frontage is set back from the street-facing property line by a wide landscaped strip between the building and the sidewalk. A Landscape Frontage is appropriate along streets where the existing streetscape may not be conducive to pedestrian- oriented ground floor retail, such as where there is no on-street parking or where streets are very wide. Ground floor entries must still be provided along and connected to the sidewalk.
LARGE SCALE RETAIL. For purposes of the Community Retail requirement of Section 235.275, “large scale retail uses” are those single retail uses containing 60,000 or more square feet of gross leasable area.
LEGISLATIVE ACTION. Any action which would result in a change in City policy including but not limited to: change to the comprehensive plan text; change to the comprehensive plan map which involves a number of parcels of land; change to the text of an implementing ordinance; change to the zoning map which involves a number of parcels of land; change to any land use plan or map which represents a change in City land use policy.
LOADING AREA. The area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading of passengers, freight, or other articles.
LOT. A lot is a legally defined piece of land that is the result of subdividing or partitioning land. This definition includes the State definition of both lot, (result of subdividing), and parcel (result of partitioning). See also, Ownership and Site.
    CORNER LOT. A lot has frontage on more than one intersecting street. A street that curves with angles that are 120 degrees or less is considered two intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner lot. See Figure 710-1.Figure 710-1. Corner Lots
    [IMAGE: <720.030_Corner-Lots.jpg>]
    FLAG LOTS. A lot located behind another lot that has normal street frontage. A flag lot includes a strip of land that goes out to the street and is generally used for an access drive. There are two distinct parts to a flag lot; the flay which comprises the actual building site located behind another lot, and the pole which provides access from the street to the flag. A flag lot results from the division of a large lot with the required area and depth for two lots, but which has insufficient width to locate both lots on the street frontage. See Figure 710-2.Figure 710-2. Flag Lot
    [IMAGE: <720.030_Flag-Lot.jpg>]
    THROUGH LOT. A lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
    LOT AREA. The total horizontal area enclosed within the lot lines of a lot.
    LOT COVERAGE. The area covered by primary and accessory buildings. Lot coverage shall be expressed as percentage of the total lot area.
    LOT DEPTH, AVERAGE. The average distance from the narrowest frontage to the lot line opposite.
LOT LINES. The property lines along the edge of a lot or site.
    FRONT LOT LINES. A lot line that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front line is the shortest of the lot lines which abut a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front. However, a through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. See Figure 710-3.Figure 710-3. Front & Side Lot Lines
    [IMAGE: <720.030_front-Lot-1.jpg>]Figure 710-4. Street Lot Lines
    [IMAGE: <720.030_front-Lot-2.jpg>]
    REAR LOT LINE. A lot line is opposite a front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregular shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are most nearly opposite the front lot line. See Figure 710-5.Figure 710-5. Lot Lines on Irregular Lots
    [IMAGE: <720.030_Lot-Lines-on-Irregular-Lots.jpg>]
    SIDE LOT LINE. A lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. On a corner, the longer lot line which abuts a street, is a side lot line. See Figure 710-3.
    STREET LOT LINE. Any lot lines that abut a street. Street lot line does not include lot lines that abut an alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines. See Figures 710-3 and 710-4.
    LOT OF RECORD. A lot or parcel of land for which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorder with the appropriate county recorder.
    LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
    LOT WIDTH, AVERAGE. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
MANUFACTURED HOME. See Residential Structure Types.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A lot, tract, or parcel with four (4) or more spaces within five-hundred (500) feet of one another available for rent or lease for the siting of manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A plot of land within a manufactured home park designed to accommodate one (1) manufactured home, on a rental or lease basis.
MITIGATE. To rectify, repair, or compensate for impacts which result from other actions.
MOTOR HOME. See Recreational Vehicle, under Vehicle Types.
MOTOR VEHICLE. See Vehicle Types.
MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE. See Residential Structure Types
NEW DEVELOPMENT. See New Development Definitions.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT. An element of a development, such as a setback, height, or parking area that was crated in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development standards. Nonconforming development includes development that is over a maximum allowed amount of floor area, as long as the development does not include an amount of floor area that is specifically prohibited by the current development standards.
NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL DENSITY. A residential use that is an allowed use in the zone and that was constructed at a lawful density, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, now has greater density than is allowed in the zone.
NONCONFORMING SITUATION. A Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, or Nonconforming Use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, and Nonconforming Use.
NONCONFORMING USE. A use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of the floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone.
NONDISCREATIONARY REVIEWS. A non-discretionary review is one where compliance with the regulations can be determined based on objective standards. Decisions are made ministerially; they do not required a public hearing or notice. Examples of these reviews include: whether the proposed use is or is not allowed, whether the site area is or is not large enough for the proposed number of housing units, and whether the proposed building meets all setbacks, height and parking requirements.
OPERATOR. A person undertaking a development, the proprietor of a use or development, or the owner of the land underlying a development.
OWNER. The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor. Owner also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract of sale showing date, book, and page of recording.
OWNERSHIP. An ownership is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person, partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a shared right-of-way. See Figure 910-11. See also, Lot and Size.
PARKING AREA. A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-passenger loading. See also, Driveway, Garage, and Vehicle Areas.
PARKING SPACE. A space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle.
PASSENGER VEHICLE. See Vehicle Types.
PAVED AREA. An uncovered hard surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as "Grasscrete"), that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas.
PERSON. Any person, partnership, association, or corporation.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development that is based on a comprehensive design that addresses the entire complex of land, structures, and uses as a single project. The design plan for the project functions as a substitute for the general site development regulations of the zoning on the site.
PRIMARY STRUCTURE. A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site.
PRIMARY USE. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use.
PROJECT. An existing or proposed development.
RAIL RIGHT-OF-WAY. See Transportation-Related Definitions.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. See Vehicle Types.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as Recreational Vehicle Parks. See also Mobile Home Park.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A residence for 6 to 15 physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition for Residential Facility.
RESIDENTIAL HOME. A residence for five or fewer physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition of Residential Home.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE TYPES
    ATTACHED HOUSE. A dwelling unit, located on its own lot that shares one (1) or more common or abutting walls with one (1) or more dwelling units. The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the side of the dwelling. An attached house does not share common floor/ceiling with other dwelling units. An attached house is also called a rowhouse or a common-wall house.
    DUPLEX. A structure that contains two (2) primary dwelling units on one (1) lot. These units may share common walls or common floor/ceilings.
    DWELLING UNIT. A building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one (1) set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory, such as an outdoor grill.
    GROUP LIVING STRUCTURE. A structure than contains sleeping areas and at least one (1) set of cooking and sanitary facilities that is used as a residence for group living uses.
    HOUSE. A detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.
    MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, intended for permanent occupancy as a dwelling. All manufactured homes located in the City after the effective date of this Code shall meet or exceed the standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and shall have been constructed after June 15, 1976.
    MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE. A structure that contains three (3) or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceiling with one (1) or more units. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots. Multi-dwelling includes structures commonly called garden apartments, apartments, and condominiums.
    MULTIFAMILY. Three (3) or more dwelling units situated on a single parcel, where the land is not divided into separate lots. Multifamily includes multi-dwelling structures and free standing structures situated on an undivided parcel.
REVIEW BODY. The person or group who is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether initially or on appeal. Review body includes the Planning Commission and the City Council.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. See Transportation-Related Definitions.
SETBACK. The minimum distance required between a specified object such as a building and another point. Setbacks are usually measured from lot lines to a specified object. Unless otherwise indicated, an unspecified setback refers to a building setback. In addition, the following setbacks indicate where each setback is measured from. See Section 730 Measurements, for measurement information.
    •Front Setback. A setback that is measured from a front lot line.
    •Rear Setback. A setback that is measured from a rear lot line.
    •Side Setback. A setback that is measured from a side lot line.
SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTAL. A short-term vacation rental (also called a vacation rental or STR) is defined as the rental of a residential dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit, or rental of part of a residential dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit for periods of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. The use is considered a commercial lodging use subject to zoning regulations and home occupancy standards.
SIGN RELATED DEFINITIONS
    BILLBOARDS. Signs advertising merchandise or services other than those available for sale on the premises.
    BUSINESS SIGNS. Sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, industry or service or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
    DISPLAY. The surface made available by the sign structure for the mounting of material to carry the advertising or other message, trademark or emblem.
    DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. Sign with advertising on two (2) surfaces or plain back-to-back.
    ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SYSTEM: A video display board of varying display quality up to television quality in which the rate of change is electronically programmed and capable of providing animated messaging, video clips, rapidly alternating messages, images or methods which achieve apparent movement through electrical pulsations, including strobe lights and bead lighting, or any other presentation that could distract drivers.
    ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER. A permanent sign that uses changing lights to form a written vertical or horizontal message, or messages, in which the sequence of messages and rate of change is electronically programmed in a dot matrix configuration which may be changed intermittently. Video signs are not included in this definition.
    FACE OF BUILDING. The wall of the building fronting on the street, excluding any appurtenances such as projecting columns, fins, pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases or decorations, but including the parapet wall.
    FINISH GROUND LEVEL (GRADE). The average elevation of the ground adjoining the structure or building upon which the sign is erected.
    FREE-STANDING SIGN. Sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces which are fastened to or embedded in the ground or a foundation in the ground; fence signs are considered in this category.
    GUIDE OR DIRECTIONAL SIGNS. Signs and sign structures which serve as directional guides to recognized areas of regional importance and patronage, including:
        (1) Recreational and entertainment centers of recognized regional significance.
        (2) Regional shopping centers maintaining a minimum of 100 parking spaces in the immediate vicinity.
        (3) Major sports stadium, entertainment centers or convention centers having a seating capacity in excess of 1,000 persons.
        (4) Recognized historical landmarks.
    HEIGHT OF SIGN. The height of a sign shall be measured from the finished ground level, excluding mounds, berms and the like to the top of the sign or the highest portion of the sign structure or frame, whichever is greater.
    LOCATION. A lot or premise or building wall or any place whatsoever upon which a sign is erected, constructed and/or maintained. See also City Zoning Ordinance.
    MARQUEE OR READER BOARD (CHANGEABLE COPY) SIGN. A sign which is characterized by changeable copy, whether free-standing or wall sign or whether the sign projects from and/or is supported by a building.
    MULTI-FACE SIGN. A multi-face sign is one with more than one (1) section or module.
    NAMEPLATES. Signs identifying the name, occupation and/or profession of the occupant of the premises.
    PARCEL, TRACT OR LOT. For the purpose of determining sign requirements shall mean any parcel, tract or lot of real property under separate ownership or lease of at least fifteen (15) years duration from any other parcel, tract or lot having street or highway frontage or in the event of an arterial street or freeway within two hundred (200) feet thereof.
    PROJECTING SIGN. A sign which projects to within any public right-of-way except a wall sign as herein defined.
    REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign or sign structure relating to the sale, lease or other disposition of real property.
    ROOF LINE. The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet whichever forms the top line of a building silhouette; where a building has several roof levels, the roof line shall be the one belonging to that portion of the wall on which the sign is located.
    ROOF SIGN. A sign located and/or maintained upon the roof of any building.
    ROTATING OR REVOLVING SIGNS. A sign, all or a portion of which moves in some manner.
    SIZE (SIGN). The size of a sign shall be the entire area within any type of perimeter or border which encloses the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character. The area of a sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram or a triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign computing the area of the parallelogram or a triangle. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign.
    STRUCTURE. The supports, uprights, bracing, guy rods or lines, cables or framework of a sign or outdoor display.
    TEMPORARY SIGN. Any advertising display or sign which shall appear or be located upon a particular parcel, tract or lot of real property for no more than sixty (60) days.
    WALL SIGN. A sign fixed to the exterior wall of any building and which projects not more than sixteen (16) inches from the building wall but does not project above the parapet or eves of the building. (Ord. 10-2011)
SITE. An ownership except as follows:
    •If a proposed development includes more than one ownership, then all the ownerships are included as the site.
    •If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and if the proposal is for new development, then the site is the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.
    •If there is existing development on an ownership, then the entire ownership in included as the site. An exception is when the proposed development is separated from the existing development by landscaping, screening, setback, or buffering measures, as would be required if the proposed development was on a separate ownership. In this case, the site is the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.
    See also, Lot and Ownership.
STREET. See Transportation-Related Definitions.
STRUCTURE. See Development-Related Definitions.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND PARTITION RELATED
    BUILDING LINE: A line on a plat or map indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.
    CROSSWALK: A right-of-way across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
    DEED RESTRICTIONS: A covenant or contract constituting a burden in the use of private property for the benefit of property owners in the same subdivision, adjacent property owners, the public or the City of Wood Village, and designed to mitigate or protect against adverse impacts of a development or use to ensure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan.
    EASEMENT: The grant of the legal right to use a strip of land for specific purposes.
    PARCEL: A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.
    PARTITION LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. “Partition land” does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures; divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including but not limited to court orders in proceedings involving intrastate or interstate succession; and “partition land” does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where and additional parcel is not created and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot standards of this Code. Partitioned land does not include a sale or grant by a person to a public agency or public body for state highway, county road, city street or other right-of-way purposes provided that such road or right-of-way complies with the applicable comprehensive plan or ORS 215.213(2)(q)  to (s) and 215.283(2)(p) to (r).
    PARTITION PLAT: Partition plat includes a final map and other writing containing all the description, locations, specifications, provisions and information concerning a major or minor partition.
    PEDESTRIAN WAY: A right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.
    PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Wood Village.
    PLAT: The final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision.
    SIDEWALK: A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing.
    STREET: A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons on foot, in vehicles, or otherwise, to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land and including the term “road”, “highway”, “lane”, “avenue”, “alley”, “boulevard”, “parkway”, or similar designations.
        (a) Alley: A narrow street generally through a block used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting another street.
        (b) Arterial: A street used primarily for through traffic.
        (c) Collector: A street used to some extent for through traffic but primarily for access to abutting properties.
        (d) Cul-de-sac (dead-end street): A short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
        (e) Half Street: A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in another subdivision.
        (f) Marginal Access Street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.
        (g) Minor Street: A street intended primarily for access to abutting properties.
    SUBDIVIDER: An individual firm or group who undertakes the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, and including changes in street or lot lines.
    SUBDIVIDE LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.
    SUBDIVISION: Either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided as defined in this Code.
    THROUGH LOT. See Lot, under Parcel Types.
THROUGH CONNECTION. A grade level pedestrian, cycling, or vehicle access route that is accessible to the public and extends through a city block, and includes but is not limited to a pedestrian walkway, a Street, or an access route through public or private land.
TOWN CENTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A Town Center Development Plan refers to information submitted by an applicant seeking approval for development within the Town Center Zone area. It includes, at a minimum, diagrams, narrative and other information as required by Section 235.400. The Town Center Development Plan explains how the applicant intends to meet the requirements of Chapter 235, including the requirements of Figure 235 – 1 (Concept Plan Regulating Diagram), and other applicable chapters and sections of the Wood Village Zoning and Development Code.
The Town Center Development Plan replaces the term Master Plan where it used to appear in Section 235.400, formerly 235.500.
TRANSPORTATION-RELATED DEFINITIONS
    FREEWAY (EXPRESSWAY) (THRU-WAY): Such streets, highways or roads of the City of Wood Village as approved by appropriate State Agency.
    RAIL RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel.
    RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public or private area that allows for the passage of people or goods. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, streets, bike paths, alleys, and walkways. A public right-of-way is a right-of-way that is dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency.
    ROADWAY. The portion of a street that is improved for motor vehicular travel. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.
    STREET. A public or private right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle travel or for motor vehicle access to abutting property. Street includes all the area within the right-of-way, such as roadways, parking strips, and sidewalks. For the purposes of this Title, street does not include alleys, rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor vehicle access, or the interstate freeways and the Sunset highway including their ramps.
    VEHICLE AREAS. All the area on a site where vehicles may circulate or park including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also, Driveway and Parking Area.
VEHICLE TYPES.
    MOTOR VEHICLE. Vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used for the transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles with motive power. See also Passenger Vehicle, Recreational Vehicle and Truck.
    PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle designed to carry ten persons or less including the driver. Passenger vehicle also includes motor vehicles designed to carry ten persons or less that are constructed with on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road use. Passenger vehicle includes vehicles commonly called cars, minivans, passenger vans, and jeeps. Passenger vehicle is intended to cover the vehicles defined as passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. See also Recreational Vehicle and Truck.
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for sport or recreational use, or which is designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. Recreational vehicle is divided into two categories as follows:
    - MOTOR HOME. Motor home includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on a intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations specifically indicate otherwise. See also Truck.
    - ACCESSORY RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Accessory recreational vehicle includes non-motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis such as vacation trailers and fifth-wheel trailers. A camper is considered an accessory recreational vehicle when it is standing alone. Accessory recreational vehicle also includes vehicles designed for off-road use such as off-road vehicles, dune buggies, and recreational boats.
    TRUCK. A motor vehicle which is designed primarily for the movement of property or special purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than ten persons. Truck includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes and other similar vehicles. Truck is intended to cover the vehicles defined as trucks and buses by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. Trucks are divided into three categories by size as stated below. See also Passenger Vehicle, and Recreational Vehicle.
        - LIGHT TRUCK. Light trucks are trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single rear wheels.
        - MEDIUM TRUCK. Medium trucks are trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck tractors, with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the Heavy Truck category.
        - HEAVY TRUCK. Heavy trucks are trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles.
    UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is 16 feet or less in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than 16 feet in length are considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks.
WASTE RELATED
    DEMOLITION LANDFILL. A land disposal site for receiving, sorting and disposing only land clearing debris, including vegetation and dirt, building construction and demolition debris and inert materials, and similar substances.
    HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE DEPOT. A facility for receiving, sorting, processing and temporarily storing household hazardous waste and for preparing that waste for safe transport to facilities authorized to receive, process, or dispose of such materials pursuant to federal or state law.
    LIMITED PURPOSE LANDFILL. A land disposal site for the receiving, sorting and disposing of solid waste material, including but not limited to asbestos, treated petroleum contaminated soil, construction, land clearing and demolition debris, wood, treated sludge from industrial processes, or other special waste material other than unseparated municipal solid waste.
    RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing and processing solid waste to obtain useful material or energy.
    MIXED CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores, processes, and recovers recyclable material from mixed construction and demolition debris for reuse, sale, or further processing.
    SOLID WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores and processes solid waste by decomposing the organic portions of the waste by biological means to produce useful products including, but not limited to, compost, mulch and soil amendments.
    MONOFILL. A land disposal site for receiving, sorting and disposing only one type of solid waste material or class of solid waste materials for burial, such as a facility that accepts only asbestos.
    MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DEPOT. A facility where sealed containers are received, stored up to 72 hours, staged, and/or transferred from one mode of transportation to another.
    SMALL SCALE SPECIALIZED INCINERATOR. A facility that receives, processes, temporarily stores, and burns a solid waste product as an accessory use to a permitted use, including incinerators for disposal of infectious wastes as part of a medical facility, but not including mass burn solid waste incinerators, refuse-derived fuel technologies, human or animal remains crematorium, or any energy recovery process that burns unseparated municipal solid waste.
    SOLID WASTE FACILITY. Any facility or use defined in Section 1 of this attachment.
    SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION. A facility that receives, processes, temporarily stores and prepares solid waste for transport to a final disposal site, with or without material recovery prior to transfer.
    TREATMENT AND STORAGE FACILITY. A facility subject to regulation under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC §§ 6901-6987, for receiving, sorting, treating, and/or temporarily storing hazardous waste, and for processing such waste for safe transport to facilities authorized to receive, treat, dispose of such materials pursuant to federal or state law. Treatment and storage facilities do not include facilities for on-site disposal of hazardous waste.
    WOOD WASTE RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores and processes untreated wood, which does not contain pressure treated or preservative treated wood, in the form of scrap lumber, timbers, or natural wood debris, including logs, limbs, and tree trunks, for reuse, recycling or energy recovery into products such as hogged fuel, fuel pellets, or fireplace logs.
    YARD DEBRIS DEPOT. A facility that receives yard debris for temporary storage, awaiting transport to a processing facility.
    YARD DEBRIS PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores and processes yard debris into a soil amendment, mulch or other useful product through grinding and/or controlled biological decomposition
YARDS. A required open space, on a lot, such space being unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure, from the ground to the sky, except for permitted projecting building features and accessory structures when in conformance with this Code. Each yard shall be measured by striking a line parallel to the corresponding lot line the distance required by the setback standard of the base zone.
ZONE. Refers to land use regulatory zones (Districts) under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wood Village. (Ord. 3-2018 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 2-2020 § 4 (Att. A))

Section 730 Measurements

730.010 Purpose.
This Section explains how measurements are made in the zoning code.

730.020 Fractions.
When calculations result in fractions the results will be rounded as follows:
A. Minimum Requirements. When a regulation is expressed in terms of a minimum requirement, any fractional result will be rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. For example, if a minimum requirement of one tree for every 30 feet is applied to a 50 foot strip, the result of 1.67 is rounded up to 2 required trees.
B. Maximum Limits. When a regulation is expressed in terms of maximum limits, any fractional result will be rounded down to the next lower number. For example, if a maximum limit of one dwelling unit for every 8,000 square feet is applied to an 18,000 square foot site, the resulting fraction of 2.25 is rounded down to 2 allowed dwelling units.

730.030 Measuring Distances.
A. Distances are measured horizontally. When determining distances for setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a horizontal plane from the appropriate property line, edge of building, structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. These distances are not measured by following the topography of the land. See Figure 730-1.730-1 Horizontal Measurement
[IMAGE: <Fig730-1_Horizontal-Measurement.jpg>]Distances are always measured horizontally.
B. Measurements are shortest distance. When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the measurement is made at the shortest distance between the two objects. See figure 730-2. Exceptions are stated in Subsection C, D and E.730-2 Closest Distance
[IMAGE: <Fig730-2_Closest-Distance.jpg>]Measurement is taken from the shortest Distance between the points.
C. Measurements of vehicle travel areas. Measurements of a minimum travel distance for vehicles, are measured down the center of the vehicle travel area. For example, curving driveways and travel lanes are measured along the arc of the driveway or traffic lane. See Figure 730-3.730-3 Measuring Vehicle Travel Areas
[IMAGE: <Fig730-3_Measuring-Vehicle-Travel-Areas.png>]Measure down the middle of the travel area.
D. Measurements involving a structure. Measurements involving a structure are made to the closest wall of the structure. Chimneys, eaves, and bay windows up to 12 feet in length, are not included in the measurement. Other items, such as covered porches and entrances, are included in the measurement. See figure 730-2 above, and the base zone sections.
E. Underground structures. Structures or portions of structures that are entirely underground are not included in measuring required distances. See Figure 730-4.Figure 730-4. Underground Structures
[IMAGE: <Fig730-4_Underground-Structures.png>]
Measurements do not include underground structures

730.040 Measuring distances on maps.
Zone boundaries that are shown crossing lots are usually based on a topographic feature or a set measurement from a property line or topographic feature, such as the top of slope, middle of stream, 25 feet from top of bank, or 30 feet from the property line. When zone boundaries are shown crossing properties with no clear indication of the basis for the line, exact distances are to be determined by scaling the distances from the Official Zoning Maps, using the center of the zoning line.

730.050 Measuring Height.
A. Measuring building height. Height of buildings is generally measured as provided in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code (the Uniform Building Code as amended by the State). The height of buildings is the vertical distance above the base point described in paragraphs 1 or 2 below. The base point used is the method that yields the greater height of the building. For a flat roof, the measurement is made to the top of the parapet, or if there is no parapet, to the highest point of the roof. The measurement is made to the deck line of the mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of the pitched or hipped roof that has a roof pitch of 12 in 12 or less. For pitched or hipped roofs with a pitch steeper that 12 in 12, the measurement is to the highest point. For other roof shapes such as domed, vaulted, or pyramidal shapes, the measurement is to the highest point. See Figure 730-5. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.Figure 730-5. Measuring Height – Roof Types
[IMAGE: <Fig730-5_Measuring-Height–Roof-Types.jpg>]
    (1) Base Point 1. Base point 1 is the elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a 5 foot distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above lowest grade. See Figure 730-6.
    (2) Base Point 2. Base point 2 is the elevation that is 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in paragraph 1. above, is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade. See Figure 730-7.730-6 Measuring Height – Base Point 1730-7 Measuring Height – Base Point 2
    [IMAGE: <Fig730-7_Base-Point-1-2.png>]
B. Measuring height of other structures. The height of other structures such as flag poles and fences is the vertical distance from the ground level immediately under the structure to the top of a structure, excluding exempted portions. When chimneys and other objects are allowed to exceed the base height of the zone by a set amount, that set amount is measured to the top of these objects. Special measurement provisions are also provided below.
    (1) Measuring height of retaining walls and fences. Retaining walls and fences on top of retaining walls are measured from the ground level on the higher side of the retaining wall. See Figure 730-8.Figure 730-8. Measuring Height – Retaining Walls
    [IMAGE: <Fig730-8_Measuring-Height-Retaining-Walls.png>]
    (2) Measuring height of decks. Deck height is determined by measuring from the ground to the top of the floor of the deck if there is no rail or if the rail walls are more than 50 percent open, and from the ground to the top of the rails for all other situations.

730.060 Determining Average Slope.
A. Average slope used. When calculating the slope of a lot, an average slope is used based on the elevations at the corners of the lot. The average slope of a lot is calculated by subtracting the average elevation of the uphill lot line and the average elevation of the downhill lot line and dividing the sum by the average distance between the two lot lines. The average elevation of the uphill and downhill lot line is calculated by adding the elevations at the ends of the lot line and dividing by two. See Figure 730-9.Figure 730-9. Calculating Average Slope
[IMAGE: <Fig730-9_Calculating-Average-Slope.png>]

730.070 Determining the Area of the Façade of a Building.
The area of a specific façade of a building is determined by adding the square footage of surface area of each section of wall visible from that perspective. For buildings with more than one wall along one facade (for example, rooms jutting out from the main building or a building where each floor is set back from the floor below), all of the walls are included in the total area. The total area does not include any roof area. See Figure 730-10.Figure 730-10. Façade of a Building
[IMAGE: <Fig730-10_BuildingFacade.png>]

730.080 Determining the Plane of a Building Wall.
The purpose of this measurement system is to provide a way to calculate varying amounts of bulk on a particular side of a structure. The plane of a building wall is a plane that extends from the ground to the top of each wall of a structure. A structure with more than one wall along one façade (for example, room jutting out from the main structure or a structure where each floor is set back from the floor below) will have a different plane for each of the walls. The area of the plane is determined by calculating the area of the plane from the ground to the top of the wall. The plane does not include roof area.
In situations where there is more than one wall along one façade, the bulk of the closer walls cover the bulk of walls that are further back. In these situations, the wall is measured by extending the plane of the wall to the area that is behind a closer wall. See Figure 730-11. [There are special measurement rules for situations where the plane of the building wall is wider than portions of the wall below]. See Figure 730-12 below.Figure 730-11. Plane of a Building Wall
[IMAGE: <Fig730-11_BuildingWallPlane.png>]
Where the plane of the building wall contains portions that are wider than areas of the wall that are below it, the calculation of area is made using the wider dimension and extending the plane to the open area below. See Figure 730-12.Figure 730-12. Additions to the Plane of a Building Wall
[IMAGE: <Fig730-12_BuildingWallPlaneAddition.png>]

730.090 Measuring Lot Width and Depths.
Lot widths and depths are measured from the midpoints of opposite lot lines. See Figures 730-13 and 730-14.730-13 Measuring Lot Width730-14 Measuring Lot Depth
[IMAGE: <Fig730-13-14_MeasuringLot.png>]

730.100 Measuring Areas with Squares of Specified Dimensions.
Required areas (for example, required outdoor areas in residential zones) must be of a sufficient size and configuration so that a square measuring x by x can be placed totally within the required area. The dimensions of the square are stated in the base zone and additional regulations sections. See Figure 730-15.Figure 730-15. Using Squares with Specified Dimensions
[IMAGE: <Fig730-15_SpecifiedDimensionSquares.png>]

730.110 Setback Averaging.
Certain regulations allow for setbacks to be averaged. In these situations the required setback may be reduced to the average of the existing setbacks of the lots that are on both sides of the site. See Figure 730-16. The following rules apply in calculating the average:
A. The setbacks used for the calculations must be the same type of setback that is being averaged. For example, only front setbacks can be used to average a front setback.
B. Only the setbacks on the lots that abut each side of the site and are on the same street may be used. Setbacks across the street or along a different street may not be used.
C. When an abutting lot is vacant or if the lot is a corner lot, then the average is of the setback of the non-vacant lot and the required setback for the zone.Figure 730-16. Setback Averaging
[IMAGE: <Fig730-16_SetbackAveraging.png>]

730.120 Local street design.
[IMAGE: <730.120_001.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_002.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_003.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_004.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_005.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_006.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_007.png>]
[IMAGE: <730.120_008.jpg>]

730.130 Clear Vision/Site Distance.
No signs, structures or vegetation in excess of three (3) feet in height shall be placed in “vision clearance areas”, as shown below. The minimum vision clearance area may be increased by the Public Works Director upon finding that more sight distance is required (i.e., due to traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.).
[IMAGE: <730.130_ClearVisionSiteDistance.png>]

Tables
 State Code Citation Table
 Ordinance Table

State Code Citation Table
This table lists Oregon Revised Statutes and Oregon Administrative Rules sections that are cited in the Wood Village Development Code. Thus, ORS 465.225 is cited in WVDC 250.310.
+------------------------------+--------------+
|        State Citation        | Code Section |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 34.010                   | 370.070      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 92               | 450.020      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 197.830 – ORS 197.845    | 560.180      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 197.830(4)(b)            | 710.040      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.213(1)(m)            | 100.070      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.213(1)(p)            | 100.070      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.213(2)               | 720.030      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.213(2)(q)            | 720.030      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.283(1)(k)            | 100.070      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.283(1)(n)            | 100.070      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.283(2)               | 720.030      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 215.283(2)(p)            | 720.030      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 223              | 450.140      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 227.175(11)              | 710.040      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 227.178                  | 500.115      |
|                              | 530.180      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS Chapter 271              | 650.030      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 271.080                  | 650.020      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 418.805                  | 310.020      |
|                              | 710.430      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 455.010                  | 340.010      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 459A.010                 | 390.020      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 465.225                  | 250.310      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| ORS 495A.025                 | 390.030      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| OAR 333-150-0000             | 345.020      |
+------------------------------+--------------+
| OAR Chapter 340, Division 41 | 430.120      |
+------------------------------+--------------+

Ordinance Table
This table lists all ordinances codified in the Wood Village Development Code. If an ordinance is codified, its location in the code is cited by the section number at the end of the enactment description. Ordinances are codified if they are general, permanent, and/or include penalty provisions for noncompliance. 
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 4-2006  | ()                                          |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 13-2010 | (640)                                       |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 15-2010 | (220, 235, 370, 710)                        |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 10-2011 | (720)                                       |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 9-2013  | (710)                                       |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 2-2018  | Adds § 425 to zoning and development        |
|         | code; amends comprehensive plan (425)       |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 3-2018  | Amends §§ 230.310, 720.030, and Table       |
|         | 230-1, zoning and development code (230,    |
|         | 720)                                        |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 2-2020  | Adds to § 260; amends §§ 310.020, 395.020,  |
|         | and 720.030, zoning and development         |
|         | code (260, 310, 395, 710, 720)              |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+
| 4-2020  | Adds § 710.260; amends §§ 230.310, 380.010, |
|         | 380.020, and 380.030; amends and renumbers  |
|         | § 710.260 to 710.270, automotive and        |
|         | temporary uses (230, 380, 710)              |
+---------+---------------------------------------------+

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Wood Village Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 3-2020, passed May 12, 2020.
Disclaimer: The City Recorder’s office has the official version of the Wood Village Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
The Wood Village Development Code is current through Ordinance 4-2020, passed September 10, 2020.
Disclaimer: The City Recorder’s office has the official version of the Wood Village Development Code. Users should contact the City Recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.
Note: This site does not support Internet Explorer. To view this site, Code Publishing Company recommends using one of the following browsers: Google Chrome, Firefox, or Safari.

City Website: www.woodvillageor.gov
Code Publishing Company