Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1379]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5), the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Avalon,
County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters I through 415, together with an Appendix, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the
Borough of Avalon, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the
"Code of the Borough of Avalon," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Avalon, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Borough of Avalon which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Borough Council of the Borough of
Avalon has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in
effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Ordinance No. 735, Structures and obstructions on sidewalks,
adopted March 12, 1936, as amended by Ord. No. 852.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(2) Ordinance No. 767, Circuses, shows and other entertainment,
adopted March 21, 1941, as amended by Ord. Nos. 829, 835.
(3) Ordinance No. 912, Disorderly conduct, adopted November 2,
1956.
(4) Ordinance No. 922, Junk Dealers, adopted April 5, 1957.
(5) Ordinance No. 991, Noise, adopted December 13, 1963.
(6) Ordinance No. 1088, Per Capita Tax, adopted May 9, 1975.
(7) Ordinance No. 1112, Assistant Building Inspector, adopted May 17,
1978.
(8) Ordinance No. 1122, Firearms and Other Weapons, adopted May
16, 1979.
(9) Ordinance No. 1150, Mercantile Tax, adopted August 25, 1982.
(10) Ordinance No. 1194, Environmental Advisory Council, adopted
May 22, 1991.
(11) Ordinance No. 1253, Skateboards, Bicycles, and Similar Devices,
adopted May 19, 1999.
(12) Ordinance No. 1257, Building Permits, adopted October 19, 1999.
(13) Ordinance No. 1267, Combining positions of Manager, Secretary
and Treasurer, adopted February 20, 2001.
(14) Ordinance No. 1332, Adoption of various international standards,
adopted March 15, 2011.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 16, 2018.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
§ 1-3 AVALON CODE § 1-4
1:4
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough or accepting and/or
approving any plan of lots, subdivision or other improvement, along
with related infrastructure and/or right-of ways.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, replacing, improving, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk,
sanitary or storm sewer/improvement, park or other public place or
property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee,
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:5
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance relating to or establishing personnel policies.
S. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough,
T. Any currently effective or former ordinance providing for
intergovernmental cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal
agreement, including but not limited to such agreements between or
amongst Bellevue Borough, Ross Township, Ben Avon Borough, Ben
Avon Heights Borough, Alcosan, the County of Allegheny and Northgate
School DistrictLor.
U. Ordinance No. 1196.
V. Ordinance No. 1327, Tri-Borough Joint Zoning Ordinance, and any
amendments thereto,
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
1379." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-4 AVALON CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such, All such changes and revisions shall
be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified
in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following terms are updated
as indicated:
(1) "Justice of the Peace" or "District Justice" is changed to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(2) "Burgess" is changed to "Mayor."
(3) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" is changed to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(4) "Department of Community Affairs" is changed to "Department of
Community and Economic Development."
(5) "Soil Conservation Service" is changed to "Natural Resources
Conservation Service."
(6) "Zoning Code Official" is changed to "Zoning Officer."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted· in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:7
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided of hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and
all legislation adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice
of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection
by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the
county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
§ 1-9 AVALON CODE § 1-13
1:8
Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. The defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 18, 2018.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 7
AUDITOR, INDEPENDENT
§ 7-1. Legislative authority; powers and duties. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Pursuant to the Borough Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 8
Pa.C.S.A. § 1059.11, the Borough Council of the Borough of Avalon is hereby
empowered to appoint an independent auditor who shall annually examine,
audit and settle all accounts whatsoever in which the Borough of Avalon is
concerned, and shall perform all powers and duties as prescribed by the
Borough Code as it affects said independent auditor.
§ 7-2. Appointment.
The appointment of the independent auditor shall be made at the first
regular meeting of the fiscal year, and shall be on an annual basis.
§ 7-3. Vacancy.
In the event a vacancy occurs during an annual term, an appointment shall
be made by the Borough Council as soon as possible after the vacancy is
created to fill the unexpired term of the last independent auditor.
Chapter 14
BUDGETARY RESERVE ACCOUNT
§ 14-1. Creation.
There is hereby created for the Borough of Avalon a Budgetary Reserve
Account.
§ 14-2. Deposit of funds.
The Borough Manager is hereby directed to deposit all funds received from
the State Treasurer pursuant to Act 77 of 1993, 16 P.S. § 6101-B, for the
period of the first calendar year in which the additional one-percent sales
tax is in effect into such Budgetary Reserve Account.
§ 14-3. Use of funds.
Such Budgetary Reserve Account created by this chapter shall be
maintained by the Borough of Avalon, and the funds therein shall be
retained by the Borough until such time as the Borough's Council shall, by
resolution, direct their expenditure for use in paying for or reimbursing the
costs incurred, whether total or partial, in connection with an unanticipated
fiscal emergency of the Borough of Avalon.
§ 1-15 AVALON CODE § 14-4
1:10
§ 14-4. Unanticipated fiscal emergency.
An unanticipated fiscal emergency as set forth in § 14-3 hereof shall be
defined to include all appropriate costs related to adverse snowstorms
and weather conditions, specifically including those in which emergencies
are declared by the Governor of Pennsylvania or Allegheny County
Commissioners, as well as landslides in the Borough, and shall also include,
and not be limited to, an unbudgeted or under-budgeted expense relating
to:
Chapter 24
ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES
A. The construction or extension of public water or public sewer lines to
serve residents within the Borough;
B. The construction, repair or maintenance (including winter maintenance
during unanticipated fiscal emergency) of public roads within the
Borough as well as excess purchases of materials and equipment or
rental thereof, and overtime pay related thereto;
C. The purchase, lease, repair or maintenance of vehicles or other
equipment necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety;
or
D. Such other unanticipated fiscal emergency as may be defined by
Council of the Borough of Avalon in a resolution.
§ 14-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:11

ARTICLE I
Issuance of Violation Tickets and Notices of Violation
[Adopted 5-22-2014 by Ord. No. 1354]
§ 24-1. Applicability.
Upon inspection of a duly empowered Borough officer and a determination
that a Borough ordinance has been violated, the Borough officer may notify
the responsible party or parties of the violation in writing in the form of
a notice of violation, a violation ticket or a nontraffic citation ("notice").
Borough officers may include Borough police officers, the Zoning Officer,
the Building Code Official, or other persons so deputized or directed by
Borough Council to enforce its laws and ordinances.
§ 24-2. Notices.
Whenever the Borough officer determines that there exists a violation of
any provision of the Avalon Borough Code that could, upon admission or
conviction, constitute a summary offense, he or she shall issue a notice
which shall:
§ 24-3. Service of notice.
A. Be in writing; and
B. Include a brief description of the time/date/location of the violation
inspected; and
C. Specify the violation which exists with reference to the applicable
ordinance provision or code; and
D. Include a statement regarding the right of appeal or other judicial
process.
A. Notice shall be served upon the owner, occupant or responsible party in
the following manner:
(1) By handing it to the person to be served; or
(2) By handing the notice, at the residence of the person to be served,
to an adult member of the family with which he resides, but if no
adult member of the family is found then to an adult person in
charge of such residence; or
(3) By handing the notice at any office or usual place of business of the
person to be served to his agent or to the person for the time being
in charge thereof; or
(4) By mailing the notice to the last known address of the person or
entity to be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
if returned as unclaimed to be sent first-class mail; or
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:13
§ 24-4. Fines. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(5) Other method permitted by relevant Pennsylvania law or Borough
ordinance.
B. If any person to whom the notice of violation cannot be served in the
above manner, the Borough officer shall briefly note the appropriate
facts in the file and shall make service upon such person by posting the
notice of violation in a conspicuous place on the premises described in
the notice.
C. For the purposes of this section, a person "cannot be served" when the
person to be served has no residence or office or usual place of business
within the Borough and the mailed notice is returned undelivered; or
when the notice cannot be served under Subsection A(1), (2) or (3)
hereof after two trips on two separate days to the residence or office or
usual place of business of the person to be served and if the mailed
notice of violation is returned undelivered.
D. Notwithstanding the above service requirements, any notice relating to
a motor vehicle may be made by affixing the notice to the vehicle under
the front windshield wiper or other location on the vehicle reasonably
believed to be conspicuous to a driver.
A. The maximum daily fines for specific ordinances herein shall be set
forth in the relevant Avalon Borough ordinance, as may be amended
from time to time.
B. Where a violation ticket is issued by the public officer, the violation
ticket may provide for a fine per violation of ordinance in an amount
less than the maximum daily fine, provided that the violation ticket
recipient pays the violation ticket as herein provided. Tickets that
remain unpaid, in full, seven days after notice may be converted into
nontraffic citations, which, upon conviction, carry the full maximum
daily fine provided by specific ordinance. Violation ticket fines may be
set by ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
§ 24-3 AVALON CODE § 24-4
1:14
Chapter 31
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 31-1. Recognition of association; purpose.
The Avalon Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of Avalon, Pennsylvania,
be and is hereby officially recognized by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Avalon as an organization formed for the purpose of maintaining
an association for beneficial and protective purposes, to its members and
their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent disability
or accident, from the funds collected therewith.
§ 31-2. Designated to receive funds. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The aforesaid Avalon Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of Avalon be
and is hereby designated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Avalon
as the proper association to receive such funds as are due and payable to
the Borough Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania, from
the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 31-3. Annual appropriation.
There is hereby annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such
sum or sums of money that may hereafter be paid into the aforesaid
Borough Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania, on account
of taxes paid on premiums by foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance
to an Act of Assembly in such case made and provided.
Chapter 48
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-3
1:15

ARTICLE I
Borough Manager
[Adopted 10-11-1963 by Ord. No. 988]
§ 48-1. Creation of office.
The Office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of Avalon.
§ 48-2. Appointment and removal. [Amended 6-19-1990 by Ord. No.
1189]
Council shall enter into an employment agreement with a Borough Manager
upon his appointment, the terms and conditions of said agreement are to
be negotiated by and between Council and the Manager, and, after full
agreement, to be ratified by vote of full Council whereupon the proper
officers will enter into a signed contract with said Manager.
§ 48-3. Qualifications. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office
as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough
or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment,
but during the tenure of his office he must become a resident of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania within 60 days after appointment.
§ 48-4. Bond. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Council,
in the sum of $150,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the Borough.2
§ 48-5. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. The powers and
duties of administration of all Borough business shall be vested in the
Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other
Borough officers. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and
duties of the Borough Manager shall include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all official
municipal departments under jurisdiction of Council, which will include
acting as Borough Building Inspector, Borough Plumbing Inspector and
2. Editor's Note: Original § V, Manager's Compensation, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed by Ord. No. 1189, adopted 6-19-1990.
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-5
1:17
Secretary of the Planning Commission, etc., as provided under the
Borough Code.
B. He shall, with the approval of Council, hire and, when necessary for the
good of the Borough, shall suspend or discharge any employee under
his supervision according to the Borough's Personnel Ordinance.3
C. He shall recommend wage scales to Council for employees under his
supervision.
D. He shall prepare and submit to Council, before the close of each fiscal
year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the budget, the Manager, or an officer
designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency or board, or any qualified officer thereof, estimates of revenues
and expenditures and such other supporting data as he requires. The
Manager shall review such estimates and may revise them before
submitting the budget to the Council.
E. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
F. He shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly budget,
develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to be
presented annually to the Council for its review and adoption.
G. He shall hold such other municipal offices and head such municipal
departments as the Council may from time to time direct.
H. He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees with the
right to take part in the discussions, and he shall receive notice of all
special meetings of Council and its committees.
I. He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs
through a weekly report and a quarterly report on Borough finances.
The Borough Manager should make such recommendations to the
Council as he deems advisable.
J. He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
K. He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Borough.
L. He shall attend to the letting of contracts as directed by Council in due
form of law, and he shall supervise the performance and faithful
execution of the same except insofar as such duties are expressly
imposed by statute upon some other Borough officer.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Personnel Policies.
§ 48-5 AVALON CODE § 48-5
1:18
§ 48-6. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he
shall immediately notify the President of Council who will promptly call the
matter to the attention of the Personnel Committee for action.
M. He shall be the purchasing officer of the Borough and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all
supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments and
other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an account of all purchases
and submit a copy of all purchase orders for purchases up to the limits
set by the Borough Code. He shall also issue rules and regulations,
subject to approval of Council, governing the procurement of all
municipal supplies and equipment.
N. All complaints regarding Borough services shall be referred to the
Manager. He, or an officer designated by him, shall investigate and
dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to
Council.
O. Other than for the purposes of inquiry, the Council or any of its
members, or any of Council's committees, or its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Borough Manager,
and neither the Council, nor any of its members, nor any of Council's
committees, or its members, shall give orders, publicly or privately, to
any subordinate of the Manager.
§ 48-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-6
1:19

ARTICLE II
Combining Positions of Manager and Secretary
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 48-7. Offices compatible.
The offices of the Borough Manger and Borough Secretary are hereby
declared to be compatible in the Borough of Avalon.
§ 48-8. Authorization of offices to be held by same person.
The Borough of Avalon is hereby authorized to appoint the same person in
the Borough of Avalon to hold the offices of Borough Manager and Borough
Secretary.
§ 48-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-8
1:21

ARTICLE III
Assistant Manager
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 48-9. Appointment and removal.
The Council of the Borough of Avalon is authorized to appoint an Assistant
Manger whose appointment shall be at the will of Council.
§ 48-10. Offices of Assistant Manager and Treasurer compatible.
The position of the Assistant Manger and Borough Treasurer are hereby
declared to be compatible in the Borough of Avalon.
§ 48-11. Authorization of offices to be held by same person.
The Borough of Avalon is hereby authorized to appoint the same person
in the Borough of Avalon to hold the position of Assistant Manager and
Borough Treasurer.
§ 48-12. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Assistant Manager shall give bond
to the Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the
Council, in the sum of $150,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of his duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the Borough.
§ 48-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-12
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Fire Marshal
[Adopted 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 1377]
§ 48-13. Office established.
The office of Avalon Borough Fire Marshal is hereby established.
§ 48-14. Duties.
The Fire Marshal shall advise, consult and assist the Borough Council
and Borough Administration regarding matters concerning fire safety, fire
service and fire prevention, when requested. The Fire Marshal may provide
community education regarding fire prevention and safety. The Fire
Marshal may serve in an honorary capacity at civic events and meetings.
The Fire Marshal shall make such reports regarding his/her official
activities to Borough Council and/or its designated committee(s) as
directed.
§ 48-15. Appointment.
The Fire Marshal serves an annual term by appointment of Borough
Council, who may appoint and remove at will by motion at a public meeting.
§ 48-16. Conflict.
Nothing herein shall amend or abridge the Fire Code Official's authority
arising under a Fire Code or other duly adopted ordinance, or the authority
of a Fire Marshal duly appointed under the Pennsylvania State Fire Marshal
Law,4 as amended.
§ 48-17. Severability; failure to enforce not a waiver.
A. If any sentence, clause or section or any part of this article is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any
of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections or parts of
the same contained in this article. It is hereby declared as the intent of
the Council of the Borough of Avalon that this article would have been
adopted has such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity sentence,
clause, or section or part thereof and not been included therein.
B. The failure of the Borough of Avalon to enforce any provisions of this
article shall not constitute a waiver by the Borough of its rights of
future enforcement hereunder.
4. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1181 et seq.
§ 48-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-17
1:25
Chapter 55
PENSIONS
§ 48-17 AVALON CODE § 48-17
1:26
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[The current Police Pension Plan of the Borough of Avalon is on file
in the Borough office.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-17
1:27

ARTICLE II
Employee Pension Plan
[The current Employee Pension Plan of the Borough of Avalon is on
file in the Borough office.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-17
1:29
Chapter 59
PERSONNEL POLICIES
[The current Personnel Policy of the Borough of Avalon is on file in
the Borough office.]
Chapter 64
PLANNING COMMISSION, JOINT
§ 64-1. Dissolution of Borough Planning Commission.
The Avalon Borough Planning Commission is dissolved, as of the effective
date of this chapter, subject to the conditions set forth herein.
§ 64-2. Creation of Joint Planning Commission.
Avalon Borough Council, acting in concert with the Councils of Bellevue
and Ben Avon, hereby creates and joins the Joint Planning Commission of
Bellevue, Ben Avon, and Avalon, to consist of nine members, three members
to be from Avalon, plus one alternate, where the Avalon members and the
alternate are to be appointed by Avalon Borough Council.
§ 64-3. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon the approval by the third of
the three municipalities approving similar ordinances to create and join the
Joint Planning Commission of Bellevue, Ben Avon, and Avalon. This chapter
shall be expressly conditioned upon all three communities approving such
a similar ordinance; should either of the other municipalities fail to enact
such an ordinance, this chapter shall be void.
Chapter 80
SALARIES
§ 48-17 AVALON CODE § 64-3
1:30
ARTICLE I
Council Persons
[Adopted 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 1179; amended in its entirety
12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 1374]
§ 80-1. Compensation.
On and after the first day of January 2018, the compensation due and
payable to each duly elected or appointed Council person of the Borough of
Avalon is hereby fixed at the sum of $1,875 per year or $156.25 per month.
§ 80-2. Forfeit of compensation.
Any Council person failing to attend at least one meeting on official business
of the Borough of Avalon in any calendar month shall forfeit all claim to
compensation for that month.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:31

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 1180]
§ 80-3. Salary. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Avalon shall be fixed at the rate
of $2,500 per annum as permitted by the Pennsylvania Legislature through
the Borough Code.
§ 80-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:33

ARTICLE III
Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 1326]
§ 80-4. Collection of real estate taxes.
The elected Tax Collector for the collection of taxes for Avalon Borough
shall collect all real estate taxes which may be levied and assessed by the
Borough for and during the term beginning January 1, 2009, and ending
December 31, 2010.
§ 80-5. Base compensation.
The elected Tax Collector for the collection of the aforesaid real estate taxes
levied and assessed for the Borough of Avalon shall be paid by the Borough
for and during the term beginning January 1, 2009, and ending December
31, 2010, as follows:
§ 80-6. Payment on delinquent taxes.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the elected Tax Collector for Avalon
Borough for the aforesaid term shall be paid as follows with regard to real
estate taxes:
§ 80-7. Compensation for expenditures.
In addition to the compensation and commission herein set forth which
reimburses the Tax Collector's office for the collection of Avalon Borough's
taxes, the Borough shall pay 1/2 of the following expenditures incurred by
the Tax Collector:
A. A base compensation of $7,280 per year, being $4 per tax statement
printed (based on 1,820 statements).
B. If more than 1,820 real estate tax statements are printed within a given
year, $4 per statement will be paid the last pay of the year, with proof of
printing presented to the Borough of Avalon.
A. Five and one-half percent annual commission on delinquent real estate
taxes for that particular tax year, until liened, which occurs one year
after delinquency.
B. Five hundred dollars for each full 1% of real estate tax collected over
95% of the tax duplicate for that particular tax year, until liened, which
occurs one year after delinquency.
A. Postage.
B. Tax forms.
C. Tax statements.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-7
1:35
§ 80-8. Office.
An office for the elected Tax Collector for Avalon Borough shall be made
available in the Avalon Borough Municipal Building, at a rent to be
established and agreed upon by Borough Council and the elected Tax
Collector.
§ 80-9. Bond.
The Tax Collector shall and will, before entering upon the duties of this
office, enter into a surety bond to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
all taxes to be collected by the Tax Collector. The Borough of Avalon will be
liable for paying 1/2 of bond's premium, while Northgate School District will
be liable for paying the other 1/2 of the bond's premium. The condition of
this bond is this: the Tax Collector shall account for and pay over all taxes,
penalties, and interest received and collected by the Tax Collector to the
Borough of Avalon.
§ 80-10. Fees for certificates.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge and collect the sum of $45
for the issuance of certificates evidencing the payment of Borough taxes
for the person or persons requesting the same. The Borough shall not be
responsible for payment of any portion of the same, and the Tax Collector
shall be entitled to retain such sums thus collected for the Tax Collector's
own use.
§ 80-11. Report of delinquent taxes.
Upon the close of each fiscal year, the Tax Collector shall and will report all
such delinquent taxes to the Borough, and the Borough may then place such
delinquent taxes in the hands of the Collector of Delinquent Taxes or in the
hands of the Solicitor for collection and/or lien as the case may be.
D. Envelopes.
E. Printing.
F. Telephone.
G. Copy machine repair.
H. Computer.
§ 80-7 AVALON CODE § 80-11
1:36
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 100
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 80-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-11
1:37

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 1147]
§ 100-1. Title.
This article shall be known and entitled "False Alarm Ordinance of the
Borough of Avalon."
§ 100-2. Illegal action.
It shall be illegal for any person, firm, corporation, or association to render
a false alarm to the Borough Building of the Borough of Avalon. Such "false
alarm" to be defined as any criminal activity or any fire alarm notice given
to the Borough fire or police office that there is a fire burning or criminal
misconduct being committed when, in fact, no fire or crime was in evidence.
§ 100-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, plus court costs and
reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. Upon judgment against any person by summary
conviction, or by proceedings by summons on default of the payment of
the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the Borough correctional facility for a
period not exceeding 10 days or to the county correctional facility for a
period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu
of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article
in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
B. In the case of firms or association, the penalties may be imposed on the
partners or members thereof; in the case of corporation, upon the
officers thereof.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-3
1:39
Chapter 105
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 278.
§ 100-3 AVALON CODE § 100-3
1:40
ARTICLE I
Public Possession and Consumption
[Adopted 5-19-1982 by Ord. No. 1146]
§ 105-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply when
used in this article:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof, originally produced by
the distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted with
or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean or include ethyl alcohol, whether
or not diluted, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage.
PERSON — Includes any individual whether a resident or nonresident of the
Borough of Avalon and whether male or female.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all property owned by the Borough of
Avalon or property owned by another governmental agency within the
Borough of Avalon.
PUBLIC WAY OR PLACE — Every way or place, in whatever nature, located
within the Borough of Avalon and open to the use of the public as a matter of
right for the purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel, or for the purposes
of recreation.
§ 105-2. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume and possess any beverage
containing any percentage of alcohol whatsoever in or upon the public ways
or places; public parks or properties within the Borough of Avalon.
§ 105-3. Open containers.
The possession of an open container containing a beverage with any
percentage of alcohol whatsoever in and upon the public ways or places;
public parks or properties of the Borough of Avalon shall be prima facie
evidence of consumption of such beverage in violation of this article.
§ 105-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:41
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 105-4 AVALON CODE § 105-4
1:42
Chapter 111
AMUSEMENTS
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:43

ARTICLE I
Amusement Devices
[Adopted 3-21-1941 by Ord. No. 768]
§ 111-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall at any time have in its or
their possession within the Borough of Avalon any mechanical or electrical
device, machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of games and
amusement, said mechanical or electrical device being commonly known
as "pin ball" machines, upon which baseball, football or any other game is
played, through the insertion therein of a coin or other metal disc, slug,
or token whatsoever, without first having procured a license therefor as
provided by this article.
§ 111-2. Application.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desirous of procuring a license
as provided for in § 111-1 shall apply in writing to the Mayor. Such
application shall set forth the name or names of the applicants together
with their occupation, place of residence and name of the owner or owners
of the premises where the machine or machines are to be installed and
shall set forth the manufacture and nature of the machine and its uses.
This information must be furnished under the oath or affirmation of the
applicant.
§ 111-3. Gambling devices.
Nothing in this article shall be in any way construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to
law, or that may be contrary to any future law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 111-4. Fees. [Amended 3-9-1948 by Ord. No. 830; 2-17-1982 by
Ord. No. 1141; 8-18-1982 by Ord. No. 1151; 2-15-1994 by Ord. No.
1211; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
No license shall be issued until an annual fee therefor shall have been paid
to the Mayor in the sum as set by resolution of the Borough Council. Upon
payment of said fee, the Mayor shall issue a license setting forth the number
of the machine so licensed, which license shall be attached to the machine
so as to be clearly observable.
§ 111-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
§ 111-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-5
1:45
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 111-5 AVALON CODE § 111-5
1:46
Chapter 116
ANIMALS
§ 111-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-5
1:47

ARTICLE I
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 7-14-1976 by Ord. No. 1100]
§ 116-1. Nuisance prohibited.
No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat in the Borough of Avalon so
as to create offensive odors, excessive noise or unsanitary conditions which
are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public, or otherwise
permit the commission or existence of a nuisance as defined hereinafter.
§ 116-2. Noise. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 116-3. Destruction of property.
Any dog or cat which scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn, tree,
shrub, plant, sidewalk, building or any other public or private property
other than the property of the owner or person in charge or control of such
animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 116-4. Waste.
No person being the owner or in charge or control of any dog or cat shall
allow or permit such animal to commit a nuisance on any school grounds,
Borough parks or other public property or upon any private property other
than the owner or person in charge or control of such dog or cat without
the permission of the owner of said property. Where the owner or person in
charge or control of such animal immediately removes all feces deposited by
such animal and disposes of the same in a sanitary manner, such nuisance
shall be considered abated.
A. Any dog or cat, which by frequent and habitual barking, howling,
screeching, yelping or baying, or in any way or manner injures or
disturbs or endangers the comfort, repose or health of persons, is
hereby declared to be committing a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for
any owner or person having custody of such animal to harbor or permit
it to commit such a nuisance.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FREQUENT AND HABITUAL — Continuous barking, howling,
screeching, yelping, baying or the making of any loud or harsh noise
by an animal for a period of 10 minutes, or the making of such noise
intermittently for 1/2 hour or more, to the disturbance of any person
any time of the day or night.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-5
1:49
§ 116-5. Exemptions.
Persons with defective eyesight or hearing while relying upon a dog
specifically trained for these purposes shall be exempt from the operation
of this article.
§ 116-6. Citation. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
When a commission of a violation of this article is observed by a police
officer he may, in his discretion, issue a citation to such person charging the
violation of said summary offense as an alternative to filing an ordinance
complaint.
§ 116-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-1987 by Ord. No.
1173; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 116-5 AVALON CODE § 116-7
1:50
ARTICLE II
Dog Control
[Adopted 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 1251]
§ 116-8. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Avalon Dog Ordinance."
§ 116-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 116-10. Purpose.
This article is adopted to regulate dogs in the Borough of Avalon, to require
the removal of dog excrement and its disposal in a sanitary manner, and
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and public in the
Borough of Avalon. Moreover, it is the purpose and intent of this article
to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the unsanitary
accumulation of animal excrement on public and private property within the
Borough.
§ 116-11. Word usage.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 116-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
DOG — The genus and species known as Canis familiaris.
EXCREMENT — Waste matter discharged from the body, especially the
feces. Defacation.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps
or harbors such dog or has it in his care, control or custody as well as every
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 116-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-12
1:51
person who permits such dog to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity. Masculine words shall include the
feminine and neuter.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the Borough of Avalon whose
duty is to preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce the law.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place in the Borough of Avalon in this Commonwealth
to which the general public has a right to resort. A public place need not
be a place devoted solely to use by the public but may be a place which
is visited by many persons on a regular basis and is usually assessable to
the neighboring public. A public place shall also include a place to which
the public or a substantial group has access; among the places included
are streets, sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks, places of business or
amusement, apartment houses, neighborhoods or any premises which are
open to the public.
SERVICE DOG — Any dog which has been trained as a guide dog, signal
dog, or has been trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an
individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals
with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders
or sounds, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items.
§ 116-13. Authority to enforce.
All police officers of the Borough of Avalon shall be authorized to enforce
the provisions of this article as well as the Dog Law of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 116-14. Restraint required.
All dogs on public property or on property beyond the property of the owner
shall be kept under restraint by the owner either by leash, not to exceed
eight feet in length, or held by the owner or a responsible person or his
agent; or be kept within the exclusive premises of the owner. Violations
of this provision shall be deemed, in additional to the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Dog Law, a public nuisance of the Borough of Avalon when
such dog is not under restraints as required by the provisions of this section.
§ 116-15. Excessive and continuous barking, chasing persons and
vehicles, trespassing.
It shall be the duty of an owner, his agent or any person who has a dog in
his care, control or custody in the Borough to prevent his dog from barking
unreasonably, excessively or continuously, from molesting passersby, from
chasing motor vehicles or bicycles, from attacking other domestic animals
or from trespassing upon public or private property and such acts shall be
deemed to be a public nuisance and a violation of this article.
§ 116-12 AVALON CODE § 116-16
1:52
§ 116-16. Inoculation against rabies. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog in the Borough of Avalon to have
the dog inoculated against rabies, pursuant to the requirements of 3 P.S.
§ 455.8, and to provide, upon request by a police officer or other authorized
law enforcement officer, a certificate of effective current inoculation by a
veterinarian. The failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall
be a violation of this article.
§ 116-17. Public parks and public grounds.
No dog, unless a service dog, whether under restraint or otherwise, is
permitted in the playgrounds, park areas, or other public grounds or
buildings of the Borough of Avalon.
§ 116-18. Nuisances.
Defecating or urinating by a dog on public or private property not belonging
to the owner constitutes a nuisance. No owner or agent shall permit a dog
to urinate or defecate on public or private property not belonging to the
owner; provided, however, if the owner or person in charge of the dog fully
complies with § 116-19 of this article and immediately removes all feces
deposited by such dog and disposes of same in a sanitary manner, such
nuisance shall be considered abated.
§ 116-19. Duties of owners and agents.
It shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or his agent as well as any person
who has a dog in his care, control or custody, to promptly remove his dog's
excrement from any property beyond the premises of the owner and to
immediately clean such affected area. For the enforcement of this section,
an owner, agent or possessor accompanying a dog under proper restraint
shall carry upon his person materials necessary to comply with the prior
provisions of this section. An owner, agent or possessor of a dog is guilty of
a violation of this section if he fails to promptly remove or clean his dog's
excrement beyond the premises of the owner or to have available materials
for this purpose on his person.
§ 116-20. Noxious odors.
No dog shall be kept by an owner in a manner so as to create offensive odors
or unsanitary conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety
of the public. An owner, agent or possessor of a dog is guilty of a violation
of this section if he fails to remove or clean his dog's excrement from his
property which causes such noxious odors, and such failure to do so shall
constitute a public nuisance.
§ 116-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-21
1:53
§ 116-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by
the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid,
the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu
of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in
equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 116-21 AVALON CODE § 116-21
1:54
ARTICLE III
Exotic Animals
[Adopted 4-15-2008 by Ord. No. 1321]
§ 116-22. Intent.
The Borough of Avalon intends to protect the public against the health and
safety risks that exotic animals pose to the community and to protect the
welfare of the individual animals held in private possession. By their nature,
exotic animals are wild and potentially dangerous; as such, they do not
adjust well to a captive environment.
§ 116-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any animal control agency contracted
by the Borough of Avalon to conduct animal control.
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Those species of animals that are exotic to humans,
meaning that the animal is of a wild or predatory nature and which, because
of its size, vicious nature, and/or other characteristics, would constitute an
unreasonable danger to human life or property. "Exotic animals" include,
but are not limited to, any or all of the following orders and families,
whether bred in the wild or in captivity. Exotic animals include any or all
hybrids. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as merely
examples. These examples are not to be construed as an exhaustive list, nor
are the examples to be construed as a generality of each group of animals,
unless otherwise specified:
Class Mammalia.
Order Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, deer but not
cattle, swine, sheep, or goats).
(1)
Order carnivora.
Family Felidae (lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, and
servals but not domestic cats).
(a)
Family Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, and jackals but not
domestic dogs).
(b)
(c) Family Ursidae (all bears)
Family Mustelidae (weasels, skunks, martins, minks but not
ferrets)
(d)
(e) Family Procyonidae (raccoons and coatis)
(f) Family Hyaenidae (hyenas)
(g) Family Viverridae (civets, genets, and mongooses)
(2)
A.
§ 116-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-23
1:55
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, trade
or professional association, firm, limited liability company, joint venture,
association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity. "Person" includes any
officer, member, shareholder, director, employee, agent, and/or
representative thereof.
POSSESSOR — Any person who owns, possesses, keeps, harbors, brings
into the Borough of Avalon, has in one's possession, acts as a custodian, or
has custody or control of an exotic animal.
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY — A nonprofit organization described in
§ 170(b)(1)(A)(vi) of the Internal Revenue Code 1986, and its subsequent
amendments, that operates a place of refuge where abused, neglected,
(3) Order Edentatia (anteaters, armadillos, and sloths)
Order Marsupialia (opossums, kangaroos, and wallabies but not
sugar gliders)
(4)
Order Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses and tapirs but not horses,
donkeys, or mules)
(5)
Order Primates (lemurs, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, and
orangutans)
(6)
(7) Order Proboscidae (elephants).
Order Rodentia (squirrels, beavers, and porcupines but not guinea
pigs, rats, mice, gerbils, or hamsters).
(8)
Class Reptilia.
Order Squamata.
(a) Family Varanidae.
Family Boidae (all species whose adult length has the potential
to exceed 15 feet in length).
(b)
(c) Family Colubridae (only boomslangs and African twig snakes).
(d) Family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, mambas, etc.)
Family Viperidae (copperheads, cottonmouths, rattlesnakes,
etc.): all species.
(e)
(f) Family Chelydridae (snapping turtles) - all types.
(1)
Order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gavials, etc.): all
species.
(2)
B.
Class Actinopterygil.
Order Characiformes.
(a) Family Characidae (red bellied piranhas).
(1)
C.
§ 116-23 AVALON CODE § 116-23
1:56
unwanted, impounded, abandoned, orphaned, or displaced exotic animals
are provided care for their lifetime or are released back to their natural
habitat. To qualify as a "wildlife sanctuary," the organization must not do
any of the following:
§ 116-24. Keeping of exotic animals prohibited.
§ 116-25. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any of the following:
A. Conduct any activity that is not inherent to the animal's nature;
B. Use the animal for any type of entertainment;
C. Sell, trade, or barter the animal or the animal's body parts; or
D. Breed the animal for any purpose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor, bring
into the Borough of Avalon, have in one's possession, act as a custodian,
or have custody or control of an exotic animal, except in compliance
with this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to breed an exotic animal.
A. Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association
(AZA) or under mentorship through the AZA;
B. Duly incorporated nonprofit animal protection organizations housing an
exotic animal at the written request of the animal control authority;
C. Animal control or law enforcement agencies or officers acting under the
authority of this article;
D. Licensed veterinary hospitals or clinics;
E. Any wildlife sanctuary as defined under § 116-23 of this article;
F. Any licensed or accredited research or medical institution;
G. Any licensed or accredited educational institution;
H. Any lawfully operated circus, carnival, or rodeo;
I. A person temporarily transporting an exotic animal through the
Borough of Avalon so long as the transit time is not more than 48 hours,
and the animal is at all times maintained within a confinement sufficient
to prevent the exotic animal from escaping; or
J. Any person or facility licensed as an exhibitor or breeder by the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) under the Animal Welfare
Act.
§ 116-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-26
1:57
§ 116-26. Personal possession permit required.
A. Unless a person qualifies for an exemption under § 116-25 of this
article, a person may not own, possess, keep, harbor, bring into the
Borough, have in one's possession, act as a custodian, or have custody
or control of an exotic animal, unless that person holds a personal
possession permit for that animal, as preliminarily approved by the
authority and ultimately issued by Borough Council. A person may
obtain a personal possession permit for an exotic animal only if all of
the following criteria are met:
(1) The person was in legal possession of the exotic animal prior to the
effective date of this article and is the legal possessor of the exotic
animal; and
(2) The person applies for and is granted a personal possession permit
for each exotic animal in the person's possession by the Borough of
Avalon, as set forth in § 116-26C of this article.
B. Persons who meet the requirements set forth in Subsection A of this
section shall annually obtain a personal possession permit. However,
from and after the effective date of this article, no new exotic animal
shall be brought into possession under the authority of a personal
possession permit.
C. A first-time applicant or an applicant seeking a renewal of a personal
possession permit shall first file an application to receive a personal
possession permit with the animal control authority on forms provided
by the animal control authority. The application shall include all of the
following for review by the authority:
(1) A written statement which sets forth the following information:
(a) The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
applicant;
(b) Whether this is a first-time application or a renewal
application;
(c) A description of each exotic animal the applicant possesses,
including the scientific name, name, sex, age, color, weight,
and any distinguishing marks or coloration that would aid in
the identification of the animal;
(d) A photograph of the exotic animal;
(e) The exact location where the exotic animal being kept;
(f) The names, addresses, and telephone number of the person (if
known) from whom the applicant obtained the exotic animal;
(g) The microchip number of the exotic animal, excluding exotic
animals exempted under § 116-25 of this article; and
§ 116-26 AVALON CODE § 116-26
1:58
(h) The name, address, and telephone number of the veterinarian
providing veterinary care to the exotic animal and a certificate
of good health from the possessor's veterinarian.
(2) In addition to the written statement, the applicant must present to
the animal control authority a certified, notarized statement
confirming all of the following:
(a) The applicant is 18 years of age or older;
(b) The applicant has not been convicted of or found responsible
for violating a local or state law prohibiting cruelty, neglect, or
mistreatment of an animal or has not, within the past 10 years,
been convicted of a felony or been convicted for the
possession, sale, or use of illegal narcotics;
(c) The facility and the conditions in which the exotic animal is
kept are in compliance with this article;
(d) The applicant has regularly provided veterinary care to the
exotic animal when needed and will provide such care in the
future; and
(e) Proof that a licensed veterinarian, pursuant to § 116-29 of this
article, has spayed or neutered the exotic animal.
(3) When filing the application, the applicant must also submit his/her
plan for the quick and safe recapture of the exotic animal if the
exotic animal escapes.
(4) When filing the application, the applicant must submit a copy of the
policy for liability insurance, as well as a declaration sheet
evidencing and confirming the coverages available and the
coverage period.
(5) An applicant must provide any additional information the animal
control authority may deem necessary to carry out the provisions of
this article.
D. A personal possession permit shall not be granted unless the animal
control authority finds that all of the requirements in § 116-26C ,
including its subsections, have been met.
E. The authority must provide written notice of the preliminary approval
within 10 days of the applicant submitting all of the requisite material
listed in § 116-26C of this article. If the tenth day falls on a Sunday or a
legal holiday, then the next business day will qualify as the tenth day.
F. If the animal control authority preliminarily approves of issuing a
personal possession permit, final approval for the issuance of the
permit must be made by Avalon Borough Council within 30 days of the
authority's approval, at the next, regularly scheduled, legislative
Council meeting.
§ 116-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-26
1:59
(1) In order for Borough Council to approve of issuing the permit, all of
the following conditions must be satisfied:
(a) The applicant must conspicuously post a sign on his/her
premises where the exotic animal is to be kept. The sign, as
provided by the animal control officer, shall provide notice of
the application. This sign must also describe the type of exotic
animal being kept on the premises; and the date, time, and
place that the Borough hearing will occur to approve or reject
the application. The sign must be posted for two consecutive
and uninterrupted weeks prior to the Borough hearing. If there
are homes to the rear of the premises at which the exotic
animal is kept, then the sign must be posted for two
consecutive and uninterrupted weeks at the rear of the
property, prior to the Borough hearing; this is in addition to
posting at the front of the property;
(b) The Borough, at the applicant's expense, must advertise the
same information contained in the § 116-26F(1)(a) notice/sign
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough for two
consecutive weeks prior to the Borough hearing at which the
decision whether to approve or reject the application will be
held; and
(c) A designated official from animal control must appear to offer
his/her recommendation as to whether Borough Council should
approve or reject this application. While the recommendation
from animal control is not binding, it is highly persuasive.
(2) The decision to approve or reject the application must occur at the
legislative meeting, unless the applicant, animal control, and
Borough Council deem otherwise.
G. If the Borough approves that the permit shall be issued, then animal
control shall establish and charge reasonable fees for the application,
the issuance (including the renewal of a personal possession permit) in
order to recover the costs associated with the administration and
enforcement of this article. The fee charged to an applicant shall be as
set by resolution of the Borough Council for each animal for which a
permit is sought. The fees collected under this section may be used only
to administer and enforce this article. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
H. If the Borough rejects the application, then the applicant will have 30
days from the date of the rejection, whether occurring at or after the
legislative meeting, within which to file an appeal with the local
Magisterial District Judge.
I. If issued, the actual personal possession permit shall set forth all of the
following information:
§ 116-26 AVALON CODE § 116-26
1:60
§ 116-27. Revocation of personal possession permit.
(1) The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
permit holder;
(2) The address, if different than above, where the exotic animal(s) are
kept;
(3) The name, number of animals, sex, species, age of the exotic
animal(s), and any distinguishing marks or coloration that would
aid in the identification of the animal;
(4) The identification number as required under § 116-28 , if
applicable.
(5) The name, address, and telephone number of the veterinarian who
provides veterinary care to the exotic animal(s) named on the
permit; and
(6) Any other relevant information the animal control authority may
deem necessary.
J. If a person can no longer care for his/her exotic animal, that person,
upon approval by the authority, may transfer his/her exotic animal to
another person currently holding a valid personal possession permit.
K. The animal control authority shall keep records of who is carrying a
valid permit. A permit holder shall notify the animal control authority of
any changes in the stated information on the permit; this includes, but
is not limited to, the death of the exotic animal.
A. The personal possession permit shall terminate under any of the
following circumstances:
(1) Upon the death of the animal;
(2) Upon the death of the permit holder;
(3) Upon the relocation of the permit holder or the animal to an
address or site outside the Borough; or
(4) If the permit holder has pled guilty to or been convicted of an
infraction of this article.
B. Upon the termination of the permit, the former permit holder or the
holder's heirs or successors in interest shall do either of the following:
(1) Immediately release the animal to animal control, where the animal
may be euthanized through any lawful and humane means; or
(2) Immediately transfer the animal to a lawfully exempt agency, as set
forth in this article, provided that this agency has agreed, in
writing, to accept the animal, and proof of this acceptance is
provided to animal control by the possessor.
§ 116-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-28
1:61
§ 116-28. Identification number.
Every exotic animal must be implanted with a microchip, at the expense of
the possessor, by or under the supervision of a veterinarian. This provision
does not apply to an exotic animal if a veterinarian determines that the
implant of a microchip would endanger the well-being of the exotic animal.
§ 116-29. Spaying or neutering.
Every exotic animal must be spayed or neutered, at the expense of the
possessor, by a veterinarian. This provision does not apply to an exotic
animal if a veterinarian determines that the spay or neuter procedure would
endanger the well-being of the exotic animal.
§ 116-30. Caging requirements and standards.
For each exotic animal, the possessor shall comply with AZA's Minimum
Husbandry Guidelines for animal care and maintenance of that animal.
§ 116-31. Care and treatment.
§ 116-32. Insurance; signs; and notification.
A. An exotic animal shall not be tethered, leashed, chained outdoors, or
allowed to roam at large. Rather, an exotic animal must be securely
enclosed at all times in a manner appropriate for the character of the
animal.
B. An exotic animal shall not be mistreated, neglected, abandoned, and/or
deprived of necessary food, water, and sustenance.
C. A person transporting an exotic animal in a vehicle shall keep the
animal securely caged in the vehicle at all times.
D. Each person shall have a plan for the quick and safe recapture of the
exotic animal if the exotic animal escapes. If recapture is impossible,
then a plan must be in place for the destruction of the exotic animal
held under a personal possession permit.
E. The possessor shall contact the animal control authority, a wildlife
sanctuary as defined under this article, or an AZA accredited facility if
the possessor can no longer care for the exotic animal prior to
euthanasia of the exotic animal. Ultimately, the possessor has the duty
to advise animal control that it can no longer care for the exotic animal.
A. A possessor of an exotic animal shall maintain liability insurance
coverage in an amount of not less than $250,000 for each occurrence
for liability damages for destruction of or damage to property and death
or bodily injury to a person caused by the exotic animal. The possessor
of an exotic animal shall provide a copy of the policy for liability
insurance, as well a declaration sheet evidencing and confirming the
§ 116-28 AVALON CODE § 116-32
1:62
§ 116-33. Public contact.
The permittee shall not bring an exotic animal to any public property or
a commercial or retail establishment, unless the permittee is bringing the
animal to a licensed veterinarian or a veterinarian clinic.
§ 116-34. Enforcement.
The animal control authority, its staff, its agents, and the Avalon Police
Department are authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 116-35. Inspection.
The possessor of an exotic animal, at all reasonable times, shall allow the
animal control authority, its staff, and its agents to enter the premises where
the animal is kept to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 116-36. Denial of personal possession permit.
coverages available and the coverage period, to the animal control
authority on an annual basis.
B. The possessor of an exotic animal shall have continuously posted and
displayed at each possible entrance onto the premises where an exotic
animal is kept a conspicuous sign, clearly legible, and easily readable
by the public warning that there is an exotic animal on the premises. In
addition, the possessor shall conspicuously display a sign with a
warning symbol that informs children of the presence of an exotic
animal. The animal control authority shall prescribe the exact content
and size of the sign.
C. If any exotic animal unintentionally escapes, the possessor of the exotic
animal shall immediately contact a law enforcement officer of Avalon
Borough to report the escape or release. The possessor is liable for all
expenses associated with efforts to recapture the animal and will
defend and indemnify the Borough from any damages and/or losses,
whether to property or person, resulting from the release of the animal.
D. No person may intentionally release an exotic animal. If an exotic
animal is intentionally released, the possessor is liable for all expenses
associated with efforts to recapture the animal and will defend and
indemnify the Borough from any damages and/or losses, whether to
property or person, resulting from the release of the animal.
A. If the animal control authority finds that an applicant for an original or
renewal of a personal possession permit does not meet the
requirements set forth in § 116-26 of this article, as well as its
subsections, the animal control authority shall deny the applicant a
personal possession permit and give the applicant written notice of the
denial and the reasons for the denial. Written notice of the denial of
§ 116-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-36
1:63
§ 116-37. Confiscation.
must be provided within 10 days of the applicant submitting all of the
requisite material listed in § 116-26 of this article. If the 10th day falls
on a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the next business day will qualify
as the 10th day.
B. If the animal control authority finds that a person has not complied with
any section of this article, the animal control authority may suspend or
revoke the personal possession permit and give the possessor written
notice of the suspension or revocation and the reasons for the
suspension or revocation.
C. A person who is denied an initial personal possession permit, denied a
renewal of a personal possession permit, has had a permit suspended or
revoked, or is denied the transfer of the animal to another person
having a valid personal possession permit, may appeal this decision to
Borough Council. This appeal shall involve all of the same notice
requirements set forth in § 116-26F(1) through (2). Similarly, if the
Borough rejects the issuance of an initial permit, a renewal, or the
possessor's appeal of a suspension or revocation, then the applicant will
have 30 days from the date of the rejection, whether occurring at or
after the legislative meeting, within which to file an appeal with the
local Magisterial District Judge.
A. The animal control authority may immediately confiscate any exotic
animal if the animal is kept in contravention of this article. This
confiscation power includes the duty of the authority to confiscate the
animal if an initial application for a personal possession permit is
rejected, a renewal application is rejected, or the permit is suspended
or revoked. The possessor is liable for the costs of placement and care
for the exotic animal from the time of confiscation until the time of
return to the possessor or until the time the animal has been relocated
to an approved facility, such as a wildlife sanctuary, as defined under
this article, or an institution accredited by the AZA.
B. If an exotic animal is confiscated due to the animal being kept in
contravention of this article, the possessor must post a security bond or
cash with the animal control authority in an amount sufficient to
guarantee payment of all reasonable expenses expected to be incurred
in caring and providing for the animal. This bond or cash includes but is
not limited to the estimated cost of feeding, medical care, and housing
for at least 30 days. The security bond or cash shall not prevent the
animal control authority from disposing of the animal at the end of the
30 days, unless the person claiming the animal posts an additional
security bond or cash with the animal control authority to secure
payment of all reasonable expenses expected to be incurred in caring
and providing for the animal for an additional 30 days; this posting must
be done prior to the expiration of the first thirty-day period. A failure to
meet this posting requirement may result in the animal being
euthanized. The amount of the security bond or cash shall be
§ 116-36 AVALON CODE § 116-37
1:64
§ 116-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 116-39. When effective.
determined by the animal control authority and will be based on the
current rate to feed, provide medical care, and house the animal. The
possessor cannot recover the cost of the bond or cash.
C. If the possessor of a confiscated exotic animal cannot be located or if a
confiscated exotic animal remains unclaimed, then animal control
authority may contact an approved facility, such as a wildlife sanctuary,
as defined under this article, or an institution accredited by the
American Zoo and Aquarium Association (AZA). Alternatively, the
authority may allow the animal to be adopted by a person who currently
possesses a personal possession permit, or it may euthanize the animal.
D. If the exotic animal cannot be taken up or recaptured safely by the
animal control authority or if proper and safe housing cannot be found,
the animal control authority may immediately euthanize the animal.
E. An exotic animal may be returned to the possessor only if, to the
satisfaction of the animal control authority, the possessor has a
personal possession permit, has corrected the conditions resulting in
the confiscation, and has paid in full the costs of placement and care of
the animal while under the care and control of the animal control
authority.
A. This article takes effect within 60 days from the date it is signed into
law.
B. The day this article takes effect, the animal control authority shall
implement and administer the prohibitions of the keeping of exotic
animals under this article. This includes, but is not limited to, the
creation of the personal possession permit program established by
§ 116-26 of this article, orders relating to the applications for personal
possession permit and renewals, fees for the permit, and the form and
content of the application and posting notices/signs.
§ 116-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-39
1:65
C. A person must obtain a personal possession permit, as required by
§ 116-26 of this article, within six months from the date this article
takes effect.
§ 116-39 AVALON CODE § 116-39
1:66
Chapter 139
BURNING, OPEN
§ 116-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-39
1:67

ARTICLE I
Recreational Burning
[Adopted 4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 1314]
§ 139-1. Conditions.
§ 139-2. Permit requirements.
The permit required by § 139-1A(7) must be obtained at least 24 hours prior
to commencing the recreational burning. The permit provided will only be
effective for the date and times specified on the permit, on which date and
during which times the burning is to occur. This approved permit must be
in the possession of the person who obtained the permit, and this person
must be present at the site of the recreational burning. A failure to abide
by the provisions of this section will be deemed a violation of this article,
subjecting the violator to the penalties set forth in § 139-5 of this article.
A. Recreational burning within the Borough of Avalon is hereby permitted,
provided all of the following conditions are met and there is full
compliance with all other provisions of this article:
(1) That the fire is at least 10 feet from the nearest building, tree, bush,
shrub, high grass, and/or any flammable liquids and/or accelerants;
(2) That the area covered by the fire is no more than four feet by four
feet in size;
(3) That the fire is tended to by both the person who obtained the
permit and the person who owns or controls the property on which
the recreational burning is occurring;
(4) That no liquid and/or other accelerant is used to initiate and/or
enhance the fire in any way;
(5) That only wood and/or paper products may be burned. The burning
of anything other than wood and/or paper products, including but
not limited to refuse/garbage, is strictly prohibited;
(6) That smoke emanating from the fire is not disturbing those persons
otherwise not at the site of the fire; and
(7) That a permit, at a cost as set by resolution of the Borough Council,
is obtained in advance from Avalon Borough in order to conduct
this recreational burning. A person must be at least 18 years of age
in order to obtain this permit. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. A failure to meet all of the conditions set forth in § 139-1A will be
deemed a violation of this article, subjecting the violator to the
penalties set forth in § 139-5 of this article.
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-3
1:69
§ 139-3. Reservation of rights.
The Borough of Avalon herein reserves the right to deny a permit to any
person charged with, though not yet adjudicated for, arson and/or to any
person who has been convicted of or plead guilty or no contest to arson.
Furthermore, Avalon reserves the right to extinguish any fire not in full
compliance with this article, regardless as to whether a permit had been
properly obtained and/or issued.
§ 139-4. Persons deemed responsible.
For purposes of this article, the following persons will be deemed jointly or
severally responsible and both are required to be present at the recreational
burning: the person who owns or controls the property on which the
recreational burning takes place and the person who obtained the permit.
Both of these persons are responsible for ensuring that either water or a
fire extinguisher is readily accessible in order to immediately extinguish the
fire, if necessary. A failure to abide by the provisions of this section will be
deemed a violation of this article, subjecting the violator to the penalties set
forth in § 139-5 of this article.
§ 139-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 139-3 AVALON CODE § 139-5
1:70
Chapter 155
CONSTRUCTION CODES
§ 139-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-5
1:71

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement of Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 1285]
§ 155-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Avalon hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 155-2. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa.Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough of Avalon.
§ 155-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough of Avalon
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by Borough
Council of the Borough of Avalon from time to time by resolution:
§ 155-4. Establishment of Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of Borough Council of
the Borough of Avalon in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
A. By the designation of an employee of Avalon Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Avalon Borough;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Avalon Borough;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code
through an intermunicipal agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code on
behalf of Avalon Borough;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-5
1:73
§ 155-5. Conflicts with other building code ordinances or portion of
ordinances.
§ 155-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Avalon Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by
Borough Council by resolution from time to time.
§ 155-7. Effective date.
This article shall be July 1, 2004.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Avalon Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Avalon Borough not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 155-5 AVALON CODE § 155-7
1:74
Chapter 172
EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 155-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-7
1:75

ARTICLE I
Excessive Police Calls
[Adopted 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 1330]
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, a word shall have the meaning set forth below:
BUILDING — Any structure located within the Borough of Avalon, whether
occupied or unoccupied.
OWNER — Any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal title to any building, structure or property, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals.
This definition shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or any other representative appointed according to law. Whenever
the word "person" is used in any section prescribing a penalty or fine,
as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or
members thereof, as to corporations, it shall include the officers, agents or
members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section.
PROPERTY — Any lot located within the Borough of Avalon, whether the lot
is vacant or has a structure erected thereon.
§ 172-2. Excessive police calls.
It is hereby deemed that in the event two calls are dispatched to a particular
property and/or building within a consecutive thirty-day period or less, each
and every call in excess of two is hereby deemed to be excessive. This
provision shall apply to calls that are responded to by either the Avalon
Borough police or the police of a neighboring community.
§ 172-3. Fee for excess calls.
There is hereby imposed a fee of $100 for each and every police call that
is excessive. Such fee is to be paid by the owner of the property and/or
building.
§ 172-4. Duties of Borough Police Department.
The Borough Police Department on behalf of the Borough of Avalon shall
invoice, collect, and receive such fees imposed by this article, and it shall
maintain records showing the amounts and dates such amounts were
received. The Police Department will forward all such fees collected and
a complete accounting thereof to the Borough Secretary. Upon the
occurrence of the second police call occurring within a consecutive thirtyday
period or less, the Borough Police Department shall notify the owner
that the next call will result in imposition of the above fee. Notice may be
§ 172-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-4
1:77
served by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, to either
the owner's residence or owner's address appearing on the property's real
estate tax blotter.
§ 172-5. Failure to pay fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who fails to pay the fee imposed by this article within 10 days
of the date of the invoice shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is
not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu
of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in
equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 172-4 AVALON CODE § 172-5
1:78
Chapter 196
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 196-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Avalon Fire Escrow
Ordinance."
§ 196-2. Purpose and intention of ordinance.
This chapter is adopted to manage fire-blighted properties, to discourage
the abandonment of properties, to prevent urban blight and deterioration
and to discourage arson and related crimes in the Borough of Avalon.
§ 196-3. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 196-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Avalon.
BOROUGH TREASURER — The elected Treasurer of the Borough of Avalon
or other appropriate municipal officer authorized to collect real property
taxes.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person authorized to act as the building
official, or any assistant to such person, who enforces the provisions of the
Borough Zoning Ordinance.
FIRE DAMAGE — Includes loss by explosion or lightning.
INSURANCE COMPANY — Includes any company, association or exchange
authorized by the Insurance Commissioner to transact the business of
insurance in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and empowered to issue
policies of insurance against loss by the perils of fire or explosion.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 172-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-4
1:79
MUNICIPAL CERTIFICATE — The certificate furnished to a named insured
by the Borough under this chapter.
§ 196-5. Municipal certificate required prior to payment of fire loss
claims.
A. Compliance with procedures. No insurance company, association or
exchange doing business in this Commonwealth shall pay a claim of a
named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
Borough of Avalon where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless the insurance
company, association or exchange is furnished with a certificate
pursuant to Subsection B of this section and unless there is compliance
with the procedures set forth in Subsections C and D of this section.
B. Written request by named insured for certificate.
(1) Issuance of certificate by Treasurer. The Borough Treasurer shall,
upon the written request of the name insured specifying the tax
description of the property, name and address of the insurance
company, association or exchange and the date agreed upon by the
insurance company, association or exchange and the named
insured as the date of the receipt of a proof of loss report of the
claim, furnish the named insured insurance company, association
or exchange either of the following which shall then be supplied by
the named insured to the company, association or exchange within
14 working days of the request:
(a) No delinquent taxes or assessments. A certificate, or at the
discretion of the Borough, a verbal notification which shall be
confirmed in writing by the insurer to the effect that, as of the
date specified in the request, that there are no delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the
property and that, as of the date of the Treasurer's certificate
or verbal notification, the Borough has not certified any
amount as total costs incurred by the Borough for the removal,
repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property; or
(b) Delinquent taxes or assessments. A certificate and bill showing
the amount of delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties and
user charges against the property as of the date specified in
the request that have not been paid as of the date of the
certificate and also showing, as of the date of the Treasurer's
certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the
Treasurer that have been incurred by the Borough for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on
the property. For the purposes of this subsection, the Borough
shall certify to the Treasurer the total amount, if any, of such
costs. A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes
delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could otherwise
§ 196-4 AVALON CODE § 196-5
1:80
have been filed against the property by the municipality under
applicable law.
(c) Administrative fee must accompany written request. All
written requests by a named insured for a certificate shall be
accompanied with a fee as set by resolution of the Borough
Council to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the
Borough in processing said request. The Borough Council may,
from time to time by resolution, either increase or decrease
said fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) Receipt of certificate by insurance company.
(a) Payment of claim to named insured. Upon the receipt of a
certificate pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a), the insurance
company, association or exchange shall pay the claim of the
named insured in accordance with the policy terms, unless the
loss agreed to between the named insured and the company,
association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the
building or other structure. In the case of such a loss, the
insurance company, association or exchange, the insured
property owner and the Borough shall follow the procedures
set forth in Subsections C and D of this section.
(b) Payment of bill to Borough. Upon the receipt of a certificate
and bill pursuant to Subsection (B)(1)(b), the insurance
company, association or exchange shall return the bill to the
Treasurer and transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the
insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments,
penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill. The Borough
shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of
the items shown in the bill.
C. Procedure when loss equals or exceeds 60% of aggregate limits of
liability.
(1) Payment to designated officer. When the loss agreed to between the
named insured and the company, association or exchange equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies
covering the building or other structure, the insurance company,
association or exchange shall transfer from the insurance proceeds
to the Manager of the Borough in the aggregate $2,000 for each
$15,000 and each fraction of that amount of a claim, or, if at the
time of proof of loss agreed to between the named insured and the
insurance company, association or exchange loss report, the named
insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure in
an amount less than the amount calculated under the foregoing
transfer formula, the insurance company, association or exchange
§ 196-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-5
1:81
shall transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in
the estimate.
(2) Designation of officer to receive insurance proceeds. The Manager
of Avalon Borough shall receive all insurance proceeds and manage
all escrow funds received under this chapter and shall carry out the
duties of this section.
(3) Pro rata transfer of proceeds. Transfer of proceeds shall be on a
pro rata basis by all companies, associations or exchanges insuring
the building or other structure.
(4) Policy proceeds remaining. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the Borough shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(5) Disbursement of excess funds. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the Borough shall be disbursed in accordance with the
policy terms.
(6) Contractor's estimate of repairs or removal. The named insured
may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure after the
transfer, and the Manager shall return the amount of the fund in
excess of the estimate to the named insured if the Borough has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(7) Application of subsection. This subsection only applies to fire losses
that occur after the adoption of this chapter.
D. Receipt of proceeds by Borough.
(1) Establishment of separate escrow funds. The Borough Manager
shall establish separate escrow funds to be held by the Borough to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(2) Receipt of proceeds by the Borough. Upon receipt of proceeds by
the Borough as authorized by this section, the Manager shall place
the proceeds in a separate fund to be used solely as security
against the total cost of removing, repairing or securing incurred
by the Borough.
(3) Transferring of funds. When transferring the funds as required in
Subsection C of this section, an insurance company, association or
exchange shall provide the Borough with the name and address of
the named insured, whereupon the Borough shall contact the
named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the
Borough and notify the named insured that the procedures under
this subsection shall be followed.
§ 196-5 AVALON CODE § 196-5
1:82
(4) Inspection of property. After the named insured repairs, demolishes
or secures the property, the Building Inspector shall inspect the
property prior to the Borough releasing any escrow funds. If the
named insured properly repairs, demolishes or secures the
property, the Building Inspector shall notify the Manager of such
completion. If the named insured fails to properly repair, demolish
or secure the property, the Borough may chose to do so and the
funds escrowed shall be applied to the Borough costs incurred.
(5) Completion of repairs or removal without cost to the Borough. The
fund shall be returned to the named insured when repairs, removal
or securing of the building or other structure have been completed
and the required proof received by the Manager if the Borough has
not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing.
(6) Payment of costs to Borough from fund when Borough has incurred
costs. If the Borough has incurred costs for repairs, removal or
securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid
from the fund, and, if excess funds remain, the Borough shall
transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
(7) Insufficient funds to pay Borough costs. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough to recover any
deficiency.
(8) Other reasonable dispositions permitted. Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Borough and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
E. Discharge of insurance obligation. Proof of payment by the insurance
company, association or exchange of proceeds under a policy in
accordance with Subsection C of this section is conclusive evidence of
the discharge of its obligation to the insured under the policy to the
extent of the payment and of compliance by the company, association or
exchange with Subsection C of this section.
F. No additional obligations created. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to make an insurance company, association or exchange
liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable under its insurance
policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this chapter or to
make the Borough or public official an insured under a policy of
insurance or to create an obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or
unpaid removal liens or expenses other than as provided in this chapter.
G. Full benefit of payment. An insurance company, association or exchange
making payments of policy proceeds under this chapter for delinquent
taxes or structure removal liens or removal expenses incurred by the
Borough shall have a full benefit of such payment, including all rights or
subrogation and of assignment.
§ 196-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-5
1:83
§ 196-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 196-7. Duty to file ordinance with department of community
affairs.
The Borough Manager shall file an exact copy of this chapter with the
Department of Community and Economic Development together with the
name, position and phone number of the municipal officer responsible for
compliance with this chapter.
Chapter 198
FIRE SAFETY
H. Liberal construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed to
accomplish its purpose to deter the commission of arson and related
crimes, to discourage the abandonment of property and to prevent
urban blight and deterioration.
§ 196-5 AVALON CODE § 196-7
1:84
ARTICLE I
Commercial Fire Safety Operating Licenses
[Adopted 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 1376]
§ 198-1. Enacting clause.
Be it ordained and enacted by the Council of the Borough of Avalon and it
is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same, that from and
after the effective date of this article, the following ordinance shall be in full
force and effect in the Borough of Avalon.
§ 198-2. Short title.
This article shall be known as "the Borough of Avalon Commercial Fire
Safety Inspection Ordinance."
§ 198-3. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the Borough Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 19650, NO. 581, § 1202, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 46202, et seq., and the provisions hereof and all sections
contained herein shall be construed as having been adopted in the interests
of the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the Borough of
Avalon, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 198-4. Purpose.
§ 198-5. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the community and to protect and to promote the
safety of commercial tenants and other inhabitants in the Borough from
fire and the hazards of fire.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: loss of health, life or property
from fire, explosions, noxious gases and other dangers or hazards of
fire.
C. To provide protection against fire, explosion and other fire hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
D. To define and limit the powers and duties of those officers and bodies
that are assigned responsibilities under this article.
E. To require prompt fire safety inspections even without a warrant if
emergency conditions exist.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-5
1:85
§ 198-6. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AGENT FOR AN OWNER — Any person who provides written proof that he/
she is/are authorized to act on behalf of a property owner.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough of Avalon.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of Avalon.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — (Also known as commercial real estate)
Building/buildings or land intended to generate a profit, either from capital
gain or rental income from commercially zoned buildings or five or more
residential units. Commercial property includes office buildings, industrial
property, medical centers, hotels, malls, retail stores, farmland, multifamily
housing buildings, warehouses, and garages. Commercial real estate is
divided in the following categories:
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "person" includes corporations, associations, and
partnerships and other similar entities.
E. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
G. This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
H. That the Borough intends to favor the public interest as against any
private interest.
OFFICE BUILDINGS — Includes single-tenant properties, small
professional office buildings, serviced offices, downtown skyscrapers,
and everything in between.
A.
INDUSTRIAL — Includes smaller properties, often called "flex" or
"R&D" properties, to larger office service or office warehouse
properties to the very large "big box" industrial properties; garages,
distribution centers.
B.
RETAIL — Includes pad sites on highway frontages, single-tenant retail
buildings, small neighborhood shopping centers, shops, and larger
C.
§ 198-5 AVALON CODE § 198-6
1:86
FIRE SAFETY COMMERCIAL OPERATING LICENSE — A certificate or
document issued by the Building Inspector after conducting a fire safety
inspection and granting permission to the owner of a commercial property
to conduct business in the Borough of Avalon.
FIRE SAFETY INSPECTION — A critical examination by the Building
Inspector to determine compliance with the 2009 International Building
Codes ("IBC"), International Fire Codes ("IFC"), and International Property
Maintenance Codes ("IPMC"), including means of egress, general
precautions against fire and fire protection systems, a checklist of which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit A.5
OWNER — Every person who owns a commercial property in the Borough
of Avalon.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
§ 198-7. Fire safety commercial operating license required.
Every person who owns a commercial property in the Borough of Avalon
must hold a current, properly issued, and unrevoked fire safety commercial
operating license issued by the Building Inspector for the specified
commercial property.
§ 198-8. Application for fire safety commercial operating license
and agreement to comply.
Every owner who owns a commercial property in the Borough of Avalon for
a period of time in excess of 30 days shall apply for a fire safety commercial
license and shall agree to comply with all provisions of the 2009 IBC, IFC
and IPMC, or such other more recent international codes duly adopted by
the Borough of Avalon. The application form shall be accompanied by a
check or money order, payable to the Borough of Avalon in the specified
amount of the fire safety commercial operating license.
centers with grocery store anchor tenants, "power centers" with large
anchor stores.
LEISURE — Includes hotels, public houses, restaurants, fast food
restaurants, cafes, and sports facilities.
D.
HEALTHCARE — Includes medical centers, hospitals, and nursing
homes.
E.
LAND — Includes investment properties on undeveloped, raw, rural
land in the path of future development. Or, infill land with an urban
area, pad sites, and more.
F.
MISCELLANEOUS — Includes any other nonresidential properties such
as hospitality and self-storage developments.
G.
5. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in Borough offices.
§ 198-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-9
1:87
§ 198-9. Requirement of inspection and compliance with Borough's
codes prior to issuance of license.
Upon application, all commercial properties shall be inspected annually by
the Building Inspector for compliance with the provisions of this article.
In the event the Borough Building Inspector refuses to issue a fire safety
operating license, the Building Inspector shall note all fire safety violations,
and shall leave with the owner a copy of any notice of violation.
§ 198-10. Issuance of fire safety commercial operating license.
Prior to the issuance of a fire safety commercial operating license, all
violations noted on a notice of violation shall be corrected, as required.
Every fire safety commercial operating license shall be issued for a period
of one year, unless sooner revoked.
§ 198-11. Adoption of regulations.
A. Pennsylvania statues govern. All matters regulated by the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act6 or by any other laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
Commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, as the case may be,
the promulgated by authority of law, as the case may be, shall control
all inspections where the requirements thereof are the same as, or in
excess of, the provisions of the Borough's Fire Safety Ordinance duly
adopted by the Borough of Avalon.
B. Inspection mandatory. The Borough Building Inspector shall not issue a
fire safety commercial operating license in the Borough of Avalon until
he/she has first inspected the commercial property for the purpose of
insuring compliance with the Borough's Fire Prevention Code and the
law.
C. Inspections to be conducted at reasonable times with prior notice to
residents; display of proper credentials required. All fire safety
inspections under this article shall be conducted at reasonable times
with prior notice to the owner and subject to constitutional restrictions
on unreasonable searches and seizures. Prior to seeking entry to
conduct a fire safety inspection, the Borough Building Inspector shall
display proper credentials, which shall have been approved by Borough
Council.
D. Procedure if entry to permit lawful fire inspection is refused. If entry is
not obtained or upon the refusal of an owner applying for a fire safety
commercial operating license to permit entry to conduct the fire safety
commercial operating license to permit entry to conduct the fire safety
inspection mandated under this article, the fire safety inspection shall
not be conducted and the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to
pursue recourse as provided by law.
6. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 198-9 AVALON CODE § 198-11
1:88
§ 198-12. Administrative search warrant required.
§ 198-13. Cost of commercial fire safety operating licenses.
§ 198-14. Violations and penalties, remedies.
E. Expiration of permits and renewals. Each fire safety commercial
operating license shall expire one year after the date of issuance. A
license may be renewed only by making application as provided in this
article. Applications for renewal should be made at least 30 days prior
to the expiration date and, when made fewer than 30 days before the
expiration date, the pendency of the application will not prevent the
expiration of the license.
F. Correction of violations required prior to renewal of license. If the
Building Inspector denies renewal of a license, the owner shall not be
issued a license until all violations noted on the notice of violation are
corrected, as required.
A. If entry to conduct a fire safety inspection under this article is refused,
the Borough Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
apply to an Issuing Authority having jurisdiction over such commercial
property for an Administrative Search Warrant to enter and to conduct
a fire safety inspection unless an emergency situation exists which
requires immediate entry.
B. If an emergency situation exists demanding immediate access to the
commercial property, the Borough Building Inspector may conduct a
prompt fire safety inspection even if entry is refused or even if an
administrative search warrant is not obtained.
A. Commercial fire safety operating license fee shall be $100 per year.
B. A fee of $100 shall be charged for two consecutive cancellations of a
fire inspection.
C. A reinspection fee of $100 shall be charged if all noted violations are
not corrected and/or if the commercial property is not violation free
and/or if the commercial property is not reinspected within 10 business
days of the initial inspection.
D. The above schedule of fees for commercial inspection licenses shall
remain in full force and effect until modified from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this article shall upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be fined not less than $1,200 and in default of the payment
of the fine and costs, shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for
a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 198-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-14
1:89
§ 198-15. Additional relief; nuisances.
No provision of this article shall prevent the Borough from instituting
proceedings and seeking relief in the courts of equity of the Commonwealth
of the Borough shall deem such action necessary to abate any violation of
this article, which constitutes a public nuisance.
§ 198-16. Appeal process if operating license is denied.
Any person aggrieved by an adjudication hereunder and who has a direct
interest in such adjudication may appeal to the court vested with
jurisdiction of such appeals as provided by the Pennsylvania Local Agency
Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 752.
§ 198-17. Duty to file ordinance with department of community and
economic development.
The Borough Manager shall file an exact copy of this article with the
Department of Community and Economic Development together with the
name, position and telephone number of the Building Inspector responsible
for compliance with this article.
§ 198-18. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions or
any part of any provisions shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise held
to be invalid, the decision of the Court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough
Council that this article would have been enacted had such unconstitutional
provisions or parts thereof not been included herein.
B. A person, partnership or corporation commits a summary offense if, he/
she refuses to permit a Borough Building Inspector to have access or to
gain entry to any premises specified in an administrative search
warrant to conduct a fire safety inspection and upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, shall be fined not less than $1,200 and in default
of the payment of the fined and costs, shall be committed to the
Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
C. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Borough to
seek other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may be at law or in
equity to prevent continuing violations of the terms of this article.
§ 198-14 AVALON CODE § 198-18
1:90
ARTICLE II
Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted 4-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1390]
§ 198-19. Purpose.
The Council of the Borough of Avalon has determined that the health,
welfare and safety of the citizens of the Borough of Avalon are promoted by
requiring certain structures to have a key lock box installed on the exterior
of the structure to aid the Avalon Fire Department in gaining access to or
within a structure when responding to calls for an emergency service, and
to aid access into or within a building that is secured or is unduly difficult
to gain entry due to being either unoccupied or the occupants are unable to
respond.
§ 198-20. Key lock box system.
§ 198-21. Installation.
A. Multifamily residential structures shall be equipped with a key lock box
at or near the main entrance or such other location as specified by the
Fire Chief.
(1) Eligible multifamily residential structures are defined as having:
(a) Five units or more with a locked common entrance area;
(b) Three or more stories with a locked common entrance area.
B. Commercial, mixed use and nonqualifying residential properties may
voluntarily be equipped with a key lock box and must follow the
procedures for placement and installation as required for multifamily
residential structures.
C. The type of key lock boxes to be implemented within the Borough shall
be a Knox-Box® brand system.
D. Structures which are not equipped with a Knox-Box® system understand
and accept the liability and risk associated with the decision to not
utilize a Knox-Box®.
E. Eligible multifamily structures shall be in compliance by the time of the
next fire safety inspection.
A. All Knox-Boxes® shall be installed to the left side of the primary ingress/
egress doors.
B. All Knox-Boxes® shall be mounted between five and six feet from the
ground to the center of the entry if possible.
(1) Flush mounting is required on all new construction.
§ 198-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-21
1:91
§ 198-22. Maintenance.
§ 198-23. Contents of lock box.
The contents of the lock box are as follows:
§ 198-24. Fire department responsibilities.
(2) Surface mounting is acceptable on existing structures.
C. In the event that the rapid entry box system cannot be installed at the
aforesaid location and/or height the AVFD Fire Chief may designate, in
writing, an alternative location and/or installation specifications.
D. All properties with an electronic security gate shall have the Knox-Box®
installed outside of the gate.
E. A window decal that is included when the Knox-Box® is shipped shall be
placed on the exterior access door to alert the fire department that a
key box is provided.
F. The AVFD Fire Chief must approve any changes in the installation.
G. Purchase, installation, and maintenance of the Knox-Box® shall be the
sole responsibility of the building owner, property owner, condominium
association, or property owner association.
A. The operator of the building shall immediately notify the AVFD Fire
Chief and provide the new keys when a lock is changed or rekeyed. The
key to such lock shall be secured in the Knox-Box®.
B. An annual inspection of the Knox-Box® will be performed by the AVFD
Fire Chief in conjunction with the Building Inspector at the time of the
annual Commercial Fire Safety Inspection.
A. Keys to locked points of ingress or egress, whether on the interior or
exterior of such buildings.
B. Keys to all mechanical rooms.
C. Keys to all locked electrical rooms.
D. Keys to elevator and their control rooms.
E. Keys to the fire alarm panels.
F. Keys (special) to reset pull stations or other fire protective devices.
G. Keys to any other areas may be included at the discretion of the
property owner or designee.
A. No fire department personnel shall carry a Knox-Box® key.
§ 198-21 AVALON CODE § 198-24
1:92
§ 198-25. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article is to occur in conjunction with the Commercial
Fire Safety Inspection Ordinance.7
§ 198-26. Severability; failure to enforce not a waiver.
B. All Knox-Box® access keys shall be installed in a "Knox-Box® Keysecure"
system installed in the fire apparatus. This secure master key system
shall require a coded combination in order to access the master Knox-
Box® key. This secure key system shall be date and time stamped upon
removal and replacement of the master Knox-Box® key. All records of
access to the Master Knox-Box® Key shall be kept and maintained by the
AVFD in compliance with all applicable record retention standards.
A. If any sentence, clause or section or any part of this article is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any
of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections or parts of
the same contained in this article. It is hereby declared as the intent of
the Council of the Borough of Avalon that this article would have been
adopted has such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity sentence,
clause, or section or part thereof and not been included therein.
B. The failure of the Borough of Avalon to enforce any provisions of this
article shall not constitute a waiver by the Borough of its rights of
future enforcement hereunder.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Art. I.
§ 198-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:93
Chapter 202
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 155.
§ 198-26 AVALON CODE § 198-26
1:94
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 202-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,8 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council of Avalon Borough does hereby
order as follows.
8. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-1
1:95

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 202-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 202-3. Applicability.
§ 202-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 202-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Avalon Borough unless a permit has
been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Avalon Borough
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
§ 202-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-5
1:97
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 202-5 AVALON CODE § 202-5
1:98
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 202-6. Designation of floodplain administrator.
§ 202-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Avalon.
§ 202-8. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "floodplain administrator."
B. The floodplain administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations.
C. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR § 59.22.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
§ 202-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-8
1:99
§ 202-9. Application procedures and requirements.
D. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Avalon. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
§ 202-8 AVALON CODE § 202-9
1:100
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 202-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-9
1:101
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 202-16) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 202-23 F, Storage, and 202-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 202-23F and 202-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 202-24
during a base flood.
§ 202-9 AVALON CODE § 202-9
1:102
§ 202-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 202-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant
to floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 202-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 202-13. Start of construction.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of development
permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual "start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
§ 202-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-13
1:103
§ 202-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 202-13 AVALON CODE § 202-14
1:104
§ 202-15. Appeals.
(2) In addition, the Borough, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter.
Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions,
mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 202-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-15
1:105

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 202-16. Identification.
§ 202-17. Description and special requirements.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Avalon Borough, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 26, 2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Avalon Borough and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE area/district shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified
as an AE zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
§ 202-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-17
1:107
§ 202-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 202-21B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 202-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Avalon Borough, and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
for which base flood elevations have been provided and a floodway
has been delineated.
C. A area/district.
(1) The A area/district shall be those areas identified as an A zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. Community identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Avalon Borough has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a local flood hazard map using best available
topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of
record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 202-17 AVALON CODE § 202-20
1:108
§ 202-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR § 60.3.
§ 202-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-20
1:109

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 202-21. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. FEMA approval.
(1) When a community proposes to permit the following
encroachments:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(b) Any development occurring in zones A1-30 and zone AE
without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more
than one foot in the base flood elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
(2) The applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12) apply to FEMA for
conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur.
(3) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(4) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
§ 202-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-21
1:111
§ 202-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures:
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 202-17C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
§ 202-21 AVALON CODE § 202-22
1:112
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 202-17C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
§ 202-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-22
1:113
§ 202-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
§ 202-22 AVALON CODE § 202-23
1:114
(1) Within any identified floodplain area the use of fill shall be
prohibited without a variance. If a variance is obtained in
accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following
provisions apply. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by the floodplain administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 202-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-23
1:115
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 202-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
§ 202-23 AVALON CODE § 202-23
1:116
§ 202-24. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: §§ 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix
G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof:§§ R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: 1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or 2) will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or 3) will involve
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances
shall be prohibited.
B. The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
§ 202-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-24
1:117
§ 202-25. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 202-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited without a variance. If a variance is obtained in accordance with
the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
A. Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply;
§ 202-24 AVALON CODE § 202-26
1:118
§ 202-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
B. Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapter 401 through 405 shall apply.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
(3) Be removed from the floodplain when flood warning is issued.
§ 202-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-27
1:119

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 202-28. Prohibited activities in any identified floodplain area.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 202-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-28
1:121

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 202-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 202-30 shall apply.
§ 202-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A area/district(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 202-17C.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any floodway area/district (see § 202-17A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 202-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-30
1:123

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 202-31. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
Avalon Borough may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application
of the requirements.
§ 202-32. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by Avalon Borough in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 202-15 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that
would cause any increase in BFE. In A area/district, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 202-17C.
B. No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI) or
development which may endanger human life (§ 202-24).
C. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
D. In granting any variance, Avalon Borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
E. Whenever a variance is granted, Avalon Borough shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
F. In reviewing any request for a variance, Avalon Borough shall consider,
at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense,
§ 202-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-32
1:125
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
G. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Avalon. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
H. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 202-32 AVALON CODE § 202-32
1:126
ARTICLE IX
Terminology
§ 202-33. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 202-34. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent annual chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 202-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-34
1:127
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 202-34 AVALON CODE § 202-34
1:128
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study,
but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 202-16
and 202-17 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in
the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2014, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after December
15, 1978, and before September 26, 2014, is subject to the ordinance in
effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction
was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 202-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-34
1:129
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December
15, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December
15, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 202-34 AVALON CODE § 202-34
1:130
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, The code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 202-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-34
1:131
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 202-34 AVALON CODE § 202-34
1:132
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 202-35. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on September 26, 2014, and shall remain in
force until modified, amended or rescinded by Avalon Borough, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 202-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-35
1:133
Chapter 214
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
§ 214-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Avalon Grading Ordinance."
§ 214-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons and property and to protect and to promote the public welfare
by preventing excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage, sediment
production and other soil and water management problems and by
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials use,
location and maintenance of grading, excavation and fill.
§ 214-3. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 214-4. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Building Inspector and/or Zoning Officer of the
Borough of Avalon.
BEDROCK — Natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface or
beneath unconsolidated surficial deposits.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of Avalon.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST — A person who holds a degree in geology
from an accredited college or university and who has training and
experience in the field of engineering geology.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as gravitational creep.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular. Masculine words shall include the feminine and neuter.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 202-35 AVALON CODE § 214-4
1:134
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of Avalon.
GRADING — Excavation of fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under these regulations.
HAZARD — A danger or potential danger to life, limb, or health or an
adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or stability of
property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm sewers,
including steam pollution.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
PROFESSIONAL — A person (engineer, surveyor or architect) licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SITE — A lot, tract, parcel of land or a series of lot, tracts or parcels of land
which are adjoining where grading work is continuous and performed at the
same time.
SOIL ENGINEER — A person registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a professional engineer and who has training and
experience in the branch of soils engineering.
SOIL SURVEY — The unpublished and operational soil survey for Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania, and the accompanying text Soil Survey
Interpretations of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Soil Conservation Services
et al. When applicable, "soil survey" shall mean Soil Survey, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania, when this publication is completed.
SOLID WASTE — All parts or combinations of ashes, garbage, refuse,
radioactive materials, combustible demolition materials and industrial
wastes, such as food-processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal scrap, etc.
§ 214-5. Prohibited acts.
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of
any provision of this chapter.
§ 214-6. Permit required.
A. Except as set forth in § 214-7 hereof, a grading permit must be obtained
from the administrator for new grading, excavations and fills; changes,
additions or alterations made to existing excavation or fill shall conform
§ 214-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-6
1:135
§ 214-7. Exceptions.
§ 214-8. Standards for grading.
to the provisions of these regulations. A separate grading permit shall
be required for each site. One permit may cover the grading, excavation
and any fills made on the same site.
B. Only one permit is required for a continuous parcel to be graded for a
proposed major planned development, such as residential planned unit
development or a planned industrial park, when adequate standards or
requirements for grading the parcel are approved by the administrator.
C. When grading is to be performed for and executed concurrently with
the construction of a new building, a separate grading permit will be
required.
A. A grading permit will not be required for any of the following situations:
(1) Grading limited to reasonable, regular, normal maintenance and
landscaping improvements by individual homeowners where
standards herein are not violated.
(2) Stockpiling of rock, sand and aggregate in an area properly zoned
for such use.
B. Grading performed for the construction of an individual residence shall
not require a separate grading permit. The grading permit will be part
of the building permit and all provisions herein shall apply unless
otherwise noted.
A. The maximum slope of cut shall not be greater than 1 1/2 horizontal to
one vertical, and maximum slope for fill shall not be greater than two
horizontal to one vertical.
B. Adequate provisions shall be incorporated to prevent erosion due to
storm drainage. All provisions shall be properly engineered and may be
paved or plated swales and/or gutters and/or piped storm sewers. All to
be reviewed and subject to approval of the Borough Engineer.
C. Existing storm drainage shall not be diverted to adjacent property
owners.
D. Adequate engineered provisions shall be incorporated to prevent
sediment infiltration into existing streams.
E. All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of fill materials and to
prevent settlement of slippage.
F. Immediately upon completion of grading, all areas not designated for
building or paving shall be mulched and planted. Planting shall be
appropriate to maintain slopes from erosion and subject to approval of
§ 214-6 AVALON CODE § 214-8
1:136
§ 214-9. Permit application; submission of plans.
Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application with
the administrator in a form prescribed by said administrator, which shall
contain the following information:
the Borough. In general, planting may be rye grass, crown vetch or
honeysuckle.
G. Any slope which exceeds 50 feet in vertical height shall be properly
benched.
H. In addition to the above, all fill-and-cut operations shall be performed in
compliance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Allegheny County.
I. In the event that the cut-and-fill operation affects any natural
watercourse, under Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, dams and encroachments jurisdiction, by change in
direction, cut and fill along the banks, culverts or bridges or
construction adjacent to, the applicant must present with his
application the permit and the letter of comments from the Department
of Environmental Protection, dams and encroachments jurisdiction.
A. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot and
block, tract or street address.
B. Be accompanied by the plans and specifications prepared and sealed by
a professional (engineer, surveyor or architect), giving a reasonable
picture of the site and proposed soil erosion controls, if any. Said plans
must be complete with North arrow, scale, distance to road
intersections, adjacent structures, roads, utilities, waterways, existing
contours and finished proposed contours. All contours shall be
minimum five-foot intervals. All necessary existing and finished spot
elevations are required to show drainage details of all constructed
measures to prevent soil erosion and planting.
C. The administrator may waive the preparation of said plans by a
professional when it is self-evident that the proposed work is simple,
clearly shown on the plans submitted and creates no potential nuisance
or hazard to adjacent property.
D. The above plans and specifications shall be submitted to Allegheny
County Conservation District for approval before submission to the
administrator, and said approval must be submitted for a permit when:
(1) Excavation or fill exceeds five feet in vertical depth and results in a
cut or fill slope steeper than four horizontal to one vertical and
exceeds an area of 1,000 square feet for areas recognized by the
Allegheny County Soil Survey as containing landslide-prone soils.
§ 214-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-9
1:137
§ 214-10. Hazardous conditions.
§ 214-11. Completion; performance guaranty.
(2) Excavation or fill exceeds 10 feet in vertical depth and results in a
cut or fill slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical and
exceeds an area of 5,000 square feet in area for areas not
recognized by the Allegheny County Soil Survey as landslide-prone.
(3) In the event that the applicant deems it necessary to exceed the
slopes of cut and fill as recommended in the soil survey or by the
Allegheny County Conservation District, said applicant may do so,
only when the design is certified by a soil engineer or geologist.
However, in no case shall the slopes be greater than specified in
§ 214-8, Standards for grading, Subsection A.
A. Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of the
administrator, determines that any existing excavation, embankment or
fill has become a hazard as defined in § 214-4, the owner of the property
upon which the excavation, embankment or fill is located or other
person or agent in control of said property shall be given notice of said
determination by the administrator, shall within the reasonable period
specified therein repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation,
embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
B. If, after such notification, the property owner has not made the
necessary repairs within the time adopted, then the governing body
may direct government employees to make the required repairs, and
the cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner by a lien filed as
provided by law.
C. Whenever the governing body, upon the recommendation of the
administrator, determines that any proposed excavation or fill may
present a hazard as defined in § 214-4, the governing body reserves the
right to require the applicant to have the proposed work certified by a
soil engineer or geologist.
A. Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post a bond
issued by a Pennsylvania approved corporate surety or other approved
security in the amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the grading work
and erosion control facilities proposed for the permit to guarantee said
work and facilities in a satisfactory manner and meeting the
requirements of this chapter. No bond shall be required if another bond
or other approved security is posted for construction and/or site
improvements. When all requirements of this chapter have been met
and the work has been completed in a satisfactory manner, the full
amount of security shall be returned to the person posting said security.
B. Alternate surety for construction of individual residence, in lieu of
above may be as follows:
§ 214-9 AVALON CODE § 214-11
1:138
§ 214-12. Expiration of permit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within six
months or if it is not completed totally within two years from the date of
issue, provided that the governing body, acting upon the recommendation of
the administrator, may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented work from being started or
completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension
of time not to exceed six months, and provided, further, that the applicant
for the extension of time is made before the date of expiration of the
permit. Any physical changes in the site, such as surface water drainage,
soil and bedrock dislocations, alteration of groundwater discharge or any
other natural or man-made modification which would cause a doubt to be
cast upon the feasibility of the contents of the original permit approval,
must be reported to the administrator in the intervening period between
approval of permit and completion of the project.
§ 214-13. Denial of permit; appeal.
(1) Cash deposit in the amount of $75 for each residence, refundable
upon compliance with this chapter or may remain in deposit with
the Borough to be applied to the next permit.
(2) Cash deposit or surety as outlined in § 214-11A above in the
amount of $1,000 to remain in effect for grading all individual
residences for a one-year period.
A. When the requirements of this chapter for obtaining a permit have been
met, the administrator shall approve the proposed plan and grant a
grading permit to the applicant. Approved work may then start.
However, when, in the opinion of the administrator, work proposed by
the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person or any street
or alley or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall be
denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger
property of streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the
administrator shall give due consideration to possible saturation by
rains, earth movements, runoffs, surface waters and subsurface
conditions, such as the stratification and faulting of rock, aquifers,
springs and the nature and type of the soil or rock. Any party aggrieved
by the decision of the administrator shall appeal the administrator's
decision to the governing body within 30 days of receipt of notice of
such decisions.
B. The governing body shall, within 45 days of the filing of an appeal from
the decision of the administrator, consider the alternate methods,
standards or materials proposed by the developer when, in his opinion,
strict compliance with the provisions of these regulations is
unnecessary. The governing body shall render a decision affirming,
overruling or modifying the decision of the administrator within 90 days
§ 214-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-13
1:139
§ 214-14. Supervision.
§ 214-15. Maintenance.
§ 214-16. Liability.
Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter nor the
compliance with the provisions hereto or with any condition imposed by the
administrator hereunder shall relieve any person from any responsibility for
damage to persons or property resulting therefrom or as otherwise imposed
by law nor impose any liability upon the Borough for damages to persons or
property.
of the filing of an appeal and mail a copy of such decision to the
applicant or permit holder at said party's last known address. Any
applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of
competent jurisdiction from any decisions of the governing body.
A. The permit holder or his agent shall notify the administrator, in writing,
of the start and completion of each continuous grading operation.
Notice shall be received by the administrator or at his office at least two
working days before start of completion of grading operation.
B. Grading work at these stages or at any other time will be subject to spot
inspections at the discretion of the administrator to determine that the
work is being performed in compliance with these regulations.
C. In cases when grading occurs in areas of landslide-prone soil as
recognized by the soil survey or better, the administrator may require
special precautions from the grader, which precautions shall be in
accordance with sound engineering practice. The results of all soil tests
and core boring made relating to the site graded shall be submitted to
the administrator.
A. The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or fill
permitted and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures,
fences, ground cover and any other protective devices as may be a part
of the permit requirements.
B. If, at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work, the
cut face or fill slope shall evidence signs of deterioration, erosion or
other evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above and
below the grading site, the administrator may direct the property
owner to take necessary remedial steps in accordance with sound
engineering practice to restore the grading to a safe condition and to do
so in a reasonable period of time.
§ 214-13 AVALON CODE § 214-17
1:140
§ 214-17. Schedule of fees.
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Borough
Fee Schedule then in effect.
§ 214-18. Notice to cease violation.
Upon written notice of any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
being served by the administrator on any person, such violation shall be
discontinued in accordance with said notice. If violation is not discontinued,
the administrator shall revoke the grading permit and the violator shall be
subject to the fines and penalties as set forth herein.
§ 214-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
Chapter 243
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 345.
§ 243-1. Receptacles required.
Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building shall provide or cause to
be provided suitable and sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding of
all garbage and rubbish that results from the occupancy and use of said
building, or any portion thereof. Such receptacle or receptacles shall not be
kept on any sidewalk or in any public place longer than is necessary for the
removal of its contents. All receptacles used for the reception of garbage
and rubbish shall be provided with proper covers or lids and shall be kept
securely closed at all times.
§ 243-2. Debris from buildings. [Amended 9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1208]
§ 214-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-2
1:141
§ 243-3. Debris from vacant lots.
No owner, lessee or occupant of any vacant lot, private court or yard shall
permit the accumulation of any dirt, ashes, rubbish, tin cans, garbage, or
other debris, thereon or on any abutting sidewalks or pavements.
§ 243-4. Owner responsibility. [Amended 9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1208]
An owner who is not in actual possession of any premises described in
§§ 243-2 and 243-3 hereof, is hereby required to remove, or cause to be
removed, all debris, ashes, garbage, wastepaper, rubbish, metal, refuse
materials or any other dangerous or detrimental substances as prohibited
by this chapter within 72 hours of accumulation or abandonment.
§ 243-5. Notice; removal by Borough; recovery of costs.
In the event any owner, lessee, or occupant, in violation of the provisions
herein, fails to remove, or cause to be removed, accumulations of any dirt,
ashes, rubbish, tin cans, garbage, or other debris as aforesaid, the Borough
of Avalon shall give five days' notice to said owner, lessee or occupant to
remove the same, and in the event said owner, lessee or occupant fails to
remove the same, the Borough Manager shall remove said accumulations at
the expense of said owner, lessee or occupant. Such expense, together with
costs, shall be recovered by the Borough of Avalon in addition to any other
penalties provided by this chapter.
§ 243-6. Sweeping debris onto public or private property prohibited.
No person shall throw, sweep or deposit in any manner onto any sidewalk,
public thoroughfare, or other public place, or onto the private premises
of another, or into gutters or sewers, any dirt, ashes, rubbish, tin cans,
garbage, or other debris of any kind.
A. No owner, lessee or occupant of any building shall throw, scatter or
permit the accumulation of any debris, ashes, garbage, wastepaper,
household waste, rubbish, metal, refuse materials or any other
dangerous or detrimental substance on any sidewalks or thoroughfares
abutting the building, in yards, in open garages, on porches or on
grounds or curtilage forming any part of the premises.
B. "Debris" shall include ashes, garbage, wastepaper, household waste,
rubbish, metal, refuse materials, car parts, tires and rims, discarded
refrigerators, television sets and tubes, hot water heaters and tanks,
furnaces and appliances, glass, pieces of concrete, wood or other
building materials, stacks of newspapers or any other dangerous or
detrimental substance.
§ 243-2 AVALON CODE § 243-7
1:142
§ 243-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
1208; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Borough
Manager or the Avalon Borough Police Department. Any person who
violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor, pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600, plus court costs
and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense,
and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section,
the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common
Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 243-8. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of ordinance inconsistent or conflicting with the
provisions of this chapter be and the same is hereby repealed; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained in this chapter shall be construed so
as to affect regulating and removal of the collection of garbage and rubbish
within the Borough of Avalon.
Chapter 255
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
§ 255-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Amended Ordinance Number 1286
Authorizing Jordan Tax Service, Inc., To Assess a 10% Penalty On The Entire
Bill for Passed Due Sewage, Including the Surcharge."
§ 255-2. Expenses approved.
A. Title search. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a title
search in an amount not to exceed $250 shall constitute a reasonable
expense for each title search necessary for the initiation of each
proceeding and compliance with Pa. R.C.P. § 3129. The sum not to
exceed $50 shall constitute a reasonable expense for each bring-down
or update of the title search in connection with the entry of judgment,
issuance of execution, listing for sale, or other action.
B. Out-of-pocket expenses. Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection
with any enforcement action, such as for postage, non-sheriff's service
of process, investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties, and
other necessary expenses shall constitute reimbursable expenses as
part of each claim recovered.
§ 243-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-2
1:143
§ 255-3. Attorney fees approved.
C. Authorization to Jordan Tax Service, Inc. Through this chapter, Jordan
Tax Service, Inc., (hereinafter, "Jordan Tax Service") is herein
authorized, as an agent of the municipality authorized to collect passed
due sewage fees, to assess a flat ten-percent penalty on the entire bill
due, including both the sewage and the surcharge applied to the
overdue amount.
A. Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 20 for all matters described, which fees shall be awarded to the
municipality, its agents, counsel, or assigns in each action initiated
pursuant to the Act for the collection of unpaid claims.9 The property
owner's obligation to pay the full amount of the flat fee for each phase
of each action shall accrue upon the initiation of any aspect of each
phase. The full amount of each flat fee for each prior phase of the
proceeding shall carry over and be due on a cumulative basis, together
with the flat fee for each subsequent phase.
(1) Filing or municipal claim. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation and filing of municipal
claims, as defined under the Act.
(2) Preparation and service of writ of scire facias or complaint in
assumpsit as provided in the Act. The sum of $450 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the initiation of each proceeding and
shall include the preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of
scire facias or complaint in civil action, sheriff's direction for
service, the notice pursuant to Pa. R.C.P. § 237.1, and the
preparation and filing of the praecipe to settle and discontinue the
proceeding, as well as obtaining any satisfaction certificate. The
above does not include the following:
(a) Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are
federal tax liens, federal judgments, federal mortgages, or
other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for all matters necessary to properly
notify and serve the United States with all required additional
notice and the presentation of related motions to court.
(b) Alternative service of legal pleadings. In the event that a
special order of court is necessary to serve original process or
any other pleading, notice, court order or other document, the
following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorney fees:
[1] Investigation of defendant(s) whereabouts and the
preparation of an affidavit of diligent search: $100.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 255-2 AVALON CODE § 255-3
1:144
[2] Preparation and presentation of a motion for alternative
service, and the delivery of the order of court, along with
appropriate directions to the sheriff for service: $200.
(3) Entry of judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees in connection with entry of judgment; this includes
the preparation and filing of the praecipe to enter judgment,
notices of judgment, affidavit of non-military status, and the
praecipe to satisfy judgment.
(4) Writ of execution - sheriff's sale of property or execution upon
assumpsit judgment. The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for the preparation of all documents necessary for
each execution upon any judgment entered pursuant to the Act.
This sum includes the preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ
of execution, all sheriff's documents, the preparation and service of
notices of sheriff's sale, staying the writ of execution, and the
attendance at one sheriff's sale.
(a) Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for each continuance of the sheriff's sale at the
request of the defendant.
(5) Sale pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of $700
shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the sale of property
pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281; this includes the
preparation and service of necessary documents, court
appearances, the attendance at the sale, and the preparation of a
proposed schedule of distribution of the proceeds realized from
such sale.
(6) Sale pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of $500
shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for a sale of property
pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282; this includes the
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
and the preparation of the proposed sheriff's schedule of
distribution.
(7) Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation of each written
installment payment agreement.
(8) Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees
for the preparation, filing, and presentation of motions. These
motions include but are not limited to motions to reassess
damages, motions to amend the caption, and motions to continue
the sheriff's sale. Motions for alternative service are excluded from
this subsection.
B. Hourly rate matters.
§ 255-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-3
1:145
§ 255-4. Procedure.
(1) The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby adopted and
approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1 and Act 20,
which fees shall be awarded to the Municipality, its agents, counsel,
or assigns as compensation in all contested matters, and in all
other matters not specifically referenced in § 255-3A above, as
undertaken in connection with the collection of claims:
(a) Senior attorneys (practicing law for 10 years or more): $185
per hour.
(b) Junior attorneys (practicing law for less than 10 years): $160
per hour.
(c) Paralegals: $100 per hour.
(d) Law clerks: $65 per hour.
(2) These hourly fees are recorded in increments of 1/10th of an hour
for all time devoted to the enforcement and collection of the
municipality's claims. Counsel, whether duly employed or duly
appointed by the municipality, its agents or assigns, shall not
deviate from this fee schedule absent a subsequent ordinance
amending the same. Hourly rate matters include, but are not
limited to, any matters where any defense, objection, motion,
petition, or appearance is entered in any phase of any proceeding
by or on behalf of any defendant or other interested party.
A. Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, shall be provided in accordance therewith and shall be
incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices sent by
the municipality, its agents, counsel, or assigns.
B. Fees to be accrued and claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue for all
efforts in collection after the 30th day after the notice, or after the 10th
day of any required second notice under the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees
accumulated as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly
appointed counsel for the municipality, where counsel is authorized to
pursue the collection of claims pursuant to the Act or by counsel for the
municipality's agents or assigns. If not collected in due course with the
debt as by voluntary payment, fees shall be included in any claims filed
on behalf of the municipality or by its agents or assigns in the course of
the enforcement. This includes any claims originally filed with the
prothonotary, any claims filed with the sheriff, or with any other clams
filed or statements provided where attorney fees are due.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to and
become part of the claim or claims in each proceeding as provided by
the Act and as provided herein.
§ 255-3 AVALON CODE § 255-5
1:146
§ 255-5. Servicing charges, expenses and fees approved.
A. The following schedule of charges, expenses, and fees (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "servicing fees") is hereby approved and
adopted by the municipality pursuant to 53 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103 and 7106,
which amounts are the direct result of each person's failure to pay
claims promptly. The servicing fees established, assessed, and collected
hereunder shall be in addition to the record costs, whether they are the
expenses set forth in § 255-2 or the attorney fees of § 255-3.
B. The servicing of a claim or claims may result in voluntary payment
without the initiation of enforcement proceedings. The intent of § 255-5
is to pass the cost of servicing the delinquency on to the delinquent
person or property. However, the recovery of servicing fees shall not be
contingent upon the initiation of enforcement proceedings.
Nevertheless, servicing fees are recoverable where enforcement
proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this section is to pass the cost
and expense associated with delinquent collection on to the person or
property and to make the municipality whole on all claims collected.
C. Schedule. The following schedule of fees shall constitute reasonable
and appropriate servicing fees for each indicated service. The servicing
fees shall be added to and become part of the municipality's claims,
together with the face, penalties (including but not limited to the tenpercent
surcharge referenced in § 255-2C of this chapter), interest,
costs, and attorney fees and shall be payable in full before the
discharge or satisfaction of any claim. The schedule of fees is separate
and distinct from any amounts imposed by the sheriff, the prothonotary,
the court, or any other public office in connection with the collection of
the municipality's claims:
(1) Assignments: $5 per claim.
(2) Filing tax liens: $5 per item.
(3) Satisfactions: $5 per claim.
(4) Tax claim revivals (i.e., S & A): $10 per claim;
(5) Act 1/Act 20 compliance: $35 per case;
(6) Filing municipal claim and filing municipal claim revivals: $15 per
claim.
(7) Municipal claim/short title examination: $35 per claim.
(8) Sheriff sale claim certificates: $50 per case.
(9) Claim certifications: $10 per year.
(10) Servicing, which includes staffing, computers, office space,
telephones, equipment, and materials: for all delinquent and liened
§ 255-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-5
1:147
§ 255-6. Effective date and retroactivity.
§ 255-7. Assignment.
The municipality assigns the provisions of this chapter to any assignee
of its claims (including but not limited to Jordan Tax Service), unless the
assignment limits the assignee's ability to collect such amounts. The
municipality and its duly authorized agents and their counsel shall retain
all rights to charge reasonable attorney fees, charges, expenses, and fees in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter in actions commenced under
the Act and for servicing any claims retained by the municipality.
Chapter 260
NOISE
taxes, tax liens, municipal claims (filed or unfiled) and municipal
liens collections: 10% of gross.
(11) Postage and court costs: actual cost.
A. This chapter shall take effect on the date of enactment set forth below
and, with respect to attorney fees, pursuant to §§ 255-3 and 255-4, shall
apply to all taxes, tax claims, tax liens, municipal claims, municipal
liens, writs of scire facias, judgments, or executions filed on or after
December 19, 1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
B. In no event shall the municipality's right to charge and collect
reasonable attorney fees pursuant to § 255-3 of this chapter be
impaired by the fact that any claim may also include an attorney
commission of 5% for claims filed prior to December 19, 1990. Any
attorney fees assessed and collected under this or any prior ordinances
pursuant to Act 1 shall be in addition to any five-percent commission
previously included in any claim or judgment thereon.
C. Attorney fees and expenses incurred in pending enforcement
proceedings prior to the effective date of this chapter, pursuant to any
prior ordinances adopted under Act 1 but not collected, shall remain
due and owing in accordance therewith and shall be incorporated in
any future statement, claim, pleading, judgment, or execution. Attorney
fees and expenses in any pending or new action incurred after the
effective date of this chapter shall be incurred, charged, and collected
in accordance with the schedules and procedures set forth in this
chapter.
D. The charges, expenses, and fees set forth in § 255-5 of this chapter
relate to all unpaid claims in favor of the municipality, its agents and
assigns, and shall be retroactive to the date of each claim.
§ 255-5 AVALON CODE § 260-1
1:148
§ 260-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Avalon Borough Comprehensive Noise
Control Ordinance."
§ 260-2. Purpose.
To provide for effective control of noise within Avalon Borough in order
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents and visitors and
to enhance the pursuits of life, recreation and commence within Avalon
Borough.
§ 260-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall
have the meanings herein given, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
ANIMALS — The keeping of dogs, cats, birds, or any animal that has the
ability to create loud, consistent sounds.
BOROUGH — Avalon Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS — The erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building, facility, street, road, bridge or other
structures using equipment, tools, machinery and/or the excavation, filling,
grading and regulation of lots, streets and other structures in connection
therewith.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
ENGINE BRAKE RETARDER — An engine-retarding device, or any
retarding device or system that brakes on the engine rather than on the
wheels as a means of slowing or stopping a gasoline-powered or dieselpowered
motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle that is self-propelled except an electric
personal assistive mobility device or a vehicle that is propelled solely by
human power.
MOTORCYCLE — A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in connect with
the ground.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or used
for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or
machinery system.
NOISE — Any sound emitted by a person, animal, or noise-creating device.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:149
NOISE DISTURBANCE — In addition to the specific noise disturbances set
forth herein, any sound that is:
NOISE-CREATING DEVICE — Any electrical, mechanical, or chemical
device or instrument, or combination thereof, that creates noise during its
operation by a person.
NONRESIDENTIAL AREA — All areas of Avalon Borough excluding
residential areas.
OPERATION — Actual control by a person.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
partnership, limited liability company, association, firm, corporation, or any
other legally recognized entity. Whenever used in any provision prescribing
and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual members, partners,
officers and managers of any legally recognized entity.
POLICE — The Police Department employed or contracted by Avalon
Borough, or any properly authorized member or officer thereof in any other
law enforcement agency having jurisdiction within Avalon Borough.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or
land borne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons,
including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDRY) — An imaginary line drawn through the
points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums,
townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons; a
demarcation or a line of separate properties; and also, for any two or more
building sharing common grounds, the line drawn midway between any two
such buildings. All areas devoted to public rights-of-way shall be deemed
to be across the property line. As used herein, the property line includes
all points on a plane formed by projecting the property line in a manner
deemed appropriate by the enforcing police.
PUBLIC — Affecting, or likely to affect, persons in a place to which the
public or a substantial group has access.
Unpleasant, annoying, offensive, loud, or obnoxious to a reasonable
person of normal sensibilities; or
A.
Unusual for the time of day or location where it is produced or heard;
or
B.
Detrimental to or injurious to the health, comfort, or safety of persons
or animals or to the reasonable enjoyment of property or the lawful
conduct of business because of the loudness, duration, or character of
the noise; or
C.
D. Endangers or injures personal or real property; or
Is in violation of any other section of this or other ordinance, statute, or
applicable regulation.
E.
§ 260-3 AVALON CODE § 260-3
1:150
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are either
owned or controlled by Avalon Borough for the benefit and use of the public.
PUBLIC STREET — Property to which the public has a legal right of access,
including but not limited to streets, alley, public sidewalks, public parks, or
similar place which is either owned or controlled by Avalon Borough for the
benefit and use of the public, but not including buildings.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of an areas
devoted to public rights-of-way.
REDUCED NOISE FACILITY — Any hospital, nursing home, or day-care
facility located within Avalon Borough.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Any area within a residential zone as codified
in the Avalon-Bellevue-Ben Avon Joint Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map
that are currently identified as Low Density Residential, Moderate Density
Residential, High Density Residential. The area zoned Mixed Use shall be
included in a residential area for the purpose of this chapter.
SOUND — An auditory sensation evoked by the oscillation of air pressure.
TAMPERING — The removal or rendering inoperative by any person other
than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement of any muffler
or sound-dissipative device or element of design of any motor vehicle or
motorcycle.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of
property.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devise used
exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled
wheel chair or an electrical mobility device operated by and designed for
the exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related disability.
VEHICLE CODE — The Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) as is hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified, or reenacted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 260-4. Prohibited acts.
A. Noise disturbance. No person shall make, continue or cause to be
made, or cause to be continued, any noise disturbance by any means,
nor shall any person suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance, by
any means, to be made or continued from or at any property, whether
public or private, real or personal, that is subject to such person's right
to control.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following acts and the causing thereof are
declared to be noise disturbances and rare, therefore, in violation of
this chapter:
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:151
(1) Radios, televisions musical instruments, CD player, stereo and
similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or
playing of any radio or audio equipment (including when the noisecreating
device is operated in or on a vehicle, or hand carried, on a
public right-of-way or public space), sound amplifier, loudspeaker,
television, musical instrument, or similar device designed or used
in a manner that intends to produce or amplify sound in such a
manner:
(a) At any time and in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance in a residential area in such a manner as to be
plainly audible across a property line (boundary) and at a
distance of 50 feet from the source, shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this chapter not otherwise exempted
herein.
(b) At any time and in such manner as to create a noise
disturbance with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing by the person that is operating such device
and for those that are voluntary listeners thereto, in the
residential and nonresidential zoned areas.
(2) The use of any drum, loud speaker, or other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention to the sale or display of
merchandise of a commercial character.
(a) At any time and in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary) in such manner
as to be plainly audible and at a distance of 50 feet from the
source shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
chapter.
(b) In such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
property line (boundary) and at 50 feet from the source of such
noise-creating device, when the noise-creating device is
operated in or on a vehicle, or hand carried, or fixed at a
location at or near a public right-of-way or public space.
(3) Yelling or shouting. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling, shouting,
hooting whistling or singing:
(a) On public rights-of-way or public spaces between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or
(b) At any time or place in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary).
(4) Construction. Except for emergency work, operating or permitting
the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction
operations, drilling or demolition work between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. such that the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary). The provisions of
§ 260-4 AVALON CODE § 260-4
1:152
this section do not apply to any person who performs any
construction, repair, or excavation pursuant to the express written
permission of the Borough.
(5) Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or other powered landscape
maintenance equipment or similar device used outdoors between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to cause a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary).
(6) Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a property line (boundary). This provision shall not apply to
municipal or utility services in or about a public right-of-way or
public space.
(7) Municipal waste collection. The performance of any municipal
waste collection shall be conducted from Monday through Friday
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on Saturdays
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless the
municipality has granted prior approval of an exception. No
collection, hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted
on Sunday.
(8) Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to cause a noise disturbance across a
property line (boundary) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(9) Vehicle, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or aircraft repairs
and testing. Repairing, rebuilding or testing any vehicle, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or aircraft in such a manner as to
cause a noise disturbance across a property line (boundary)
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(10) Animals. Any animal, which by frequent and habitual barking,
howling, screeching, yelping, baying, or crowing, or in any way or
manner injures or disturbs or endangers the comfort, repose or
health of persons, declared to be committing a noise disturbance.
Continuous loud or harsh noise by an animal for a period of 10
minutes, or the making of such noise intermittently for 30 minutes
or more at any time of the day or night, shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this chapter.
C. Other prohibited acts.
(1) Tampering. The use within the Borough of a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, which has had a muffler or sound-dissipative device or
element of design removed or rendered inoperative.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:153
D. Specific prohibitions on public rights-of-way. Prohibition of certain
noises upon public rights-of-way by the use of motor vehicles and noisecreating
devices.
(1) Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public rights-of-way. No person
shall operate, or cause to be operated, a public or private motor
vehicle or motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such a vehicle,
on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the
operation of the same violates the Vehicle Code. Consistent with
Section 4523 of the Vehicle Code all motor vehicles and
motorcycles shall be equipped with a muffler or other effective
noise suppressing system in good working order and in constant
operation and no muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with
a cutout, bypass or similar device.
(2) Standing vehicles. No personal shall operate or permit the
operation of any vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached to
such vehicle for a period in excess of 15 minutes in any hour while
the vehicle is parked, stopped or standing within 150 feet of a
residence, whether on public or private property, in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential property line
(boundary).
(a) This provision shall not apply to vehicles performing
emergency services or to vehicles forced to remain stopped or
standing because of traffic conditions.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, diesel-powered vehicles with a
gross weight of 10,001 pounds or more are subject to
restrictions in Act 124 of 2008, 35 P.S. §§ 4601-4610, the
Diesel-Powered Motor Vehicle Idling Act.
(3) Engine brake retarders. No person shall use an engine brake
retarder device in Avalon Borough.
(4) Squealing tires. No person shall cause or allow the tires of a motor
vehicle, which the person is operating, to squeal except when
necessary in order to avoid a collision with another person, vehicle
or other property.
(5) Racing engine/rapid throttle advance. No personal, while
occupying any public right-of-way shall operate any noise-creating
device in such a manner that the public's attention is drawn to the
source of the noise. The prohibition of this section shall include
racing the engine or rapid throttle advance and/or revving of an
internal combustion engine resulting in increase of noise from the
engine.
E. Prima facie violation. The noise from any of the aforesaid prohibit acts
that is heard by the police shall be prima facie evidence of a noise
disturbance.
§ 260-4 AVALON CODE § 260-5
1:154
§ 260-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Blasting. Sounds resulting from blasting activities that have been
authorized by the Borough, which blasting may occur only between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, unless
specifically authorized.
B. Events. Events such as, but not limited to, concerts, block parties,
carnivals, festivals, fireworks, or other performances or similar
activities publicly or privately sponsored and presented in any public or
private space outdoors, provided that such activities do not occur
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless specific
permission by the Borough has been obtained.
C. Emergency work. Sounds resulting from the performance of emergency
work or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and
equipment.
D. Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair,
maintenance or replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or
about the public right-of-way or any public space.
E. Snow removal. Sounds resulting from the use of snowplows, tractors or
snow blowers used in connection with snow removal from private or
public property.
F. School and public activities. Sounds resulting from organized schoolrelated
programs, activities, athletic and entertainment events or other
public programs, activities or events that serve the public interest,
provided such programs, activities or events do not occur between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. an 7:00 a.m.
G. Warning devices. Sounds or sirens, alarms, public address system or
other communication device or equipment made by warning devices
operating continuously for no more than three minutes, except that in
the event of an emergency, the time limitation shall not apply. A
warning device or siren used in connection with the operation of a
police care, fire truck or apparatus, train, ambulance or any other
emergency or other vehicle in the event of an emergency or as part of a
warning. Such to include but not be limited to generators used during
an emergency for law enforcement purposes. Whether such is for an
actual emergency, practice or for drill purposes.
H. Bells and chimes. Routine and customary ringing of bells and chimes in
the performance of an institutional or commercial function in
residential or nonresidential areas, whether such bells and chimes are
through a recording or other amplified process.
I. Official duty. Any noise created by a government entity, official or
employee in the performance of an official governmental duty or
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:155
§ 260-6. Intent.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to supplement all other
provisions of these Codified Ordinances and shall not be deemed to preempt
or preclude application of any of the other provisions of the Codified
Ordinances except existing conflicting provisions of this chapter, which are
repealed by this chapter.
§ 260-7. Penalties.
§ 260-8. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, such holding shall not affect the other
activity, whether such is for an actual emergency, practice or drill
purposes.
J. Any sound created by the arrival or departure of a helicopter during an
emergency.
K. Any sound related to construction or repair activities, municipal waste
collection or law care equipment which is not in violation of § 260-4B of
this chapter.
L. Public amplification or address system used at an athletic or other
public event including those help at public parks.
M. Authorized activity. Any noise for an event or activity for which approval
is necessary and has been issued by the Borough, including expression
or communication protected by the United States Constitution, may be
obtained as long as any approval conditions relative to noise have not
been violated. Such authorization shall be requested through Avalon
Borough and shall be approved by Borough Council or other appointed
representative of Avalon Borough.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefore, pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in
the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough
shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu
of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
B. In addition to the above penalties, the Borough may seek such equitable
or other remedies, as may otherwise be available which are deemed to
supplement the other enforcement provisions including civil process to
obtain a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or any
matter provided by the law for abatement of a nuisance.
§ 260-5 AVALON CODE § 260-8
1:156
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this
chapter are declare severable.
Chapter 278
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:157

ARTICLE I
California Avenue Park
[Adopted 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 1276]
§ 278-1. Prohibited acts.
A. The following acts by any person within the confines of the California
Avenue Park shall be and the same are hereby prohibited:
(1) Climbing trees; cutting, breaking, injuring, defacing or disturbing
any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, wall, monument, fence, bench
or other structure, apparatus or property; plucking, pulling up,
cutting, taking or removing any tree, shrub, plant or flower;
gathering or taking any fruit or nut; cutting, writing or marking
upon any building, monument, fence, bench, table or other
structure, apparatus or property.
(2) Injuring, defacing or destroying any notice, rule or regulation
posted for the government of the park.
(3) Cutting or removing any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or
gravel.
(4) Making or kindling a fire for any purpose, except in places
expressly provided therefor by the Borough Council.
(5) Making unreasonable noise or engaging in riotous, boisterous,
threatening, immoral or indecent conduct.
(6) Using obscene language or making obscene gestures which serve
no legitimate purpose of the actor.
(7) Selling or offering for sale any merchandise, article or thing
whatsoever except as authorized by Borough Council.
(8) Throwing or depositing any bottle, tin can, broken glass, paper,
clothes, rubbish or offal of any description except in receptacles
provided for that purpose.
(9) Leading or permitting to run loose any animal or fowl of any kind.
(10) Riding or driving or propelling or causing to be propelled any
vehicle, cycle or automobile elsewhere than on the trails, roads or
drives provided for such purpose, and at no time shall such riding
or driving be done on any foot path within the park limits.
(11) Riding or driving any vehicle or cycle of any kind at a speed
exceeding 15 miles per hour.
(12) Carrying or discharging firearms or fireworks within the limits of
the park except by permit.
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-1
1:159
§ 278-2. Permit required for picnics, celebrations, parades, services
and exercises within park.
No company, society or organization shall hold or conduct any picnic,
celebration, parade, service or exercise without first obtaining a permit, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to take part in any picnic, celebration,
service or exercise held or conducted within the park contrary to the
provisions hereof.
§ 278-3. Park closed between dusk and dawn.
The park shall be closed each night between dusk and dawn the following
morning, and loitering, lounging, or being present in the park at anytime
within said hours shall be deemed a violation of this article. Special permits
may be obtained to remain in the park until 12:00 p.m. midnight for valid
reason given.
§ 278-4. Permits issued by Borough Manager.
All permits provided for hereunder shall be issued through the Borough
Manager, subject to approval of the Park Committee of Avalon Borough.
§ 278-5. Borough Development Committee authorized to establish
rules and regulations. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Borough Development Committee is hereby authorized to make and
enforce reasonable rules and regulations relative to conduct of those
persons using the California Avenue Park.
§ 278-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
(13)No person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, bring into any part of
the premises presently or hereafter used as a part of the California
Avenue Park any intoxicating liquor or malt beverage of any kind
whatsoever.
B. Violations of this section or any part thereof, shall make the offender
liable not only for the penalties hereinafter provided for, but shall
subject such offender to permanent exclusion from the use of the
facilities of the park or any part thereof.
§ 278-1 AVALON CODE § 278-6
1:160
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 278-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-6
1:161
Chapter 284
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 284-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSING — The act of going upon property or approaching members
of the public to discuss or explain issues, which shall include religious
proselytizing, exercising an individual's freedom of speech or campaigning
for political votes, that does not include the request for contributions or
donations or the sale of goods or products.
PEDDLING — The act of going upon property or approaching members of
the public to sell goods, services or products.
PERSON — Any individual, unincorporated organization, firm, association
or corporation.
SOLICITING — The act of going upon property or approaching members of
the public to ask for, request or seek monetary contributions, donations or
support.
§ 284-2. License required.
§ 284-3. Licensing procedure.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or peddle, upon or along
any of the public streets, alleys, or public places of the Borough of
Avalon, or by going from house to house for such purposes, without
having first procured a license to do so as provided herein.
B. Exceptions. The following persons are exempt from obtaining a license:
(1) Children under 18 years of age soliciting or peddling on behalf of a
nonprofit, school or governmental organization.
(2) Persons soliciting on behalf of a nonprofit or neighborhood
organization for either donations to, or membership in, such
organization.
(3) Persons peddling donated merchandise on behalf of a nonprofit
organization where the proceeds of the sale are used for a
charitable purpose.
(4) Persons peddling on behalf of a religious organization where the
proceeds of the sale are used to support such organization or for a
charitable purpose.
A. All persons seeking licenses must register their name or names and the
name or names of its solicitor, or solicitors, with the Chief of Police of
§ 278-6 AVALON CODE § 284-3
1:162
§ 284-4. Fees.
§ 284-5. Rights of licensee.
Any person complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to
do the acts specified in such license for the term therein stated; provided,
the Borough of Avalon, at the Borough Police Department, Avalon,
Pennsylvania, in order to receive a license.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his/her designee to
investigate said application(s), with regard to accuracy of the
information on the application and any record of unsafe, criminal or
fraudulent conduct of the applicant.
(1) Application review may take up to 10 business days.
(2) In the event that an application is approved, the license will be
made available.
(3) In the event that an application is rejected, the applicant will be
advised in writing and have a right to appeal in the manner
provided herein. Applications may be rejected where the Chief of
Police believes that the applicant is seeking to engage in unsafe,
illegal, fraudulent or criminal activity, or has made a material
misrepresentation on the license application.
(4) Applications not acted upon within 10 business days shall be
deemed approved.
A. A fee of $30 per registered solicitor per day shall be due upon
registering in order to cover administrative costs associated with
registration, issuance and enforcement of a license. This fee may be
modified by resolution of the Council from time to time.
B. The issuance of a permit shall be contingent upon the payment of the
proper fee as established by Borough Council.
C. Exceptions. No license fees shall be charged under this chapter to:
(1) Farmers selling their own produce.
(2) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
(3) Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk products.
(4) Any insurance company or its agents, or insurance broker,
authorized to transact business under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 284-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-5
1:163
however, that the license shall be personal, individual and not transferable
and shall not be construed to permit employment of unlicensed agents.
§ 284-6. Duration and transfer of license.
The duration of each license shall be the period of solicitation as defined on
the approved license. Transfer of licenses is prohibited.
§ 284-7. Hours.
In order to preserve the right of Borough residents to enjoy the peace and
tranquility of their homes without unreasonable interruption or annoyance
during times when door-to-door solicitations are most unwelcome, it shall
be unlawful for any person to solicit, peddle and/or canvass in, upon, or
along any of the public streets, alleys, or public places of the Borough of
Avalon, or by going from house to house for such purposes between hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. or all day on Sundays or other business holidays
recognized as such holidays by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 284-8. Display of license.
Licensees are required to openly display and produce their license at the
request of any citizen or police officer.
§ 284-9. Do Not Knock List.
All Borough residents shall be able to register their home address on a
"Do Not Knock" list. This list will be provided to all persons and their
solicitors and peddlers who are licensed by the Borough for peddling and/or
solicitation. The Do Not Knock List applies to known canvassers who have
actual notice of the Do Not Knock List. Borough residents must register
their home on the "Do Not Knock" list every three years.
§ 284-10. Solicitation, canvassing and peddling prohibited where
indicated.
No solicitation, peddling or canvassing activity shall be done on any private
property posted with "no-solicitation" signs or listed on the Do Not Knock
List, and any such violation will be considered trespass subject to the
criminal laws of the Commonwealth.
§ 284-11. Do Not Knock List violation remedies.
Licensees and others who are notified of the Do No Knock List under
the regulations and who violate the list by soliciting, peddling and/or
canvassing at an address on the Do Not Knock List shall, in addition to
the violations and penalties set for this chapter, have his/her/its license
immediately revoked and/or other enforcement action taken. Licensees who
believe that the license has been improperly revoked under this section may
appeal said revocation pursuant to § 284-12.
§ 284-5 AVALON CODE § 284-12
1:164
§ 284-12. Appeals.
If any person is denied a license pursuant to § 284-3 or has his/her/its
license revoked pursuant to § 284-11, at the written request of the person,
a hearing shall be held before Borough Council or before a designated
hearing officer who shall make a recommendation to the Council for their
official action, within 30 days. The matter shall be reviewed consistent with
this chapter held in accordance with the Local Agency Law10 and subject to
any appeal fees as may be adopted by the Council, and amended from time
to time, by resolution.
§ 284-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefore, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 284-14. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency.
§ 284-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its adoption.
§ 284-16. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any clause, sentence,
subsection, section, or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such
judgment or decision shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application to the clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
Chapter 296
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
10.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 284-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-16
1:165

ARTICLE I
Trees and Other Plant Growth Near Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 1-14-1972 by Ord. No. 1067]
§ 296-1. Encroachment upon streets and sidewalks declared
nuisance.
The encroachment of trees, shrubbery, hedges, grass, weeds or any other
growing thing upon the streets and sidewalks of the Borough, so as to
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or to interfere with
the vision of operators of motor vehicles or other vehicles in observing
oncoming or cross traffic, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 296-2. Maintenance by owner or occupier.
Each owner or occupier of real estate shall maintain and trim any trees,
shrubbery, hedges, grass, weeds or any other growing thing upon the
property owned or occupied by him or her, including the area between the
sidewalk and the cartway of the street, in a safe and orderly condition and
so as to not interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic or with the vision
of operators of motor vehicles or other vehicles in observing oncoming or
cross traffic.
§ 296-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-2013 by Ord. No.
1349; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person found to be violating the provisions of this article may be
cited by any Borough police officer, Code Enforcement Officer or any other
person granted authority by the Borough to enforce its ordinances. Any
person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon being
found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs
and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil
action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense,
and each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section,
the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas
of Allegheny County.
§ 296-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-3
1:167

ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (See Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 296-4. Adoption.
The Borough hereby adopts a document being marked and designated as
the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code as the official Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Avalon pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Borough Code for the control of buildings, structures and property as herein
provided and subject to any amendments contained herein or that may be
adopted from time to time, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, terms, and commentary of said 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
amendments, if any, prescribed in this article.
§ 296-5. Amendments.
The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code is amended and
revised, with additions, deletions and changes noted in the following
respects for purposes of applicable standards for the Borough of Avalon:
A. Section 101.1, page 1, second line, insert "Borough of Avalon" in space
provided.
B. Section 103, Department of Property Maintenance Inspection, delete
the reference to "Department of Property Maintenance Inspection" and
replace the deleted reference with a reference to "Code Official."
(1) Revise Section 103.1 to read:
§ 103.1 General. The official in charge of enforcing this article
shall be known as the "Code Official." The Code Official may be
an individual or individuals or a corporation or other organization
providing Property Maintenance Code enforcement services.
(2) Section 103.5, Fees, is revised to read:
§ 103.5. Fees. Fees shall be as set forth in the Avalon Borough Fee
Schedule as adopted and amended by Borough Council from time
to time by resolution.
C. Section 106, Violations, revise and replace sections as follows:
(1) § 106.2. Notice of Violation. The Code Official shall serve a notice of
violation or order in accordance with § 107. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Code Official or other designated
representative from utilizing other enforcement tools provided for
in the Avalon Borough Code, including but not limited to tickets or
§ 296-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-5
1:169
other violation notices, instead of or in conjunction with the Avalon
Borough Property Maintenance Code.
(2) § 106.4. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, by subject
to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense subject to the daily
maximum fine.
D. Section 109, Emergency Measures, revise and replace this section as
follows:
(1) § 109.5. Costs of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the
performance of emergency work may be paid for by the Borough.
The legal counsel shall institute appropriation against the property
owner, responsible party or agent of the premises where the unsafe
structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs, plus
attorney's fees, including, but not limited to, filing of municipal
claims pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7107 et seq., for the cost of the
emergency work, 6% interest per annum, plus a penalty of 5% of
the amount due plus attorney's fees and costs incurred by the
Borough in connection with the emergency work and the filing of
the municipality claim.
E. Section 111, Means of Appeal, delete §§ 111.1, 111.2, 111.3, 111.4 and
111.5 in their entirety and replace them with the following:
§ 111. Means of Appeal.
§ 111.1. Application for Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision
of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal, within 20 days after the date of the decision,
notice or order appealed from, to the Borough of Avalon Council,
which Council shall have jurisdiction to hear and rule on appeals filed
hereunder. The Council may determine whether the full Council, or any
number of Council members, or any designated hearing officer, will
hear and rule on the appeal. Such person or persons shall serve as
the "Board of Appeals" or "Board" for any purpose provided for in the
Avalon Borough Property Maintenance Code.
Such appeal shall be filed, in writing, shall state the grounds for
appeal, be accompanied by the required appeal fee of $100 or such
other fee as is set under the Borough of Avalon Fee Schedule by
resolution, and shall be processed and heard in accordance with the
Local Agency Law. All advertising and court reporter costs resulting
from the appeal will be paid by the appellant prior to commencement
of the appeal hearing with such amounts to be held in escrow as may
be determined by the Borough Manager.
§ 296-5 AVALON CODE § 296-5
1:170
§ 111.2. All appeals under the Property Maintenance Code must be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that the
provisions of this code do not apply, that the requirements of this
code are satisfied by other means or that the strict application of the
code would cause an undue hardship due to the unique circumstances
involving the property in question such that strict application of the
code would prevent the property owner or occupant from making
reasonable use of the property.
§ 111.3. The Board may consider the following factors in deciding a
claim of hardship:
§ 111.3.1. Whether the owner or occupant has complied with prior
orders or agreements covering maintenance of the property.
§ 111.3.2. Whether the owner or occupant has a history of investment
or improvement at the property.
§ 111.3.3. Whether the cost of repair or compliance is reasonable in
relation to the value of the property and the danger presented by the
property.
§ 111.3.4. Whether enforcement of the code would result in a taking
without compensation.
§ 111.3.5. The length of time any violations have existed.
§ 111.3.6. Degree of mitigation attempted.
§ 111.3.7. Number and severity of violations at the property.
§ 111.3.8. Visibility of violations from the street and neighboring
properties.
§ 111.3.9. Existence of similar conditions at neighboring properties.
§ 111.3.10. Danger presented by the violations to children or the sick
or elderly.
§ 111.4. The Board of Appeals shall have no authority to waive
requirements of the Property Maintenance Code except upon a finding
of undue hardship made pursuant to §§ 111.1, 111.2 and 111.3.
§ 111.5. The Board of Appeals shall decide appeals based on the vote
of a majority of a quorum of the Board.
F. Section 112, Stop-Work Order, amended to read as follows in Section
112.4:
§ 112.4. Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense subject to
the daily maximum fine.
§ 296-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-5
1:171
G. Chapter 3, General Requirements, amend provisions to read as follows:
(1) Section 302.4, Weeds, insert "12 inches" in the space provided.
(2) Insert new Section 302.10, Prohibited Furniture. Furniture which
would be adversely affected by the elements and are susceptible to
infestation by inserts, rats or other vermin is prohibited from being
placed or stores on exterior property. Such prohibited furniture
shall include, but is not limited to, upholstered couches,
davenports, beds, sofas, chairs, loveseats and any other interiortype
fabric covered articles not designed or intended for use in an
exterior area.
(3) Section 304.14, Insect Screens, insert the words, "April 1" to
"October 31" in the spaced provided in the first sentence of this
section.
(4) Section 308.2, Disposal of Rubbish, amended to read as follows:
§ 308.2, Disposal of Rubbish. Both the owner and occupant of a
structure shall be responsible for the disposal of all rubbish in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
(5) Section 308.3, Disposal of Garbage, amended to read as follows:
§ 308.3, Disposal of Garbage. Both the owner and occupant of a
structure shall be responsible for the disposal of garbage in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
H. Chapter 6, Mechanical and Electrical Requirements, amend provisions
as follows:
(1) Section 602.3 insert dates as follows in the space provided:
"September 1" to "May 31."
(2) Section 602.4, Occupiable Work Spaces, insert dates as follows in
the space provided: "September 1" to "May 31."
§ 296-5 AVALON CODE § 296-5
1:172
Chapter 303
PROPERTY TRANSFERS
§ 296-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 296-5
1:173

ARTICLE I
Certification of Sanitary Sewer Status
[Adopted 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 1246]
§ 303-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DYE AND/OR SMOKE TEST AND/OR CCTV CAMERA — [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION, EVIDENCE OF COMPLIANCE — An
official statement from the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Avalon stating that there are no illegal stormwater or surface water
connections into the sanitary sewer system and there are no illegal sanitary
connections to the stormwater sewer system on the specific property which
is being sold.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
ILLEGAL SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS — The connection of real
estate property sanitary waste drains in to the stormwater sewer
system.[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
ILLEGAL STORMWATER OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The
connection of any basement seepage, surface water, subsurface drains,
downspouts, roof drainage or surface areaway drainage into the sanitary
sewer system.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER — A
written letter from the proper official of the Borough of Avalon concerning
municipal liens and property taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, associate, partnership, firm, corporation,
institution, agency, authority or other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
TEMPORARY DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — A temporary statement
of certification from the proper officer of the Borough of Avalon, issued
pursuant to the terms of § 303-4 of this article.
Any commonly accepted method of testing wherein dye and/or smoke
and/or CCTV camera is introduced into the stormwater, surface or
subsurface water collection system and downspouts of real estate
property to determine if illegal stormwater or surface water is entering
the sanitary sewer system.
A.
Any commonly accepted method of testing wherein dye and/or smoke
and/or CCTV camera is introduced into the internal sanitary lines or
cleanout vents of the real estate property to determine if illegal sanitary
waste is entering the stormwater sewer system.
B.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-2
1:175
§ 303-2. Sale without evidence of compliance prohibited.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
to sell any real estate within the Borough of Avalon on which a building or
improvement exists, without first delivering to the purchaser a document
of certification or a temporary document of certification from the proper
officers of the Borough of Avalon.
§ 303-3. Evidence of compliance; document of certification;
application. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person selling real estate located within the Borough of Avalon
(hereinafter "applicant") shall make application on a form furnished by the
Borough of Avalon at least 14 days before the date of sale. The person
selling real estate shall then have a certified plumber or approved testing
agency perform a dye test and/or a smoke test and/or CCTV camera test
on the property to be sold, said smoke test to involve the use of nontoxic,
nonstaining smoke, which is forced through the real estate sewer system
by the use of air blowers. The certified plumber or approved testing agency
shall complete the appropriate portions on the form that the property has
been dye tested and/or smoke tested and/or CCTV camera work performed,
and certify the results of such test. In the event that there are no illegal
sanitary, stormwater or surface water connections, the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designate shall issue a document of certification upon the
payment of a fee as set by resolution of the Borough Council. When an
illegal sanitary, stormwater or surface water connection is discovered by the
means of the above-mentioned testing, no document of certification will be
issued until the illegal connections are removed, inspected and approved by
the Borough.
§ 303-4. Temporary document of certification. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A temporary document of certification may be issued at the Borough's sole
discretion only under the following circumstances:
A. The Borough will make the appropriate test at such time as weather
conditions make such testing possible. In addition, the applicant shall
provide a signed written acknowledgement from the purchaser of the
real estate, agreeing to correct, at the said purchaser's sole expense,
any violations that may be discovered as the result of subsequent tests.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring
the applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs incurred;
provided, nevertheless, that primary liability shall run with the land and
no such agreement shall affect the Borough's enforcement powers of
excuse the current owner from performance.
B. Remedial activities for illegal sanitary, stormwater or surface water
connection.
§ 303-2 AVALON CODE § 303-4
1:176
§ 303-5. Rules and regulations.
§ 303-6. No conflict with general police powers.
Nothing in this article shall limit, in any fashion whatsoever, the Borough's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Nothing in this article shall be a defense to any citation issued
by any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any other
law or ordinance.
(1) When illegal sanitary, stormwater or surface water connections
have been discovered and the necessary remedial activities to
correct such connection would require a length of time such as to
create a practical hardship for the applicant, the applicant may
apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a temporary document of
certification which may only be issued when the applicant provides
the Borough with all of the following:
(a) Cash security in amount of the contract for the completion of
the necessary remedial work is posted with the Borough; and
(b) An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all cost
overruns related to the remedial work, together with a license
to the Borough to enter upon the property to complete such
work in case of default by the contractor.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine, by regulation, when
such temporary document of certification shall expire, at which
time the security shall be forfeited, and the Borough may use the
security to have the necessary remedial work completed.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to make reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and
enforcement of this article as he deems necessary, which shall include,
but not be limited to: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees;
(2) Establishing the forms of application, fees and purchaser
acknowledgments;
(3) Limiting the times of year in which temporary documents of
certification are available for reasons of weather;
(4) Such other rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation
and enforcement of this article.
B. All rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section shall be in
writing and be approved by the Council of Avalon Borough prior to such
rules and regulations being effective.
§ 303-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-7
1:177
§ 303-7. Violation and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this article, or of any regulation or requirement pursuant
thereto and authorized thereby shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay
a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is
not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu
of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in
equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 303-7 AVALON CODE § 303-7
1:178
ARTICLE II
Prior Notification
[Adopted 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 1305]
§ 303-8. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them:
AGENCY RELATIONSHIP — A relationship whereby the broker or licensee
in the employ of the broker act as fiduciaries for a consumer of real estate
services by the express or implied authority of the consumer of real estate
services.
ASSOCIATE BROKER — A broker employed by another broker.
BROKER — Any person who, for another, does at least one of the following:
BUYER AGENT — Any licensee who has entered into an agency relationship
with a consumer/buyer of real estate.
CONSUMER — A person who is the recipient of any real estate services.
DESIGNATED AGENT — One or more licensees designated by the
employing broker, with the consent of the principal, to act exclusively as an
agent or as agents on behalf of the principal to the exclusion of all other
licensees within the broker's employ.
DUAL AGENT — A licensee who acts as an agent for the buyer and seller, or
lessee and landlord, in the same transaction.
EMPLOY, EMPLOYED, EMPLOYEE, EMPLOYMENT — The use of these
words apply to the relationship of independent contractor, in addition to the
traditional employment relationship.
LICENSEE — A person who holds a license.
Negotiates with or aids any person in locating or obtaining for
purchase, lease, or acquisition an interest in any real estate;
A.
Negotiates the listing, sale, purchase, exchange, lease, time share, or
any other similarly designated interest in any real estate;
B.
C. Manages any real estate;
Represents him or herself to be a real estate consultant, counselor,
agent, or finder;
D.
Undertakes to promote the sale, exchange, purchase, or rental of real
estate; provided, however, that this provision shall not include any
person whose main business is that of advertising, promotion, or public
relations;
E.
F. Attempts to perform any of the above-referenced acts.
§ 303-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-8
1:179
LISTING BROKER — A broker engaged as a seller's agent, dual agent, or
transaction licensee to market the property of a seller/landlord for sale or
lease pursuant to a written agreement with the seller/landlord.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, corporate fiduciary, partnership,
association, or other entity, whether foreign or domestic.
PRINCIPAL — A consumer of real estate services who has entered into an
agency relationship with a broker.
REAL ESTATE — Any interest or estate in land, whether corporeal,
incorporeal, freehold or nonfreehold, providing the land is situated within
the Borough of Avalon.
REAL ESTATE SERVICE — An act or acts requiring a real estate license.
SALESPERSON — Any person employed by a licensed real estate broker to
list for sale, sell, or offer for sale; to buy or offer to buy; or to negotiate the
purchase or sale or exchange of real estate; or to negotiate a loan on real
estate; or to lease or rent or offer to lease, rent or place for rent any real
estate or collect or offer or attempt to collect rent for the use of real estate
for or on behalf of such real estate broker.
SELLER AGENT — Any licensee who has entered into an agency
relationship with a consumer/seller of real estate.
SUBAGENT — A broker, not in the employ of the listing broker, who is
engaged to act for, or cooperate with, the listing broker in selling property
as a agent of the seller. A subagent is deemed to have an agency
relationship with the seller.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document relating to a real estate transfer.
TRANSACTION LICENSEE — A licensed broker or salesperson or closing
agent who provides communication or document preparation services or
performs acts described under the definition of "broker" or "salesperson"
for which a license is required, without being an actual agent or advocate
of either a buyer or seller of real estate.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate,
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
§ 303-8 AVALON CODE § 303-9
1:180
§ 303-9. Written notice required.
Any associate broker, broker, buyer agent, designated agent, dual agent,
licensee, listing broker, salesperson, seller agent, subagent, transaction
licensee, and/or any other person, involved in the sale, transfer, and/or
conveyance of any real estate, where that real estate is located within the
boundaries of the Borough of Avalon, must notify the Borough Manager
or a Secretary of the Borough that a sale, transfer, and/or conveyance
of the real estate will occur within 48 business hours prior to the sale,
transfer, and/or conveyance. This notification must be in writing, whether
by regular mail, facsimile, and/or certified mail, and must be addressed to
either the Borough Manager or a Borough Secretary. This written notice
must be received by the Borough at least 48 business hours prior to the
sale, transfer, and/or conveyance.
§ 303-10. Exception for consumer.
The requirements set forth in § 303-9, as detailed above, do not apply to
the consumer, whether that consumer is a buyer or a seller of the real
estate, unless that consumer, buyer, or seller is also the associate broker,
broker, buyer agent, designated agent, dual agent, licensee, listing broker,
salesperson, seller agent, subagent, transaction licensee, and/or any other
person, involved in the sale, transfer, and/or conveyance of the real estate
within the Borough's boundaries.
§ 303-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 303-12. Liability.
Liability for violating this article will attach severally to each associate
broker, broker, buyer agent, designated agent, dual agent, licensee, listing
broker, salesperson, seller agent, subagent, transaction licensee, and/or any
other person involved in the sale, transfer, and/or conveyance of the real
estate within the Borough's boundaries.
§ 303-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-12
1:181
Chapter 310
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 303-12 AVALON CODE § 303-12
1:182
ARTICLE I
Fire Safety Rental Operating License
[Adopted 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1272]
§ 310-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Avalon Tenant Fire Safety
Inspection Ordinance."
§ 310-2. Authority. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
This article is adopted pursuant to the Borough Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 1656 (1965), No. 581,
§ 1202, as amended, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202 et seq., and the provisions hereof
and all sections contained herein shall be construed as having been adopted
in the interests of the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of
the Borough of Avalon, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 310-3. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are:
§ 310-4. Repealer.
Borough of Avalon Ordinance No. 1262 ordained and enacted into law on
February 15, 2000, as well as all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
conflicting herewith are hereby repealed; however, such repeal shall not
affect any act done or any liability or violation accrued under any such
prior ordinance herein repealed or superseded and all such liabilities or
violations shall continue and may be enforced in the same manner as if
such repeal or supersession had not been made; and any offense or violation
committed and any penalty or forfeiture incurred under such ordinance
herein repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in the same manner as if
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the community and to protect and to promote the
safety of residential tenants and other inhabitants in the Borough from
fire and the hazards of fire.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: loss of health, life or property
from fire, explosions, noxious gases and other dangers or hazards of
fire.
C. To provide protection against fire, explosion and other fire hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
D. To define and limit the powers and duties of the of those officers and
bodies that are assigned responsibilities under this article.
E. To require prompt fire safety inspections even without a warrant if
emergency conditions exist.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4
1:183
this article had not been approved; excepting only that any refusal to permit
a lawful inspection under Borough Ordinance No. 1262, § 12(C), is repealed
in its entirety and no such violations shall accrue.
§ 310-5. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 310-6. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AGENT FOR AN OWNER — Any person who provides written proof that he
is authorized to act on behalf of a property owner.
APARTMENT — A part of a house, apartment house or other dwelling
occupied by a tenant, while the rest is occupied by another or others.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged in several suites of connecting
rooms, each suite designed for independent housekeeping, but with certain
mechanical conveniences such as heat, light, or elevator services in
common to all tenants occupying the building.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Avalon.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of Avalon.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY, INCLUDING GARDEN APARTMENTS — A
building or portion thereof containing or designed to contain three or more
separate dwelling units with or without common access facilities.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "person" includes corporations, associations and partnerships
and other similar entities.
E. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
G. This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
H. That the Borough intends to favor the public interest as against any
private interest.
§ 310-4 AVALON CODE § 310-6
1:184
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more tenants, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. All rooms comprising a dwelling
unit shall have access through an interior door to other parts of the dwelling
unit.
FIRE SAFETY INSPECTION — A critical examination by the Building
Inspector to determine compliance with the 2009 International Fire Code,
including means of egress, general precautions against fire and fire
protection systems, a checklist of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof as Exhibit A.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
FIRE SAFETY RENTAL OPERATING LICENSE — A certificate or document
issued by the Building Inspector after conducting a fire safety inspection
and granting permission to a landlord to rent or lease a dwelling unit,
a rental unit, a rooming unit, an apartment, a single-family dwelling, a
multiple dwelling or a townhouse to a tenant.
LANDLORD — Any person who either along, jointly or severally, with others
shall have title to any premises or shall have charge, care or control of
the premises as agent for the person holding legal title or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate
of any person holding legal title, or any person selling under an article
of agreement unless said article of agreement has been properly recorded
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
LEASE — Any permissive occupancy by a person or persons of any
premises, regardless of whether or not any charges, fees or other
considerations are made or levied therefor.[Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
MANAGER — A person who has charge of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit
in a boarding, lodging or tourist home.
OWNER — Every person who has a property right in a multifamily dwelling,
apartment house or rooming house and every person who owns, has, keeps,
rents, leases or maintains a multifamily dwelling or rooming house,
including a boarding, lodging or tourist home charging rent to tenants.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
RENT — Consideration paid for use or occupation of property. A stated
return or payment for the temporary possession or use of an apartment
or dwelling unit. To get temporary possession and use of an apartment or
dwelling unit in return for a stated payment usually at fixed intervals.
ROOMING HOUSE, INCLUDING A BOARDING, LODGING OR TOURIST
HOME — A building other than a multifamily dwelling containing not more
than one dwelling unit occupied by a tenant and providing, for
§ 310-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6
1:185
compensation or other consideration, rooming units for lodging in addition
to the owner.
ROOMING UNIT — A room or rooms constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping unit that is physically separated from any other room,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit in the same structure. The rooming unit shall
contain living and sleeping facilities, but not cooking or eating facilities, and
shall be occupied by no more than one family.
TENANT — Any person who shall inhabit, occupy or possess any premises
owned or controlled by a landlord under a lease, as hereinbefore
defined.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — Dwelling units attached to each other by
party or common walls, with each unit having individual access and rear
common or private garden orientation.
§ 310-7. Fire safety rental operating license required.
No person shall rent or lease a dwelling unit, a rental unit, a rooming unit,
an apartment, a single-family dwelling, a multiple dwelling or a townhouse
or a row house in the Borough of Avalon to any tenant unless he holds
a current, unrevoked fire safety rental operating license issued by the
Building Inspector in his or her name, for the specified dwelling unit, rental
unit, rooming unit, single-family dwelling, multiple dwelling or townhouse.
§ 310-8. Application for license; agreement to comply.
Every owner, landlord, manager or agent for an owner who rents or leases
any dwelling unit, rental unit, apartment in any multifamily dwelling, singlefamily
dwelling, or any rooming unit in any rooming house, including a
boardinghouse, lodging or tourist home, in the Borough of Avalon to any
tenant for a period of time in excess of 30 days, shall apply for a fire safety
rental operating license and shall agree to comply with all provisions of the
2009 International Fire Code duly adopted by the Borough of Avalon. The
application form shall be accompanied by a check or money order payable
to the Borough of Avalon in the specified amount of the fire safety rental
operating license.
§ 310-9. Requirement of inspection and compliance. [Amended
6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1357]
A. Upon application, all rental units shall be inspected by the Building
Inspector for compliance with the provisions of the Borough's Fire
Prevention Code. All rental units must be inspected and licensed either:
(1) Prior to beginning of a lease to a new tenant for the specific
licensed unit; or
(2) Once every four years, whichever occurs first in time.
§ 310-6 AVALON CODE § 310-9
1:186
§ 310-10. Issuance of license.
Prior to the issuance of a fire safety rental operating license, all violations
noted on a notice of violation shall be corrected, as required. Every fire
safety rental operating license shall be issued for a period of four years,
unless sooner revoked.
§ 310-11. Adoption of regulations.
The following regulations are hereby adopted for the issuance of fire safety
rental operating licenses:
B. In the event the Borough Building Inspector refuses to issue a fire
safety operating license, the Building Inspector shall note all fire safety
violations and shall leave with the owner, landlord, manager or agent
for the an owner, and tenant, a copy of any notice of violation.
A. Pennsylvania statutes govern. All matters regulated by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or by any other laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or
agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, as the
case may be, shall control all inspections where the requirements
thereof are the same as, or in excess of, the provisions of the Borough's
Fire Prevention Code duly adopted by the Borough of Avalon.
B. Inspection mandatory. The Borough Building Inspector shall not issue a
fire safety rental operating license in the Borough of Avalon until he or
she has first inspected the dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose
of insuring compliance with the Borough's Fire Prevention Code and
the law.
C. Inspections to be conducted at reasonable times with prior notice to
residents; display of proper credentials required. All fire safety
inspections under this article shall be conducted at reasonable times
with prior notice to the applicant, owner, landlord, manager, tenant, or
agent for the owner and subject to constitutional restrictions on
unreasonable searches and seizures. Prior to seeking entry to conduct a
fire safety inspection, the Borough Building Inspector shall display
proper credentials which shall have been approved by Borough Council.
D. Procedure if entry to permit lawful fire inspection is refused. If entry is
not obtained or upon the refusal of an applicant, owner, landlord,
manager, tenant, or agent for an owner applying for a fire safety rental
operating license to permit entry to conduct the fire safety inspection
mandated under this article, the fire safety inspection shall not be
conducted and the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to pursue
recourse as provided by law.
E. Expiration of permits and renewals. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 1357]
(1) Each fire safety rental operating license shall expire either:
§ 310-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-11
1:187
§ 310-12. Administrative search warrant.
§ 310-13. Contents and execution of administrative search warrant.
(a) On the first day of a lease to a new tenant for the specific
licensed unit; or
(b) Four years after the date of issuance, whichever occurs first in
time.
(2) A license may be renewed only by making application as provided
in this article. Applications for renewal should be made a least 30
days prior to the expiration date and, when made fewer than 30
days before the expiration date, the pendency of the application
will not prevent the expiration of the license.
F. Correction of violations required prior to renewal of license. If the
Building Inspector denies renewal of a license, the applicant, owner,
landlord, manager or agent for an owner shall not be issued a license
until all violations noted on the notice of violation are corrected, as
required.
G. Nonresident applicants. No fire safety rental operating license shall be
issued or renewed to a nonresident applicant unless such applicant
designates, in writing, to the Building Inspector, the name of his agent
for receipt of service of any notice of violation and for service of
process.
A. If entry to conduct a fire safety inspection under this article is refused,
the Borough Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
apply to an issuing authority having jurisdiction over such rental unit
for an administrative search warrant to enter and to conduct a fire
safety inspection, unless an emergency situation exists which requires
immediate entry.
B. If an emergency situation exists demanding immediate access to the
rental unit, the Borough Building Inspector may conduct a prompt fire
safety inspection even if entry is refused or even if an administrative
search warrant is not obtained.
A. An administrative search warrant to enter and conduct a fire safety
inspection may be issued upon probable cause supported by affidavit if
the Building Inspector has reason to believe, based upon a complaint
that a violation exists within the premises to be searched, or, where an
inspection is sought due to the lapse of time since the last inspection,
the nature of the building (e.g., a multifamily apartment house) or
because of conditions in the entire area within which the premises are
located.
B. An administrative search warrant shall be served by the Building
Inspector between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and the entry
§ 310-11 AVALON CODE § 310-13
1:188
§ 310-14. Cost of rental operating licenses. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 310-15. Violations and penalties.
and inspection shall be conducted within a specified period of time not
to exceed two days from the date of issuance.
C. A Building Inspector executing the administrative search warrant shall
make reasonable effort to give notice of his or her identity, authority
and purpose to any occupant of the premises specified in the warrant
and shall not make an immediate forcible entry to inspect unless an
emergency situation exists.
A. The cost of a rental operating license shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwellings, apartments and townhouses with one to
three units: as set by resolution of the Borough Council. Should
violations be present that would endanger the safety and welfare of
the inhabitants, the number of units inspected shall be increased by
25% increments. There shall be no reinspection fee.
(2) Single-family dwellings, apartments and townhouses with four or
more units: as set by resolution of the Borough Council. Twenty-five
percent of the total number of units shall be inspected annually.
Should violations be present that would endanger the safety and
welfare of the inhabitants, the number of units inspected shall be
increased by 25% increments. There shall be no reinspection fee.
(3) Rooming/boarding houses. Annual rental license fee as set by
resolution of the Borough Council. Annual inspection required of
10% of the total rooms.
B. A reinspection fee in the amount as set by resolution of the Borough
Council shall be charged if all noted violations are not corrected and/or
if the premises are not violation free and/or if the premises are not
reinspected within 10 business days of the initial inspection.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’
fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the
penalty is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day
a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of
this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In
addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough
may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 310-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15
1:189
§ 310-16. Additional relief; nuisances.
No provision of this article shall prevent the Borough from instituting
proceedings and seeking relief in the courts of equity of the Commonwealth
if the Borough shall deem such action necessary to abate any violation of
this article which constitutes a public nuisance.
§ 310-17. Appeal process.
Any person aggrieved by an adjudication hereunder and who has a direct
interest in such adjudication may appeal to the court vested with
jurisdiction of such appeals as provided by the Pennsylvania Local Agency
Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 752.
§ 310-18. Filing requirement.
The Borough Manager shall file an exact copy of this article with the
Department of Community and Economic Development together with the
name, position and phone number of the Building Inspector responsible for
compliance with this article.
B. A person, partnership or corporation who refuses to permit a Borough
Building Inspector to have access or to gain entry to any premises
specified in an administrative search warrant to conduct a fire safety
inspection shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more
than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by
the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid,
the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to preclude the Borough to
seek other relief or avail itself of any remedy that may be at law or in
equity to prevent continuing violations of the terms of this article.
§ 310-15 AVALON CODE § 310-18
1:190
ARTICLE II
Tenant Registration
[Adopted 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1273]
§ 310-19. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Borough of Avalon Tenant Registration
Ordinance."
§ 310-20. Purpose.
This article is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
Borough's residents and to prevent the loss of life, limb and property from
fire, explosions, noxious gases and other dangers.
§ 310-21. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 310-22. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AGENT FOR AN OWNER — Any person who provides written proof that he
is authorized to act on behalf of a property owner.
APARTMENT — A part of a house, apartment house or other dwelling
occupied by a tenant, while the rest is occupied by another or others.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "person" includes corporations, associations and partnerships
and other similar entities.
E. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
G. This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
H. That the Borough intends to favor the public interest as against any
private interest.
§ 310-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-22
1:191
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building arranged in several suites of connecting
rooms, each suite designed for independent housekeeping, but with certain
mechanical conveniences such as heat, light, or elevator services in
common to all tenants occupying the building.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Avalon.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY, INCLUDING GARDEN APARTMENTS — A
building or portion thereof containing or designed to contain three or more
separate dwelling units with or without common access facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more tenants, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. All rooms comprising a dwelling
unit shall have access through an interior door to other parts of the dwelling
unit.
LANDLORD — Any person who either along, jointly or severally, with others
shall have title to any premises or shall have charge, care or control of
the premises as agent for the person holding legal title or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate
of any person holding legal title, or any person selling under an article
of agreement unless said article of agreement has been properly recorded
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
LEASE — Any permissive occupancy by a person or persons of any
premises, regardless of whether or not any charges, fees or other
considerations are made or levied therefor.[Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
MANAGER — A person who has charge of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit
in a boarding, lodging or tourist home.
OWNER — Every person who has a property right in a multifamily dwelling,
apartment house or rooming house and every person who owns, has, keeps,
rents, leases or maintains a multifamily dwelling or rooming house,
including a boarding, lodging or tourist home charging rent to tenants.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
RENT — Consideration paid for use or occupation of property. A stated
return or payment for the temporary possession or use of an apartment
or dwelling unit. To get temporary possession and use of an apartment or
dwelling unit in return for a stated payment usually at fixed intervals.
ROOMING HOUSE, INCLUDING A BOARDING, LODGING OR TOURIST
HOME — A building other than a multifamily dwelling containing not more
than one dwelling unit occupied by a tenant and providing, for
compensation or other consideration, rooming units for lodging in addition
to the owner.
§ 310-22 AVALON CODE § 310-22
1:192
ROOMING UNIT — A room or rooms constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping unit that is physically separated from any other room,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit in the same structure. The rooming unit shall
contain living and sleeping facilities, but not cooking or eating facilities, and
shall be occupied by no more than one family.
TENANT — Any person who shall inhabit, occupy or possess any premises
owned or controlled by a landlord under a lease, as hereinbefore
defined.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
TOWNHOUSE or ROW HOUSE — Dwelling units attached to each other by
party or common walls, with each unit having individual access and rear
common or private garden orientation.
§ 310-23. Information required to be provided.
§ 310-24. Filing fee. [Added 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1356]
A. Every owner, landlord, manager or agent for an owner who rents or
leases any dwelling unit in any multifamily dwelling or any rooming unit
in any rooming house, including a boarding, lodging or tourist home, in
the Borough of Avalon to any tenant for a period of time in excess of 30
days, shall supply the following information to the Borough Secretary:
(1) The dwelling unit or rooming unit number or street address; and
(2) The name or names of all tenants to occupy such dwelling unit or
rooming unit; and
(3) The mailing address of the dwelling unit or rooming unit; and
(4) The period of time for which the rental is made.
(5) If the property is vacant, the tenant registration form must be
completed and reported as vacant. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. The above information shall be provided to the Borough Secretary
within 10 days of the renting, leasing or subleasing of any dwelling unit
or rooming unit in the Borough of Avalon for a period of time in excess
of 30 days.
A. At the time the information required in§ 310-23 is supplied, the owner,
landlord, manager, or agent for an owner must pay in full filing costs as
set by resolution of the Borough Council. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. The number of units and the related filing fees shall be calculated on a
calendar basis.
§ 310-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-25
1:193
§ 310-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid,
the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu
of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this article in
equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 310-26. Filing requirement.
The Borough Manager shall file an exact copy of this article with the
Department of Community and Economic Development together with the
name, position and phone number of the Building Inspector responsible for
compliance with this article.
§ 310-25 AVALON CODE § 310-26
1:194
ARTICLE III
Sewer, Water and Garbage Service in Landlord's or Owner's Name
[Adopted 1-11-2006 by Ord. No. 1300; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 310-27. Repealer.
Those sections of any ordinances or parts of all other ordinances are
repealed insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this article; however,
such repeal shall not affect any act done or any liability or violation accrued
under any such prior ordinance herein repealed or superseded.
Furthermore, all such liabilities or violations of any repealed or superseded
ordinances shall continue and may be enforced in the same manner as if
such repeal or supersession had not been made. Moreover, any offense or
violation committed and any penalty or forfeiture incurred under any such
ordinance herein repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in the same
manner as if this article had not been approved.
§ 310-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to preclude an owner/landlord from avoiding
liability to pay for water, sewer, and/or garbage service because the water,
sewer, and garbage service may have been in the name of a non-owner/
tenant of the real property.
§ 310-29. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
PERSON — Natural persons, copartnerships, associations, private and
public corporations, authorities, fiduciaries, the United States and any other
country and their respective governmental agencies, this commonwealth
and any other state and their respective political subdivisions and agencies.
REAL PROPERTY — Lands, tenements, real estate, buildings, parts thereof
or any estate or interest therein and shall include any personalty on real
property which is demised with the real property, whether the real property
is for residential and/or commercial use.
TENANT/LESSEE — Any person or group of persons whose dwelling unit is
in a residential and/or commercial building and who is provided water and/
or sewer service at that residential and/or commercial unit but who is not
the landlord/lessor and/or owner.
LANDLORD/LESSOR — One who owns and/or leases real property (whether
for residential and/or commercial use) to another.
OWNER — One who has the right to possess, use, and/or convey real
property, whether residential and/or commercial. The definition of owner
includes "legal owner" or "equitable owner."
§ 310-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30
1:195
§ 310-30. Duty of owners and/or landlords; violations and penalties.
§ 310-31. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable. If any provision, section,
clause, sentence, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held
unconstitutional, invalid or illegal by any court of competent jurisdiction,
that judicial holding shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this
article. It is hereby declared as the legislative intent that this article would
have been enacted had such unconstitutional, invalid, or illegal portion not
been included. Council of the Borough of Avalon does not intend to violate
the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution
of the United States of America.
§ 310-32. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2006.
A. As of January 1, 2006, all owners and/or landlords of real property
within the Borough's limits must place any and all water, sewer and/or
garbage service in the name of the owner and/or landlord. As of January
1, 2006, it will be considered a violation of this article to have water,
sewer and/or garbage service in the name of any person and/or entity
who is not the owner and/or landlord of the property to which water,
sewer, and/or garbage service is provided.
B. Any landlord and/or owner who fails and/or refuses to comply with this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more
than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by
the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid,
the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in
lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough may enforce this
article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 310-30 AVALON CODE § 310-32
1:196
Chapter 321
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 399.
§ 310-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-32
1:197

ARTICLE I
Sewer Connection Charges
[Adopted 12-20-1978 by Ord. No. 1114]
§ 321-1. Connection charges assessed.
In those cases where the Borough of Avalon has constructed or built a
sanitary sewer or sewers either as trunk sewers or lateral sewers, through
or along property which property has not been assessed or which sewers
have not been the subject or proceedings to determine assessments, but,
which property subsequently becomes the subject of an application for a
connection with such sanitary sewer, the person, firm or corporation making
such application shall be required to pay a stipulated sum to the Borough
of Avalon according to the classification into which the property falls in
the schedule hereinafter set forth. Such charges shall be in addition to any
street opening permit fees or plumbing inspection fees.
§ 321-2. Fee schedule. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
At the time that an application is made for the connection to the said
sanitary sewer there shall be paid to the Secretary of the Borough of Avalon
by each person, firm or corporation making the application a charge for
the connection into such sewer based upon the extent or character of the
burden which the proposed connection places upon the public sewer as
set forth in the following schedule. Such connection fees may be amended
by resolution of the Borough Council. For this purpose, each trap shall
constitute a fixture:
A. For connecting a single-family dwelling:
(1) Ten fixtures or less: $200.
(2) For each fixture in excess of 10: $20 each fixture.
B. For connecting a duplex:
(1) For each family, eight fixtures or less: $175.
(2) For each fixture in excess of eight: $20 each fixture.
C. For connecting multiple-family dwellings:
(1) Three to 10 units, six fixtures or less: $150.
(2) For each fixture in excess of six: $20 each fixture.
(3) Ten to 25 units, six fixtures or less: $100.
(4) For each fixture in excess of six: $20 each fixture.
(5) Twenty-six units or more, six fixtures or less: $75.
(6) For each fixture in excess of six: $10 each fixture.
§ 321-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-2
1:199
§ 321-3. Exclusive right.
The Borough of Avalon shall have the sole and exclusive right to determine
the manner and method of the connection of the sanitary sewers from
any property to the Borough sewer system and of the construction of said
sanitary sewers.
§ 321-4. Effective date.
The effective date of this article shall be January 1, 1979.
D. For connecting commercial buildings:
(1) Each building containing six fixtures or less: $200.
(2) For each fixture in excess of six: $20 each fixture.
E. For connecting amusement and recreation buildings:
(1) Each unit containing six fixtures or less: $300.
(2) For each fixture in excess of six: $25 each fixture.
F. For connecting churches or church buildings:
(1) Each unit containing 10 fixtures or less: $100.
(2) For each fixture in excess of 10: $10 each fixture.
G. For connecting schools and school buildings: no charge.
H. For connecting buildings or land use in the above categories situate
beyond the boundaries of the Borough of Avalon, the charge shall be the
respective charges above set forth plus 50% of such charges.
I. Tap in fees are required in addition to the fixture fees noted above.
Sewer connection and service fees are required as follows:
Certification of sanitary sewer
status
$25
Tap fee $3,000 per EDU
Retap fee $1,500 per EDU
Inspection of tap $100
§ 321-2 AVALON CODE § 321-4
1:200
ARTICLE II
Discharge of Waste Materials Restricted
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 1221]
§ 321-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
hereafter designated:
ALCOSAN — Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its treatment
facility and any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility; which has any of but is not limited to the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than
or equal to 10, as determined by pH meter.
A.
It is liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.35 mm
(0.250 in) per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130° F.).
B.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
A.
B. It reacts violently with water.
C. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gasses, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
D.
It is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which can generate toxic gasses,
vapors, or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human
health or the environment.
E.
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a
strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
F.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction
at standard temperature and pressure.
G.
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR § 173.51, or a Class
A explosive as defined in 49 CFR § 173.53 or a Class B explosive as
defined in 49 CFR § 173.88.
H.
§ 321-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-5
1:201
Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR § 261 or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act as
specified in 25 Pa. Code § 261.
IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN Treatment Facility which
has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Borough which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
PASS THROUGH — Any discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into
the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's
NPDES Permit (including and increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharged
into water.
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR § 261.21.
A.
B. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR § 173.151.
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred
to as "NPDES") permit (including an increase in magnitude of duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state
or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2 or more commonly referred to
as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act," and including state
regulations contained in and State Sludge Management Plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air
Act, and the Toxic Substance Control Act.
B.
§ 321-5 AVALON CODE § 321-5
1:202
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of water.
THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known as "The
Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, pursuant to Section 307(A) of
the Act.
WASTE WATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, water ways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 321-6. Toxic pollutants prohibited.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly
into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance
located in the Borough/Township and transmitting substances into the
facilities of ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other wastewater which will:
§ 321-7. Discharge prohibitions.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe
or other conveyance located in the Borough/Township and transmitting
substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
A. Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities; or
B. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
A. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant.
B. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive, or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's rules and regulations.
C. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
D. Any waste which exceeds that naturally occurring background levels
for either alpha, beta, or gamma radiation and/or any wastewater
§ 321-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-7
1:203
§ 321-8. Rules and regulations.
§ 321-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000, for each offense,
recoverable with costs, and, in default of payment of the fine and costs,
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or
concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
E. Any solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations of
ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN system.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gasses or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety.
G. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
H. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer
type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition.
I. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
J. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
K. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities, such as residues, sludges, or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance
which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposable criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
A. No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN.
B. The pretreatment regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this article by reference as though fully
set forth herein.
§ 321-7 AVALON CODE § 321-9
1:204
shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute
separate offense. In addition, any person violating any provision of the
ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the pretreatment regulations and
administered by ALCOSAN. Such penalties may include, but are not limited
to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation
as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. § 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is
granted to ALCOSAN, and is in addition to but not in place of any other
remedy available to the Borough.
§ 321-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-9
1:205

ARTICLE III
Illegal Connections to Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 1284]
§ 321-10. Certain connections prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this article, no person, firm,
corporation, property owner, lessee, occupier, developer or contractor shall
connect, or cause or permit to be connected to the sanitary sewers of the
Borough of Avalon any rain leader, downspout, gutter, parking lot drain,
driveway drain, interior or exterior sump, french drain, swimming pool
drain, spring or other source or device capable of carrying surface water,
rain, stormwater or groundwater into the sanitary sewers of the Borough.
§ 321-11. Certain discharges prohibited.
§ 321-12. Smoke and/or dye tests required.
A. From and after the effective date of this article, no person, firm,
corporation, real property owner, lessee, occupier, developer or
contractor shall cause or permit discharge of surface water, rain,
stormwater or groundwater into the sanitary sewers of the Borough.
B. Affirmative duty. From and after the effective date of this article, it shall
be the affirmative duty of every real property owner to repair and
maintain in water-tight condition all sanitary sewer laterals from
private structures located upon the owner's real property to the public
sanitary sewer located in the Borough's right-of-way.
A. The proper officers, employees and agents of the Borough, as appointed
or hired by Council from time to time, are hereby authorized and
directed to conduct periodic smoke and/or dye tests and such other
appropriate inspections, at public cost, of all existing structures located
in Avalon Borough and all structures located in adjacent municipalities
with whom the Borough has a reciprocal inspection agreement and
whose sewer drains are known or reasonably suspected to be
connected to Avalon's sanitary sewers. Upon prior written notice to the
owner and occupant, such appropriate other inspections may include
an inspection and dye testing of plumbing fixtures and traps inside any
structure located in the Borough.
B. Purpose of inspections. The purpose of the inspections shall be to
determine if the structure is in compliance with this article and all
regulations promulgated hereunder, and all other ordinances, laws and
regulations pertaining to sewer system and structures.
C. Written notice of inspection required. The Borough, or its agents, shall
give at least seven days' written notice of the inspection program and of
the approximate date that the inspection shall be conducted.
§ 321-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-12
1:207
§ 321-13. Submission to testing required.
Every owner, lessee or occupier of land within Avalon shall submit to smoke
and/or dye testing under this article.
§ 321-14. Illegal connections.
D. Hours of inspection. All inspections shall be performed between the
hours of 8:00 a.m., local time, and 5:00 p.m., local time, unless the
owner or occupant of the structure requests another time for the
convenience of the owner or occupant and the Borough.
A. Discovery of illegal stormwater or surface water connections. When
illegal stormwater or surface water connections or conditions have
been discovered, all necessary remedial work to correct such illegal
connections shall be completed by the owner, lessee or occupier of the
premises, weather permitting, within 180 days of the date the party
receives notification of the illegal connection or condition. Notice shall
be by regular mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the party at the
property or at such other address for the party maintained in the
Borough records. Notice shall be deemed to have been received seven
days after mailing, unless returned by the post office.
B. Delay because of weather conditions. When weather conditions shall
not reasonably permit either the start or the completion of the
remediation within 180 days of notice of the violation, the Borough may
extend the time for start or completion of the work for a period not to
exceed 180 days, provided that the owner, lessee or occupier of the
premises submits to the Borough:
(1) A written contract to complete the work from a licensed master
plumber; and
(2) A cashier's or certified check payable to the Borough in a sum equal
to 110% of the cost of the work called for in the contract, to be held
by the Borough as security for prompt and complete remediation
once the weather permits; and
(3) A written license, on a form prepared by the Borough, permitting
the Borough or its authorized agents and employees to enter upon
the premises to complete the work if the owner, lessee or occupier
fails to do so after reasonable notice.
C. Severe economic hardship. In the event that the necessary remedial
work would create a severe economic hardship for the owner, lessee, or
occupier of the premises, application may be made to the Borough for
an extension of up to an additional six months to complete said remedial
work. A severe economic hardship shall occur when any person
responsible for compliance with this article as to the particular
premises has a level of income considered to be low-moderate under
federal guidelines.
§ 321-12 AVALON CODE § 321-14
1:208
§ 321-15. Acceptable remediation of illegal connections.
D. Completion of remedial work by the Borough. In the event that the
owner, lessee or occupier of the premises neglects, refuses or is unable
to effect the necessary remedial work within the time permitted,
including any extension, the Borough may undertake to have the
remedial work completed at the expense of the owner, lessee or
occupier of the premises, and to require the necessary arrangements
for the payment of the cost of such work by the owner, lessee or
occupier of the premises upon an installment basis mutually
satisfactory to the Borough and the owner, lessee or occupier of the
premises. Under such circumstances, the Borough shall file a lien
against such property pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims
Act, which liens shall remain in effect until payment in full.
A. Acceptable remediation.
(1) Acceptable remediation of an illegal connection to the Borough's
sanitary sewer system under this article shall mean that the illegal
connection is to be disconnected from the sanitary sewer system of
the Borough, removed and access to the sewer at that location
capped or sealed; and such source shall be discharged properly:
(a) To the storm sewer of the Borough, if, in the opinion of the
Borough Engineer, such connection is reasonably feasible; or
(b) To the curb drain in the public streets of the Borough, if, in the
opinion of the Borough Engineer, such connection is feasible;
(c) To a surface outlet wholly upon the subject property; or
(d) If none of Subsection A(1)(a), (b) or (c) is feasible, in the
opinion of the Borough Engineer, then to a dry sump located
wholly on the property.
(2) Such remediation shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications prepared by the Borough Engineer.
B. Written plan required.
(1) Prior to beginning remediation of an illegal connection, the owner,
lessee or occupant shall prepare and file with the Borough a
written plan documenting to the satisfaction of the Borough the
proposed remediation, including:
(a) A measurement of the surface area drained by each outlet to
be remedied;
(b) A list of materials to be used; and
(c) The disposition of the water for each outlet.
§ 321-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-15
1:209
§ 321-16. Presale inspection of real estate required.
A presale inspection of real estate for illegal sewer connections shall be
performed by the Borough. The inspection of real estate for illegal sewer
connections may be conducted by an inspection service appointed by the
Borough. Said inspections may include a smoke or dye test. Any remediation
of an illegal connection shall be completed in the manner set forth herein,
including a filed plan, inspection by the Borough and issuance of a final
compliance certificate. The owner of real estate subject to a presale
inspection shall pay for the cost of the inspection. The issuance of a presale
certificate by the Borough shall be a condition precedent to the issuance
of a lien or tax certificate by the Borough, and the Borough is hereby
prohibited from issuing a municipal no-lien letter unless the presale
inspection is conducted. The Borough may fix the fee for the cost of the
presale certificate by resolution of Council. A certificate issued under
§ 321-15E of this article, or a presale certificate issued under this section,
shall be valid in lieu of a presale inspection for a period of one year after
issuance.
(2) The plan shall be subject to review and approval by the Borough
prior to the commencement of any remedial work. Upon plan
approval, the Borough shall certify its approval upon the plans. A
copy of the approved plans shall be kept on file with the Borough.
Upon rejection of the plan, the Borough shall return the plan to the
applicant and shall state the reason(s) for the rejection.
C. Site inspection required. Prior to covering any work to remediate an
illegal connection under this article, the owner, lessee or occupant shall
submit the site to inspection by the Borough. The Borough shall have
the right to reject any work which does not conform to an approved
plan, the Borough's specifications or this article. Rejected work shall be
promptly removed by the owner, lessee or occupant and promptly
replaced by conforming work.
D. Certain discharges of water prohibited. In no event shall any owner,
lessee, occupier, developer or contractor either directly or indirectly
permit water to be discharged upon or across any public or private
sidewalk or discharged onto any adjacent property causing a safety
hazard or public nuisance. Should the owner, lessee, occupier,
developer or contractor fail to maintain the discharged water in a safe
and attractive manner, following due notice from the Borough to
correct the problem within the specified time frame, the owner, lessee,
occupier, developer or contractor shall be subject to all applicable fines
and shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the Borough and/or
the affected adjacent property owners to remediate the problem.
E. Certification of compliance. Upon completion of smoke or dye testing,
and remediation of any illegal connections in accordance with an
approval plan filed with the Borough, the Borough shall issue a
certificate of compliance as to that property.
§ 321-15 AVALON CODE § 321-17
1:210
§ 321-17. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Borough shall promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations, as
approved by the Borough Council, for the operation and enforcement of this
article, which shall include but not be limited to establishing the form of:
§ 321-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with, or who shall otherwise violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600
§ 321-19. Each calendar day a separate violation.
Every calendar day after the owner, lessee or occupier of premises has
received written notice of the violation shall constitute a separate violation
of this article.
A. Applications;
B. Purchaser acknowledgments; and
C. Plumber certifications.
§ 321-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-19
1:211

ARTICLE IV
Grease Removal Systems
[Adopted 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 1342]
§ 321-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD PREPARATION FACILITY — Includes any food establishment in any
building, room or place or any portion thereof or appurtenance thereto,
where human food or drink is mixed, cooked, or otherwise prepared, offered
for sale, sold, served or given with or without charge to patrons, customers
or guests for consumption on the premises; provided, however, that this
does not include the mixing, cooking or other preparation and serving of
food in single-family dwellings to the resident family or its guests, or to
buildings designated for other approved residential use in the Borough
Zoning Ordinance.
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor whose flow rate is 35 gpm or less and
which is located inside building. Grease traps shall be rated for a minimum
22.5 gpm.
RESTAURANT — Includes any public eating place where regular meals are
prepared, offered for sale, sold and served to patrons, customers or guests
for compensation based on the price charged for and generally paid at the
conclusion of each meal. The words "regular meals" as used herein mean
meals generally consistent of curses embracing some kind of meat or its
equivalent, vegetables, bread, pastry, beverage and accompaniments, serve
at more or less intervals.
§ 321-21. Grease removal systems.
Grease removal systems must be installed at all connections to the Avalon
Borough sanitary sewage facilities from users conducting food preparation
or food processing operations, including, but not limited to, restaurants,
nursing homes, schools, hospitals or other connections which discharge
or have the potential of discharging quantities of grease to the Borough
sanitary sewage facilities in excess of allowable standards. Installation of
a grease removal system shall be required when the Borough determines
that such discharge could result in obstruction to flow in the sewer or
accumulations of grease that could result in obstruction to flow in the
sewer. Grease removal systems must be installed according to the following
specifications:
A. No wastewater, other than from kitchen fixtures or food processing
equipment, shall discharge into the grease removal system unless
approved by the Avalon Borough Council or its designee in writing.
B. Any user required to install a grease removal system must install either:
(1) An outdoor passive inground grease interceptor;
§ 321-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-21
1:213
(2) An automatic electrical/mechanical grease removal unit; or
(3) Semi-automatic grease removal unit.
C. Inground grease removal system shall have a minimum depth of four
feet and a minimum capacity of 500 gallons, and shall have sufficient
capacity to provide at least a twenty-four-hour detention period for the
process flow. The minimum process flow shall be based on 15 gallons
per seat or chair per day or based on actual water usage for existing
facilities, according to such reasonable standards as may be utilized the
Borough Engineer.
D. A suitable sampling location shall be providing for sampling of the
discharges from grease removal systems. Any plans for such grease
removal system as required in this section shall be submitted for
Borough review and approval prior to installation. The Borough must be
notified 72 hours prior to installation of any grease removal device in
order to inspect and oversee the installation. Automatic electrical/
mechanical grease removal systems must have a sampling valve
installed in the discharge piping with a minimum clearance of eight
inches for the installation of sampling bottles.
E. The owners shall be responsible for cleaning and maintaining grease
removal system and shall maintain records of the dates of cleaning and
the means of disposal, subject to review by the Borough. Any removal
and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner must
be performed by a licensed waste disposal firms.
F. All dishwasher wastewater from the prerinse station must discharge to
the grease removal device. All other dishwater wastewater must bypass
the grease removal device and be discharged directly into the
sewer system.
G. The garbage disposal units may only be installed in facilities with
properly sized and operational inground passive-type grease
interceptors which have been properly designed for retention of
settleable solids. Garbage disposal units are prohibited in all other
commercial or industrial facilities. Garbage disposal waste shall not be
discharged into automatic electrical/mechanical grease removal
systems.
H. Grease and oil traps or other interceptors shall be provided at the
user's expense, when such user operates an establishment preparing,
processing or serving food and/or food products. Grease interceptors
can be required in other industrial or commercial establishments when
they are necessary, in the opinion of the Borough, for proper handling of
liquid waste containing oil and/or grease in an amount in excess of 200
mg/l by weight fat soluble, or for any flammable waste, and all such
traps, tanks, chambers or other interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Borough and shall be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. All such interceptors shall be
serviced and emptied of the waste content as required for the efficient
§ 321-21 AVALON CODE § 321-21
1:214
operation, but not less often than every 30 days, in order to maintain
the minimum design capability to intercept oils and greases from the
wastewater discharged to the publicly owned sanitary sewer.
I. Waste removed from grease inceptors shall not be discharged into the
publicly owned sanitary sewer. The owner shall be responsible for the
sanitary disposal of such waste. The owner shall keep a
contemporaneous written record stating the date of disposal, the name
and address of the person or company handling such disposal and the
disposal location.
J. A facility must keep interceptor cleaning records and disposal records
on file a minimum of three years. The following information must be
maintained: receipt for job performed signed by contractor, and cost,
cleanout date, person responsible for cleaning, name of firm performing
the cleanout, disposal method for and destination of material removed.
K. The owner must inspect and maintain oil and grease storage containers
at least once a week and record in a maintenance log the date and time
of inspection, maintenance activity and the name of the individual
conducting the activity. The maintenance activities that shall be
documented in the maintenance log must include the following:
(1) Deterioration of the oil containers;
(2) Leakage and spills from the oil containers;
(3) Properly covered storage containers;
(4) When grease was emptied and by whom.
L. A facility must maintain a proper containment around the storage
container and storage area.
M. The facility owner is not to utilize enzymes, bacteria, chemicals, etc.,
that would adversely affect the operation of the grease traps.
N. The facility owner is to document the cleaning of the exhaust system
filters and record in a maintenance log the date and time of inspection,
maintenance activity and the name of the individual conducting the
activity. No filter cleaning is to be performed in an area not protected by
a grease trap.
O. Notwithstanding the above, no interceptor or grease trap shall
discharge amounts of grease into the public sewer system that are in
excess of levels permitted by Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
(ALCOSAN). In the event that ALCOSAN regulations are more stringent
than those stated above, the ALCOSAN regulations and limits shall
control.
P. In the discharge of duties, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer,
Borough Engineer or other Borough designee shall have the authority
to enter, during regular business hours, any restaurant, food
§ 321-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-21
1:215
§ 321-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 321-23. Appeals and modifications.
preparation facility or other covered place or enterprise in the
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article.
Q. The Borough may adopt and charge to the user of an interceptor or
grease trap reasonable inspection fees to be set by resolution in order
to facilitate and enforce this article.
A. Any person or user who is found to have failed to comply with the
provisions of this article regarding grease traps may be fined up to
$1,000 per day per violation. Each day of violation shall be a separate
offense.
B. Wherever a user has been notified of a violation of the provisions of this
article and has not abated the violation within the deadline as ordered
by the Borough, the Borough may arrange with the water supplier for
water service to the user to be severed and for service to recommence,
at the user's expense, after the user has satisfactorily come into
compliance. The user shall pay all water-termination-related charges of
the water supplier.
C. In addition to the penalties and remedies contained herein, the Borough
may take any action at law or in equity to seek redress for violation of
this article.
A. Should the Borough determine any user to be in violation of these
regulations, it may serve upon such person a written notice stating the
nature of the violation. Within 20 days from the date of said notice, the
user must supply to the Borough a written explanation for the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation and a schedule
for coming into full compliance. Submission of such a plan does relieve
the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation.
B. Any person aggrieved by the issuance of a violation notice under this
article may file a written appeal to the Borough Manager within 20 days
of such notice of violation requesting a Local Agency Law hearing.
Upon the filing of such appeal, the Borough Council will provide for
such a hearing and may assign a hearing officer to conduct a hearing,
make findings of fact and recommendations, and/or to issue a
determination. Any request for an appeal hearing shall be accompanied
by a $50 nonrefundable hearing fee, and the applicant shall be
responsible for payment of all costs incurred by the Borough in
connection with the hearing, including but not limited to court reporter
costs, costs of transcripts, cost of publication of notices, etc.
C. Upon written request from any person, the Borough Engineer may
approve a modification of any substantive requirement herein, provided
§ 321-21 AVALON CODE § 321-23
1:216
that such modification is needed to avoid undue hardship, adequate
measures are taken to preserve the proper operation of the sanitary
sewer system, and the modification poses no danger to the public
health.
§ 321-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-23
1:217

ARTICLE V
Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Fee
[Adopted 10-21-2014 by Ord. No. 1360]
§ 321-24. Surcharge fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
All property within the Borough of Avalon with improvements located on
such property that utilize potable water for sanitary facilities shall be
subject to a sanitary surcharge fee imposed by the Borough of Avalon. The
amount of said fee shall be $0.0021 on every gallon of water or part thereof
used during any three-month billing period as evidenced by the quarterly
water meter readings taken by the West View Water Authority. An additional
fee of $9.95, to be paid quarterly, will be part thereof as a customer service
charge for the billing.
§ 321-25. Billing.
The sanitary sewer surcharge fee established by this article shall be for
each residential, commercial, or industrial unit served by a metered water
service line and the quantity of water used by each such residential,
commercial, and industrial unit. Such surcharge fee shall be billed to the
person in whose name the water service is contracted (whether he be the
owner of the property or a tenant); however, the property owner shall be
responsible for the payment of such surcharge fee if the billable party does
not make such payment.
§ 321-26. Separate sewer improvement fund.
The Borough of Avalon shall be required by this article to establish a
separate sewer improvement fund to utilize the sanitary sewer surcharge
fees to, directly or indirectly, provide the funds necessary for the required
engineering work, design, construction, and purchase of components for
improvements, replacements, rehabilitation, major repairs, additions, and
other associated major work projects to the sanitary sewer system and
storm sewer system. Such other major work projects include, but are not
limited to, smoke testing, dye testing, the separation of storm flow from
the sanitary sewer system, manhole and inlet rehabilitation, reconstruction,
and installation, the cleaning of sewer lines and components, investigating
and identifying the conditions of sewers and locating possible leaks, breaks,
and blockages through the use of televising sewer lines, the purchase and
installation of sewer flow monitors, the required field work and engineering
work necessary to adequately provide maps of the sewer systems and
identify the hydraulic capacity of the systems, and any other sewer system
related work items as identified by the Council of the Borough of Avalon.
§ 321-27. Penalty for failure to pay.
The failure of any billable party (or ultimately the property owner) to pay
the identified sanitary sewer surcharge fee to the Borough of Avalon within
§ 321-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-27
1:219
30 days of the billing date of such surcharge fee will cause the imposition of
a penalty which will be imposed as follows:
§ 321-28. Termination of water service.
The failure of any billable party (or ultimately the property owner) to pay
the identified sanitary sewer surcharge fee to the Borough within 90 days
of the billing date may result in the Borough of Avalon having the potable
water supply to the building terminated until such sewer surcharge fee is
paid to the Borough in total. Any and all fees associated with the scheduled
termination of water service to a location shall be the responsibility of the
billable party (or ultimately the property owner) and shall be paid to the
Borough of Avalon prior to the Borough halting such planned termination
of water service. Any and all fees associated with the planned and/or actual
termination of water service to a location shall be the responsibility of the
billable party (or ultimately the property owner) and shall be paid to the
Borough of Avalon prior to the restoration of water service to the location.
A. An initial penalty charge in the amount of 10% of the surcharge fee
shall be assessed and added to the charge.
B. An additional penalty charge in the amount of 10% of the principal
balance shall be added to the balance that remains unpaid each year on
the anniversary date of the initial penalty charge as long as the charge
remains outstanding.
C. Partial payments received on unpaid balances shall be applied first to
all penalty charges and then to the principal balance due and owing.
D. Unpaid amounts may be subject to additional costs, fees, expenses and
interest, consistent with the Municipal Tax Claim and Lien Law, as
amended.
§ 321-27 AVALON CODE § 321-28
1:220
ARTICLE VI
Storm and Sewage Line Maintenance Program
[Adopted 12-14-2017 by Ord. No. 1366]
§ 321-29. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Avalon Borough Storm and Sanitary
Maintenance Ordinance."
§ 321-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUDGETED YEAR — The year which follows the budgeting process and for
which the budget references.
PROJECT — The unit of work that is being completed to fulfill the annual
maintenance requirements of this article.
§ 321-31. Preparation.
§ 321-32. Funding.
§ 321-33. Execution.
A. Annually the Street Chairman, Borough Manager, Street
Superintendent and Borough Engineer will propose a project at a
minimum cost of $150,000.
B. Each project is to be accompanied by an estimated cost to proceed as
supplied by the Borough Engineer.
A. Each project is to be approved as part of the annual budgeting process.
B. Funding for the project is to be provided by the Sewage Surcharge
Fund. No project shall be permitted to allow the fund balance to fall
below $250,000.
A. Upon the first business day of February of the budgeted year, the
Borough Manager is to begin the bidding process.
B. All utilities are to be engaged with plans and time frames upon the first
business day of February of the budgeted year.
C. All work is to be started by June of the budgeted year.
§ 321-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 321-33
1:221
Chapter 334
SMOKING
§ 321-33 AVALON CODE § 321-33
1:222
ARTICLE I
Smoking Prohibited in Borough Building
[Adopted 5-17-2006 by Ord. No. 1306]
§ 334-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them:
BOROUGH BUILDING — The new Borough Building located at 640
California Avenue, including but not limited to the vestibule, Council
Chambers, the administrative offices and/or any other offices and/or
conference rooms, the kitchen and/or lunchrooms, the tax office, the rest
rooms, the hallways and/or stairwells, and the police station, including the
garages and showers.
SMOKING — This includes, but is not limited to, a lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe, and/or other smoking device.
§ 334-2. Smoking inside prohibited.
Smoking is strictly prohibited within the Borough building.
§ 334-3. Smoking permitted outside.
Smoking is permitted only outside the confines of the building's walls.
§ 334-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 334-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-4
1:223
Chapter 345
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 243. Junked and abandoned vehicles — See Ch.
390.
§ 334-4 AVALON CODE § 334-4
1:224
ARTICLE I
Storage, Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 1190]
§ 345-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 345-2. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).11
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure, or residual
materials in liquid or solid form, generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided such waste is not hazardous waste. The term includes the
residual materials generated in producing, harvesting, and marketing
of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural, and agricultural crops or
commodities grown on what are usually recognized and excepted as
farms, forests, or other agricultural lands.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited
to appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to their size, shape, or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and
residential waste building materials, grubbing waste, and rubble
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition
operations on houses, commercial buildings and other structures and
pavements.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters
the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit, or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
11.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 345-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-2
1:225
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases, or vectors.
HAULER OR PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation who has been licensed by the municipality or
its designated representative to collect, transport, and dispose of refuse
for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged
in service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant,
or air pollution control facility.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Avalon, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institutional, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution and agency, or any other legal
entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term person shall
include the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal
entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
§ 345-2 AVALON CODE § 345-2
1:226
§ 345-3. Prohibited activities.
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining or agricultural operations
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that it is
not hazardous. The term residual waste shall not include coal refuse
as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act. Residual waste
shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment
plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in
compliance with valid permit issued pursuant to the Clean Streams
Law.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
material placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and require proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the municipality
any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or any other municipal or residual
§ 345-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-3
1:227
§ 345-4. Standards for storage of solid waste.
solid waste except in accordance with the provisions of this article, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97, and the
Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within the
municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this article,
any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97, and
the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article VIII.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect, or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the municipality
without first securing a license to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid wastes that is stored or deposited for collection within the
municipality without prior approval by the municipality.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the municipality except at an approved and permitted
resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any Department rules and
regulation adopted pursuant to Act 97.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit, or cause
or permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or private property
within the municipality except as provided in this article.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public street or alley or on the curb side of any
street or alley on private property within Avalon Borough any garbage,
rubbish, bulky waste or any other municipal or residual solid waste
more than 24 hours before the collection date or pickup date
established by the Council of the Borough of Avalon for said person.
[Added 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 1197]
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections, and shall place
and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparation standards:
§ 345-3 AVALON CODE § 345-4
1:228
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained free of liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
(4) Garden clippings and tree trimmings shall be placed in approved
containers or shall be cut and tied securely into bundles. Bundles
shall not be more than four feet in length, not more than two feet in
diameter and not more than 40 pounds in weight.
(5) Newspapers and magazines shall be placed in approved containers
or shall be tied securely into bundles of not more than 40 pounds in
weight.
(6) When specified by the municipality or its designated
representative, special preparation and storage procedures may be
required to facilitate the collection and resource recovery of a
certain waste material.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
municipality or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust and corrosion resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 pounds.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic bags
shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity
when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection, and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons
and a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
§ 345-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-4
1:229
§ 345-5. Standards and regulations for collection.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standards of this article or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the municipality or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the municipality or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pick-up days when the containers are placed
out for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner or customers premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items, such as furniture, automobile parts, machinery,
appliances, and tires shall be stored in a manner that will prevent
the accumulation or collection of water, the harborage of rodents,
safety hazards and fire hazards.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this article. The type, size and placement requirements for bulk
containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the waste
hauler, and are subject to approval by the municipality.
A. The municipality shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish,
and bulky wastes from individual residences and multifamily residential
sources with less than four units, or it may contract with a private
collector or collectors to provide this essential residential collection
service.
B. All households and homeowners shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the municipality unless they can demonstrate that
they have made alternative arrangements that are consistent with this
article and approved by the municipality.
§ 345-4 AVALON CODE § 345-5
1:230
C. All multifamily residential sources (with four or more units),
commercial, institutional, and industrial establishments shall negotiate
and individually contract collection service with the municipality's
collector or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their choice.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week. Bulky wastes shall be collected following prior arrangement with
the municipality's collector and payment of any required special fees.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies, and unsightly
conditions. The municipality reserves the right to require more
frequent collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published regularly by the
municipality or its contracted hauler.
G. All solid waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless prior
approval of any exception has been granted by the municipality. No
collection, hauling, or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on
Sunday.
H. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the municipality
shall comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the municipality shall be
conveyed by the hauler to a transfer station, processing facility, or
disposal site designated as approved by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97, and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97, and must be licensed by the Allegheny
Department of Health.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) Collection vehicles for rubbish and other nonputrescible solid
waste shall be capable of being enclosed or covered to prevent
roadside litter and nuisances.
(5) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
§ 345-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-5
1:231
§ 345-6. Collection and disposal charges.
§ 345-7. Administrative appeals.
§ 345-8. Injunction powers.
The municipality may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania, for an injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to
enforce any of the provisions of this article.
(6) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The governing body of the municipality shall be authorized to make
funds available, in accordance with the laws and procedures of the
municipality, for the establishment, maintenance, and operation of a
municipal solid waste collection and disposal system; or for the
contracting of such service to a private collector.
B. Annual fee schedules (if appropriate) shall be published by the
municipality based on any competitively bid residential collection
service contract that may be awarded by the municipality.
C. The municipality shall be responsible for the collection of any fees for
solid waste collection and disposal from residential customers.
Licensed haulers shall be responsible for the collection of any collection
and disposal fees from commercial, institutional, and industrial
customers.
A. All appeals shall be made, in writing, to the governing body of the
municipality.
B. Pending a reversal or modification, all decisions of the municipality
shall remain effective and enforceable.
C. Appeals may be made by the following persons:
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a new standard or regulation
issued by the municipality may appeal within 10 days after the
municipality gives notice of its intention to issue the new standard
or regulation.
D. The notice of appeal shall be served, in writing, and sent by certified
mail with return receipt requested. Within 20 days after receipt of the
notice of appeal, the municipality shall hold a public hearing. Notice of
the hearing shall be sent to both parties in time to adequately prepare
for the hearing. Notice shall be sent to the parties by certified mail with
return receipt requested at the last known address in addition to
publication in the local newspaper.
§ 345-5 AVALON CODE § 345-9
1:232
§ 345-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-15-1999 by Ord. No.
1255; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 345-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-9
1:233

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 1191]
§ 345-10. Title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Borough of Avalon Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 345-11. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used throughout this article shall have the
following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988.12
ALUMINUM — All empty aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food and beverage containers consisting
of steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the municipality to
collect recyclable materials from residences, authorized by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection
services from the municipality to collect recyclable materials from those
properties.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes, and those multiple dwelling residential
buildings containing four or more dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin coated food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, automotive
glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 345-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-11
1:235
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes but is not limited to automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments from community activities and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plan, wastewater treatment plan, wastewater treatment plan or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Avalon.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are newspapers that have been soiled, color comics,
glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in colors other
than black and white often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees, and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the wide variety of types of plastics, the municipality may stipulate
specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the municipality and can be separated from municipal waste and
returned to commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of
useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans
high grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics,
and any other items selected by the municipality or specified in future
§ 345-11 AVALON CODE § 345-11
1:236
revisions to Act 101. The recyclable materials selected by the municipality
may be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the municipality.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastic and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single or multifamily dwellings having less
than four dwelling units per structure for which the municipality provides
municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the PA Department of Environmental Protection for beneficial
use.
§ 345-12. Establishment of program/grant power.
§ 345-13. Lead acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead acid batteries with other municipal wastes is
prohibited and shall be a violation of this article.
§ 345-14. Separation and collection.
A. The municipality hereby establishes a recycling program for the
mandatory separation and collection of recyclable materials and the
separation, collection and composting of leaf waste from all residences
and all commercial, municipal and institutional establishments located
in the municipality for which waste collection is provided by the
municipality or any other collector. Collection of the recyclable
materials shall be made at least once per month by the municipality, its
designated agent, or any other solid waste collects operating in the
municipality and authorized to collect recyclable materials from
residences or from commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments. The recycling program shall also contain a sustained
public information and education program.
B. Specific program regulations are provided as an attachment to this
article. The Borough Council is empowered to make changes to
program regulations as necessary, as described in § 345-19.
Subsequent changes in the program regulations may be made through
approval of the Borough Council and public notice and notification of all
affected parties.
C. This article is ordained by the Council of the Borough of Avalon by and
with the authority of the same.
§ 345-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-14
1:237
A. All persons who are residents of the municipality shall separate all of
those recyclable materials designated by the municipality from all other
municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments, store such materials for collection, and shall
place same for collection in accordance with the guidelines established
hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
in containers provided by the municipality for collection. Any
containers provided to residences for collection of recyclables shall
be the property of the municipality and shall be used only for the
collection of recyclable materials. Any resident who moves within
or from the municipality shall be responsible for returning the
allocated container(s) to the municipality or shall pay the
replacement cost of said container(s). Use of recycling containers
for any purpose other than the designated recycling program or
use of the recycling containers by any person other than the person
allocated such container(s) shall be a violation of this article.
(2) An owner, landlord, or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with four or more units may
comply with its recycling responsibilities establishing a collection
system at each property. The collection system must include
suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, accessible locations for the containers, and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collection system. Owners, landlords and agents of owners or
landlords who comply with this article shall not be liable for
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
B. If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the
municipality or its authorized agent, owners, landlords and agents of
owners or landlords shall submit an annual report to the municipality
reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the previous year,
said report to be filed with the Borough Manager of the Borough of
Avalon on or before January 10 of each year.
C. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste.
D. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, leaf waste and such other materials as may be designated by the
municipality generated at commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and from community activities and store the recyclable
materials until collection. A person may be exempted from this
subsection if that person submits documentation to the municipality
annually indicating that the designated recyclable materials are being
recycled in an appropriate manner.
§ 345-14 AVALON CODE § 345-14
1:238
§ 345-15. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All recyclable material placed by persons for collection by the municipality
or authorized collector pursuant to this article shall, from time of placement
at the curb, become the property of the municipality or the authorized
collector, except as otherwise provided by § 345-17 of this article. Nothing
in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated
recyclable materials by the generator unless and until such materials are
placed at the curbside for collection.
§ 345-16. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation, other
than the municipality or one authorized by the Borough Council to collect
recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments one calendar day shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 345-17. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not provided that the receiving person, firm
or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from the
collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from the Borough Council
to make such a collection.
§ 345-18. Recycling of materials.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and
shall be a violation of this article. The collected recyclable materials shall be
taken to a recycling facility designated by the Borough of Avalon. Disposal
by collectors or operators of recycling facilities of source-separated
recyclable materials in landfills or to be burned in incinerators is prohibited
and shall be a violation of this article. The collected recyclable materials
shall be taken to a recycling facility designated by the Borough of Avalon.
Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling facilities of sourceseparated
recyclable materials in landfills or to be burned in incinerators is
prohibited unless markets do not exist and the collectors or operators have
notified the Borough Manager of the Borough of Avalon in writing.
§ 345-19. Enforcement and administration; violations and penalties.
E. If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than the
municipality or its authorized agent, occupants of said establishments
shall submit an annual report to the municipality the tonnage of
materials recycled during the previous year. Said annual report shall be
filed with the Borough Manager of the Borough of Avalon on or before
January 10 of each year.
§ 345-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-19
1:239
§ 345-20. Agreements.
The municipality may enter into (an) agreement(s) with public or private
agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable
materials from curbside.
§ 345-21. Modifications.
The municipality may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the
standards and regulations herein and as authorized in § 345-19.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby authorized and directed to make
reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of
this article as deemed necessary, including but not limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences, and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
article shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for
the first offense. Thereafter all such violations shall be subject to the
penalties hereinafter provided.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, any person who violates or permits a
violation of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor, pay a fine
of not more than $600, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings. If the penalty
is not paid, the Borough shall initiate a civil action for collection in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of
this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense. In
addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the Borough
may enforce this article in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. The municipality reserves the right not to collect municipal waste
containing recyclable materials in combination with nonrecyclable
materials.
§ 345-19 AVALON CODE § 345-21
1:240
ARTICLE III
Disposal of Rubbish and Grass on Borough Property
[Adopted 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 1304]
§ 345-22. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, corporation or corporations,
to dispose of any rubbish, paper, grass, leaves, garbage, and/or any other
debris of any kind whatsoever upon the streets and/or alleys of the Borough.
§ 345-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
§ 345-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-23
1:241

ARTICLE IV
Waste Dumpsters and Street Storage
[Adopted 2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 1336]
§ 345-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation,
association, society or group who applies for a permit pursuant to this
article.
GARBAGE — All putrescible (or decayable) wastes; except sewage and
body wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead
animals; and all such substances accumulated on or removed from all
public and private establishments and properties, including residences, but
excluding recognizable industrial by-products, discarded wood and lumber,
grass clippings, weeds and leaves.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation,
association, society or group.
REFUSE — Includes rubbish, garbage and trash, as these terms are defined
herein.
RUBBISH — General dry material produced routinely by household,
commercial, or industrial establishments, such as paper, cans, bottles, and
other containers and ashes.
STREET — Any public street, road, way, alley, parking area or other area
designated for public pedestrian or vehicular traffic, passage or parking.
STREET STORAGE — Any storage unit placed in a street for a period in
excess of 24 consecutive hours that is not a motor vehicle as defined by the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,13 or a waste dumpster. This includes, but is not
limited to, portable storage containers.
TRASH — Includes bushes, branches, Christmas trees, lawn rakings and
similar waste materials, bulky objects, such as discarded household
appliances or equipment or furniture, and building demolition and
construction wastes.
WASTE DUMPSTER — Any dumpster, trailer, box container or any other
receptacle of any kind used for the storage of refuse.
§ 345-25. Permit required; fees.
A. No person shall place or cause to be placed any waste dumpster or
street storage on any Avalon Borough street unless and until said
person has obtained a permit, issued by the Avalon Chief of Police and
signed by the Borough Manager. The duration of such permit shall be
13.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 345-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-25
1:243
§ 345-26. Placement, maintenance and use regulations.
30 days, and the continued validity of such permit shall be contingent
upon full compliance with the regulations and requirements set forth in
this article.
B. All persons applying for a permit shall pay a nonrefundable permit fee
and advance deposit fee in an amount set by resolution of the Borough
Council The deposit shall be refunded within 30 days after the
termination of the permit, provided that no violation of this article has
occurred. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. All persons applying for a permit shall advise the Avalon Borough Chief
of Police of the following information in writing:
(1) Specifications of waste dumpster or street storage, including size
and capacity;
(2) Type and amount of refuse to be stored;
(3) Intended waste dumpster or street storage placement;
(4) Length of time the waste dumpster or street storage will remain in
said location;
(5) Name, address and telephone number of the person available 24
hours per day to receive communication from Avalon Borough
officials concerning the waste dumpster or street storage and the
activities related thereto.
D. After the expiration of a legally issued permit, applicant may seek an
extension of the permit upon written good cause shown to Borough
Council. If a permit extension is denied, applicant may appeal the
decision, in writing, within 10 days from receipt of the denial. The
applicant must pay a nonrefundable appeal fee in an amount as set by
resolution of the Borough Council to complete the written request for
appeal. Upon written appeal and payment of the applicable appeal fee,
a public hearing shall be scheduled and held pursuant to the Local
Agency Law before Borough Council. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The location and utilization of a waste dumpster or street storage upon
a street shall be in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws,
rules and regulations applicable thereto, including but not limited to
any highway occupancy or other permit required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, in addition to the requirements of this
article.
B. The placement of a waste dumpster or street storage upon a street shall
not extend into the travel lane of traffic, and must be placed at least 20
feet from all road intersections.
§ 345-25 AVALON CODE § 345-26
1:244
C. Any waste dumpster or street storage placed upon a street shall bear
reflective markings with sufficient reflective capacity to provide
reasonable warning to approaching traffic from a distance of at least
100 feet.
D. Any waste dumpster or street storage placed upon a street shall bear
the name and telephone number of the person who owns the unit. If
such waste dumpster or street storage is not so marked, the applicant
must supply said information to the Chief of Police as a condition for
securing and maintaining a valid permit.
E. All waste dumpsters and street storage must be maintained in a safe
and sanitary manner to assure that the contents may not be invaded or
removed by weather, animals or trespassers. Use of the waste dumpster
or street storage must not disturb adjacent properties with noxious
odors, noise, airborne pollutants, or other any other such nuisance.
F. All waste dumpsters must be removed from Avalon Borough within 24
hours of reaching full capacity. A waste dumpster is considered filled to
capacity when its contents extend to the top edge of any wall of the
waste dumpster or beyond the edges of any doors, hatch, or other
opening in the roof or any wall of the dumpster.
G. After any waste dumpster or street storage is removed, the applicant
shall reasonably clean and restore the waste dumpster or street storage
location to the condition as it existed prior to the placement of the unit.
Such restoration must be completed within 24 hours of removal of the
waste dumpster or street storage. If the waste dumpster or street
storage area is not cleaned and restored within 24 hours of removal,
Avalon Borough officials shall cause the area to be cleaned and
restored. Such reasonable costs and expenditures incurred by the
Borough shall constitute a municipal claim and shall be the
responsibility of the applicant, in addition to applicable fines and
penalties.
H. The waste dumpster or street storage owner and/or contractor shall be
responsible for any and all damage to streets, sidewalks, curbs, public
rights-of-way or other public improvement which results from the
placement, service, operation, use or removal of the waste dumpster or
street storage.
I. The permitee shall assume all risk of damage, and the Borough shall not
be liable for any damage, to the waste dumpster or street storage
caused by Borough performed or contracted street plowing, street
sweeping, or other public function.
J. The Borough reserves the right to limit and/or deny a permit or
extension of a permit for a waste dumpster or street storage for good
cause, such as snow removal, street cleaning, public safety concerns or
other municipal purpose. In such a case that the Borough requires the
immediate removal of a waste dumpster or street storage, notice will be
provided to the applicant. Applicant will remove the waste dumpster or
§ 345-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-26
1:245
§ 345-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County. Additionally, the Borough may remove
the waste dumpster or street storage at the expense of the permittee.
street storage within 24 hours. If the waste dumpster or street storage
area is not removed within 24 hours of notice, Avalon Borough officials
shall cause the area to be cleaned and restored. Such reasonable costs
and expenditures incurred by the Borough shall constitute a municipal
claim and shall be the responsibility of the applicant, in addition to
applicable fines and penalties.
§ 345-26 AVALON CODE § 345-27
1:246
Chapter 350
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 321.
§ 345-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-27
1:247

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 350-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Avalon
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 350-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Borough finds that:
§ 350-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Borough and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the
benefits described in § 350-2 of this chapter, through provisions designed
to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including regulation of development and activities causing accelerated
runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the
protection of people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by
using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to
infiltrate and recharge, evapotranspire, and/or harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices
and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of
predevelopmenthydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
§ 350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:249
§ 350-4. Statutory authority.
The Borough is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,14 as amended, and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1, et seq., as amended,
The Stormwater Management Act.
§ 350-5. Applicability; enactment and when effective.
§ 350-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Borough inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
Commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
Borough.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
A. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. This chapter is hereby enacted as an ordinance of the Borough of
Avalon, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, ("Borough") and shall take
effect immediately upon final passage by Borough Council and approval
by the Mayor.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 350-3 AVALON CODE § 350-7
1:250
§ 350-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 350-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 350-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by Borough Council, a board, agency, commission,
agent or employee of the Borough purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 350-10. Waivers.
A. If the Borough, by and through the Borough Engineer, determines that
any requirement under this chapter cannot be achieved for a particular
regulated activity the Borough may, after an evaluation of alternatives,
approve measures other than those in this chapter, subject to § 350-10C
pursuant to the process described in this section. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre.
B. The request for a modification or waiver shall originate with the
applicant, shall be in writing, and shall accompany the stormwater
management site plan submitted to the Borough. The request shall
provide the facts on which the request is based, the provisions of the
chapter, involved, and the proposed modification. The Borough
Engineer or other designated plan reviewer shall review the request to
determine if it meets the requirements of the chapter, including
Subsection C below and make a recommendation to Borough Council or
its appointed hearing officer. Borough Council may grant the waiver or
modification after a local agency hearing as provided in Subsection D
below.
C. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the Borough if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the
land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or
detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended
outcome, and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Hardship
must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and
not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions
of the Stormwater Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden
§ 350-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-10
1:251
§ 350-11. Version of regulations and standards.
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard, shall be interpreted to
refer to the latest or most current version of that document.
§ 350-12. Disclaimer of liability.
shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications shall not substantially
or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany
the stormwater management site plan submission, as directed in
§ 350-10A above.
D. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the Borough.
E. Consideration of waivers or requests for modification shall be filed with
the Borough Manager, along with any hearing fee adopted by Council
by resolution. Hearings are not public, unless specifically requested to
be public by the applicant in writing at the time he/she/it files a request
for waiver and/or modification from this chapter. Borough Council may
appoint a third-party hearing officer to conduct the local agency
hearing and make a recommendation to the Council, who shall act upon
the recommendation at a public meeting. Appeals from Borough
Council determinations must be filed with the Court of Common Pleas
of Allegheny County, consistent with relevant law and local procedural
rules.
F. This section shall not apply to requests for waiver or modification to the
provisions of Article V, Design Criteria. All requests for waivers or
modifications from Article V shall be reviewed by the Borough for
applications of any size earth disturbance.
A. For regulatory purposes, the degree of stormwater management sought
by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable. This chapter
shall not impose upon the Borough any legal duty in addition to those
duties otherwise imposed under the Stormwater Management Act15
upon the Borough, any appointed or elected official, employee or
representative of the Borough. It is not the intention of the Borough to
guarantee the elimination of harm resulting from stream flow, floods,
rain, snow, or stormwater runoff; or erosion resulting therefrom. It is
the intention of the Borough to create reasonable stormwater
management regulations which balance several competing interests in
an appropriate fashion with the emphasis on public safety.
B. This chapter does not imply that areas within or outside any identified
flood-prone area will be free from flooding or flood damages.
15.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 350-10 AVALON CODE § 350-12
1:252
C. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any condition
imposed by the Borough or a Borough official hereunder, shall relieve
any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property
resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any
liability upon the Borough for damages to person or property.
D. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty
of any kind by the Borough, or by an official, employee, or consultant
thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure, use, or other
plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action
against the Borough, or an official, employee, or consultant thereof, for
any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 350-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-12
1:253

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 350-13. Words defined.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes and are intended for this chapter only.
ACT 167 — The Borough is empowered to regulate land use activities
that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by
the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S.
§ 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application to the Borough for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the Borough.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "non-structural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to small-
§ 350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-13
1:255
scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P. S. § 851(c)] that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER — A qualified professional as defined
herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County Conservation
District, that has been designated by the Borough to be the reviewer
of SWM site plans for the Borough, and shall be understood to be the
reviewer where indicated as the Borough within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
in a designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the
next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the Commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
§ 350-13 AVALON CODE § 350-13
1:256
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary
of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies
provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed absent
evidence to the contrary that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS16).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration. Any
surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious surfaces. In addition, any surface designed
to be constructed of permeable, pervious or porous concrete, asphalt,
or pavers shall be considered an impervious surface.
16.Editor's Note: See § 350-42A and B.
§ 350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-13
1:257
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those species
that are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and spread and
displace native vegetation. (See http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/es/groups/
public/documents/document/dcnr 010314.pdf for a list of invasive
species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings: the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving a
group of two or more buildings or the division or allocation of land or
space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features; any subdivision of
land; development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on-site.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Avalon, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania
("Borough").
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have historically grown in
Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Borough are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
§ 350-13 AVALON CODE § 350-13
1:258
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.17
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak
rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — A watershed or portion of a watershed
for which a release rate has been established by an adopted Act 167
stormwater management plan.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
Commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs
located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or the developer's representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in
accordance with this chapter. Stormwater Management site plan will
be designated as SWM site plan throughout this chapter.
STREAM — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
17.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-13
1:259
SUBDIVISION — As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code18, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — See "stream."
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
Commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this Commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 350-13 AVALON CODE § 350-13
1:260
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 350-14. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 350-15.
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Borough issues
written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Borough, in accordance with § 350-24,
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
C. These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in
regulated activities.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.19 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual20), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated. Comment on the adequacy of the Erosion and Sedimentation
Controls may be provided by the Borough per the requirements of
Allegheny County Conservation District.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 350-16 and the peak
rate controls of § 350-17 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
19.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: See § 350-42D.
§ 350-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-14
1:261
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s).
Notification shall include a description of the proposed development
and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at a
minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the
subject property of the SWM site plan, however, if in the judgement of
the designated plan reviewer additional properties are being affected,
additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed
postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the Borough. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to
the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual21). If methods
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification, acceptable
to the designated plan reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID
and green infrastructure is not practicable.
H. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at
strategic locations, made as shallow as practicable, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting
the other requirements of this chapter.
I. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm. Infiltration tests performed at the facility locations and proposed
21.Editor's Note: See § 350-42C.
§ 350-14 AVALON CODE § 350-14
1:262
§ 350-15. Exemptions.
basin bottom depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must
support time-to-empty calculations if infiltration is a factor.
J. The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak
rates of discharge shall be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual,
Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 1422 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law23, and the Storm
Water Management Act.24
L. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.25
M. The Borough may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for
meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this
chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do
not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean
Streams Law.
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than one-quarter acre and propose an increase in impervious area of
less than 5,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements in
§ 350-19 of this chapter except as provided in Subsection B below.
B. Earth disturbances between one-twentieth acre (2,178 square feet) and
one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet) of earth disturbance must submit
a SWM site plan to the Borough which shall consist of the following
items and related supportive material needed to determine compliance
with §§ 350-16 through 350-18. The applicant can use the protocols in
the Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan (Appendix C).
(1) General description of proposed stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
22.Editor's Note: See § 350-42E.
23.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See § 350-42C.
§ 350-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-15
1:263
§ 350-16. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual26 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever
possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design
Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District where
appropriate.
(3) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that is proposed; proposed structures, roads,
paved areas, and buildings; and a statement, signed by the
applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved
drainage plan must be approved by the Borough, and that a revised
erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted to the
Borough or Conservation District for approval.
(4) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail; and all calculations, assumptions, and
criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities
must be shown.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
E. Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase
impervious area, and underground infrastructure projects are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter, provided the activities meet the
requirements of all other municipal, state and federal requirements.
Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 350-14D through J.
F. The Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Borough believes may pose a
threat to public health and safety or the environment.
G. Voluntary green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that
are solely intended to better manage runoff from existing development
and are not part of new development or redevelopment, are exempt
from the stormwater management provisions of this chapter. This does
not exempt such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal
regulation.
26.Editor's Note: See § 350-42C.
§ 350-15 AVALON CODE § 350-16
1:264
below. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or
alternative design criteria as allowed by PA Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable as a
method to any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions. The following shall be incorporated
into the CG-1 method:
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
Commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a forty-eight to seventy-two-hour dewatering
time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system (not
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in
a facility designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an
area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to
local stormwater systems or the environment. Justification, as
prepared and sealed by a qualified professional, for assertion that
permanent removal is not feasible must be provided, at a minimum,
in the form of field measured infiltration rate testing and
geotechnical evaluation of the existing site soils with regard to the
impact of proposed infiltration. Applications omitting this
justification, including infiltration rate testing will be considered
incomplete. BMPs proposing use of extended detention in lieu of
permanent reduction through the listed methods shall include a
valve to adjust or regulate dewatering time to achieve the
performance standards noted herein. The valve system shall
include an inspection/monitoring port for review of dewatering.
(3) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) 20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be
considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing
conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual27) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
27.Editor's Note: See § 350-42C.
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-16
1:265
§ 350-17. Rate controls.
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
Commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area
with a dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a
combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed
for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a
combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater
systems or the environment.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 350-17, Rate
Controls, if the project qualifies for exemption by the provisions of
§ 350-15A.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and 100-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. This is the
equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those
rates shown in the maps contained in Appendix A (Release Rate
Management Districts). This predevelopment to post-development
control is not to be misconstrued as the same as the "Conditional
Direct Discharge" areas on the release rate maps. For comparison
of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a cubic foot
per second (cfs). If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge
indicated by the post-development analysis are less than or equal to
the peak rates of discharge indicated by the predevelopment
analysis for one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year,
twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements of this section
have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional
controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge
requirement. Peak flows should be computed using the methods
§ 350-16 AVALON CODE § 350-17
1:266
§ 350-18. Riparian buffers.
included in the chapter titled "Stormwater Calculations and
Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP
Manual. Except, however, where documented downstream flooding
problems exist, the Borough may impose a 50% reduced release
rate criteria.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year,
twenty-four-hour storm events, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (Release Rate
Management Districts) of this chapter. For comparison of peak flow
rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a cubic foot per second
(cfs). For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the specified design events. Peak flows should
be computed using the methods included in Chapter 8 of the
PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The intent of this
chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve
stream water quality. The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland
flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and
shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition
of sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer
rather than in the stream; and reducing erosion by providing stream
bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams; keeping waters
cooler and reducing evaporation.
B. Except as required by Pa. Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the riparian buffer
easement shall be required for all streams (as defined in Article II) with
a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The riparian
buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the
top of the streambank (on each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted
that is inconsistent with the intent of the riparian buffer as
described in § 350-18A.
(2) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(3) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
§ 350-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-18
1:267
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the Borough and
shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds Office,
so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property
located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private
ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area required by
Zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning Ordinance.
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement, but they shall cross the Easement in the shortest practical
distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities are not
permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
G. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted by the Borough within riparian buffers:
(1) It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for nonmotorized
use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted
provided they have adequate drainage.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
H. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
I. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
§ 350-18 AVALON CODE § 350-18
1:268
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 350-19. Plan requirements.
A. Appropriate sections from the Borough, Allegheny County Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local
ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The Borough shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient in
meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the Borough may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
Borough may accept submission of modifications.
C. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan discussed in Subsection C(3)(i) below.
(2) The following signature block for the Borough:
"(Municipal official or designated plan reviewer (§ 350-21A), on
this date (Signature date), has reviewed and hereby certifies that
the SWM site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
Municipal Ordinance No._____, except where waivers have been
granted as noted on the Plan. The review is based on a survey
and plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is
correct and valid as submitted."
(3) The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual28. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(c) A key map showing the development site's location within the
Borough's stormwater management districts, watersheds and
subareas. On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the
district(s), watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are located on
the development site and identify their district and watershed
names and applicable subarea numbers.
(d) Location of the 100-year floodplain on the development site
based on the current municipal Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
28.Editor's Note: See § 350-42C.
§ 350-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-19
1:269
(e) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 350-14.
(f) Expected project time schedule.
(g) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(h) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(i) Plan and profile drawings and details of all SWM BMPs,
including drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and
swales.
(j) SWM site plan shall show the property lines, dimensions of the
site and the locations of existing and proposed on-lot
wastewater facilities and water supply wells, property
boundaries, existing and proposed topography, point(s) of
interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
(k) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing
and proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This
plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for
O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance
activities, personnel and equipment requirements, estimated
annual maintenance costs, and method of financing continuing
O&M.
(l) A justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other than
green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under
this chapter.
(m) Certification and seal of the qualified professional responsible
for the preparation of the plans and report.
(n) Watershed maps delineating predevelopment and postdevelopment
watershed boundaries and land cover conditions,
as well as the flow path and segments used to determine time
of concentrations for each watershed.
(o) Storm sewer calculations and watershed maps delineating all
subareas used to size and compute flow for storm sewer
system.
§ 350-19 AVALON CODE § 350-19
1:270
§ 350-20. Plan submission.
Up to five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
§ 350-21. Plan review.
(p) Existing contours at intervals of two feet except in areas with
slopes greater than 15%, in which case five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(q) Contours of the finished project site at intervals of two feet,
except in areas with slopes greater than 15%, in which case,
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
A. Two copies to the Borough.
B. One copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
C. One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when
requested by the District).
D. One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with
combined sewersystems).
A. The Borough has designated Municipal Engineer as the designated plan
reviewer of SWM site plans for the Borough, and shall be understood to
be the reviewer where indicated as the Borough within this chapter.
B. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Borough for consistency with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved or requires
additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a subdivision
and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time
period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code (90 days). If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Borough.
D. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the Borough will not approve the
SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID
practices are not practicable.
E. If the Borough disapproves the SWM site plan, the Borough will state
the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Borough also may
approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the
acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
F. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VII, must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 350-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-21
1:271
§ 350-22. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan, as determined by the designated plan reviewer, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this article.
§ 350-23. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Borough's concerns, to the Borough in accordance with
this article. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 350-24. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Borough's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The Borough may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific
SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Borough
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 350-25 within the term of validity, then the
Borough may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke any
and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the
Borough shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 350-23 of this chapter.
§ 350-25. Record drawings, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
G. Borough determinations on SWM site plans shall be made by Borough
Council at public meetings under the Sunshine Law.29
A. The applicant and/or developer shall be responsible for providing
record drawings of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site
plan, including, but not limited to BMP grading, outlet structure
configuration and emergency spillway configuration. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the Borough.
B. The record drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude
coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at
the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
29.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 350-21 AVALON CODE § 350-25
1:272
professional must sign the completion certificate. The certification shall
include documentation confirming field reviewed dewatering times for
rate and volume control BMPs. Record drawings shall be provided in
both hard copy and electronic (AutoCAD, latest edition) format.
C. The Borough may conduct inspections during construction as it deems
appropriate. If inspections performed by the Borough reveal
deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM site plan, the
Borough may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall be
at the cost of the stormwater facility owner. Failure to make corrections
as directed shall constitute a violation of this chapter, subject to
penalties as described herein.
D. After receipt of the completion certification by the Borough, the
Borough may conduct a finalinspection.
§ 350-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-25
1:273

ARTICLE V
Design Criteria
§ 350-26. Calculation methodology.
A. All computations used in conjunction with the analysis and design of
stormwater management facilities shall be based on one or more of the
following methods, or as otherwise approved in advance by the
Borough:
(1) TR-55-Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Technical Release No. 55.
(2) TR-20-Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Technical Release No. 20.
(3) Modified Rational Method.
(4) Penn State Runoff Model.
(5) Virginia Tech/Penn State Runoff Model.
B. These methods for determining peak discharge shall be used to:
(1) Determine predevelopment runoff conditions;
(2) Analyze the impact of development; and
(3) Perform calculations in the design of any detention/retention
facilities used in controlling runoff.
C. The SCS, Type II Rainfall Distribution shall be used for all analyses. The
design storm frequencies for the watershed are:
Design Storm 24 Hour Rainfall Depth
One-year 1.97
Two-year 2.35
Five-year 2.88
Ten-year 3.30
Twenty-five-year 3.90
Fifty-year 4.40
100-year 4.92
D. Predevelopment conditions. The cover type for all sites will be
considered to be the dominant land cover during the five-year period
immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity:
(1) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition). Forested land areas
shall be considered in good condition.
§ 350-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-26
1:275
§ 350-27. Design and construction standards; collection and
conveyance facilities.
(2) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing disturbed impervious area, when
present, shall be considered meadow (good condition).
E. Post-development conditions. The hydrologic parameters used to
develop peak flow rates shall be reflective of anticipated soil runoff
characteristics following grading and development of the site.
F. Time of concentration. The minimum time of concentration for any
watershed shall be six minutes. A minimum six-minute time of
concentration may be assumed for any post-development watershed.
Calculations must be provided for all predevelopment times of
concentrations. A minimum time of concentration cannot be assumed
for predevelopment conditions.
G. The use of the Basic Rational Method in estimating runoff may be
employed in the design of the storm sewer conveyance system within
the development. The storm sewer system shall be interpreted as the
conduits, culverts, inlets and appurtenant features for the conveying of
stormwater to, through or from a development site to the point of final
discharge or control facility. The Rational Method shall not be used in
the analysis of stormwater runoff from the development in its entirety
or in conjunction with the design of any retention/detention facilities or
other runoff control measures.
H. Points of interest for analysis of predevelopment and post-development
runoff must be selected to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of §§ 350-16 and 350-17 is achieved at all points where
runoff exits the perimeter of the property.
I. Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another unless the watersheds are subareas of a larger watershed that
are tributary to a common point of interest within or near the perimeter
of the property. Transfer of runoff from one watershed to another under
any other circumstances shall only be approved at the discretion of the
Borough. Documentation shall be provided that peak flow rates are not
increased following development and there will be no detrimental
impact in downstream areas.
J. The stormwater management plan shall consider all of the stormwater
runoff flowing over the project site. Runoff calculations shall be made to
ensure that runoff from the upstream watershed area can be
accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements and watercourses,
etc. on the site.
A. All stormwater collection and conveyance facilities (pipes, swales, and
structures) shall be designed for a 100-year design storm event, unless
the runoff would naturally drain overland to a stormwater detention
§ 350-26 AVALON CODE § 350-27
1:276
facility, in which case a twenty-five-year design storm event may be
used. The hydraulic gradeline must be a minimum of two feet below
the surface elevation within the pipe. Swales and channels shall provide
at least one foot of freeboard above the energy gradeline. Backwater
effects of pipes discharging under surcharge conditions shall be
included.
B. Runoff calculations shall include complete hydrology and hydraulic
analysis of all downstream swales and pipe facilities to permanent
stream discharge point, to the municipal boundary or connection to a
state or county owned conveyance system.
C. Manholes shall not be spaced more than 350 feet apart for pipe sizes up
to 24 inches in diameter and not more than 450 feet apart for larger
pipe sizes.
D. No public stormwater pipe shall be less than 15 inches in diameter that
conveys surface runoff. The minimum pipe slope shall be 1.0% grade or
maintain velocity of two feet/s. For public storm sewer systems, only
pipes related to construction of stormwater BMPs may be less than 15
inches in diameter.
E. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Borough's
construction standards. In addition, all workmanship and materials
shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be
supplied by manufacturers or suppliers listed in PennDOT's Bulletin 15.
F. Manhole and inlet castings shall conform to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 and PennDOT Standards for
Roadway Construction. Inlet grates shall be bicycle safe. Frames and
grates shall be cast iron or structural steel. Concrete frames shall not
be permitted.
G. All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for cleanout. No blind connections shall be permitted.
H. The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined drainage
course, which has a defined bed and bank. If stormwater runoff cannot
be discharged to a defined drainage course, documentation of written
permission from each downstream property owner shall be provided for
all properties between the source of discharge and the defined drainage
course. The use of level spreaders or similar BMPs that promote sheet
flow may be permitted if the applicant provides documentation that the
peak post-development 100-year discharge is no greater than
predevelopment two-year discharge and a letter from the geotechnical
engineer of record regarding slope stability of the downstream area is
provided. Use of a level spreader requires a waiver to be granted by the
Borough.
§ 350-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-28
1:277
§ 350-28. Design and construction standards; stormwater detention
facilities.
A. All retention/detention facilities shall be equipped with multistage
outlet structures to provide discharge control for each designated
storm frequency. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass the postdevelopment
100-year storm runoff in the event of an outlet structure
failure without damaging or impairing the continued function of the
facilities (i.e., impairing the continued function of) the facilities. The
facility(ies) must have an emergency outlet which is able to discharge
the post-development 100-year peak flow. Should any stormwater
management facilities qualify as a dam under PaDEP Chapter 105
criteria, the facility shall be designed in accordance with those
regulations and meet the regulations concerning dam safety.
B. Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff shall
provide an emergency spillway designed to convey the unattenuated
100-year post-development peak rate flow with a blocked primary
outlet structure and an inundation stormwater to the invert elevation of
the spillway, with a minimum one-foot freeboard to the crest of the
embankment.
C. Woody vegetation shall not be permitted on the embankments or within
25 feet of the emergency spillway.
D. The water depth of a storage facility which is not fenced shall be limited
to two feet unless approved by the Borough. Otherwise, appropriate
fencing at least four feet in height shall be required.
E. Side slopes of storage facilities shall not exceed a ratio of 3:1 horizontal
to vertical dimension. The crest of the embankment shall have a
minimum width of not less than 10 feet.
F. The facility shall be equipped with an access road at least 10 feet wide
and with a maximum of grade of 15%. Access roads greater than 12%
grade must be paved. Access roads 12% or less shall have a minimum
six inches depth noneroding aggregate surface. A gate with a minimum
opening of 10 feet shall be provided for maintenance access. An access
easement with a minimum width of 20 feet to all stormwater detention
facilities shall be provided. The access easement shall include a
statement on the recorded plan from the owner/operator of the facility
granting access to the Borough.
G. All stormwater facility outlet structures shall have suitable gaskets to
prevent leakage and piping of water through the facility embankment.
All storm pipe installed through the facility embankment must be
constructed of reinforced concrete pipe. Use of high-performance
polypropylene pipe may be permitted with documentation of pipe
manufacturer's backfill requirements.
H. A geotechnical investigation report for the construction of the
stormwater detention/retention and infiltration facilities must be
§ 350-28 AVALON CODE § 350-28
1:278
provided including design recommendation for embankment
construction, interior and exterior slopes, drainage swales and
infiltration areas.
I. Basin outlet structures shall have nonclogging trash racks over all
design openings. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall be
included in the operation and maintenance plan.
J. Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the greatest
extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through the basin.
K. BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses (e.g.,
drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the level of
water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to
protect and maintain water quality in "special protection" streams, as
required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93
(collectively referred to herein as "State Water Quality Requirements").
§ 350-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-28
1:279

ARTICLE VI
Operation and Maintenance
§ 350-29. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 350-30. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Borough may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Borough will accept the
facilities. The Borough reserves the right to reject or accept the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The Borough may take enforcement actions against an applicant and/or
landowner for any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the landowner shall sign
and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The landowner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The landowner shall convey to the Borough conservation
easements to assure access for periodic inspections by the Borough
and maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The landowner shall keep on file with the Borough the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the Borough
within 10 working days of the change.
B. The landowner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of
the SWM BMPs. If the landowner fails to adhere to the O&M
agreement, the Borough may perform the services required and charge
the landowner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a
lien against the property.
§ 350-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-30
1:281
§ 350-31. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Borough for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls
as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.30
C. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Borough's solicitor.
30.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 350-30 AVALON CODE § 350-31
1:282
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 350-32. General.
A. The Borough may include all costs incurred into the review fee charged
to an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs
for the following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Review of a SWM site plan resubmission.
(4) Attendance at meetings.
(5) Inspections.
B. Fees may be adopted and amended by resolution of the Council from
time to time.
§ 350-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-32
1:283

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 350-33. Prohibited discharges and connections.
§ 350-34. Roof drains and sump pumps.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this Commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection
C below and discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this Commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including water line
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of Total Residual Chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped ground water and water from
foundation and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
(9) Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as
the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharge are
followed.
D. In the event that the Borough or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in, Subsection C significantly contribute
pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this
Commonwealth, the Borough or DEP will notify the responsible
person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 350-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-34
1:285
§ 350-35. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, drainage easements, or structures that were installed as a
requirement of this chapter without the written approval of the Borough.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough, no stormwater from roofs
or driveway drains shall be discharged to the street surface or curb.
§ 350-34 AVALON CODE § 350-35
1:286
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 350-36. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Borough or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Borough
to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard
to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 350-37. Inspection.
§ 350-38. Enforcement.
§ 350-39. Suspension and revocation.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Borough for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Borough within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 350-15.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 350-35 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the Borough.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Borough pursuant to this chapter
may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
§ 350-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-39
1:287
§ 350-40. Penalties.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Borough when:
(1) The Borough has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Borough may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Borough will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written
notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to
correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within
the allowed time period, the Borough may revoke or suspend any, or all,
applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this
chapter.
E. In the event that a landowner's approval or permit is suspended or
revoked by the Borough, he/she/it shall have the right to appeal to
Borough Council pursuant to the Local Agency Law.31 Such appeal must
be in writing and filed with the Borough Manager within 10 days from
the date of the suspension or revocation. Appeals must be accompanied
by the requisite appeal fee adopted by the Council by resolution and
amended in the same manner from time to time. The appeal must
provide the facts on which the appeal is based and the provisions of the
Ordinance involved. Hearings are not public, unless specifically
requested to be public by the landowner in writing at the time he/she/it
files the appeal. Borough Council may appoint a third-party hearing
officer to conduct the local agency hearing and make a
recommendation to the Council, who shall act upon the
recommendation at a public meeting. Appeals from Borough Council
determinations must be filed with the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County, consistent with relevant law and local procedural
rules.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
31.Editor’s Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq.
§ 350-39 AVALON CODE § 350-40
1:288
§ 350-41. Appeals.
more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative. The Borough shall not be required to provide
ongoing notice to the landowner or responsible party daily for
continuing violations.
B. In addition, the Borough may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Borough
within 30 days of that action.
B. Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the Borough Manager
within 10 days from the date of the suspension or revocation. Appeals
must be accompanied by the requisite appeal fee adopted by the
Council by resolution and amended in the same manner from time to
time. The written appeal must provide the facts on which the appeal is
based and the provisions of the Ordinance involved. Hearings are not
public, unless specifically requested to be public by the landowner in
writing at the time he/she/it files the appeal. Borough Council may
appoint a third-party hearing officer to conduct the local agency
hearing and make a recommendation to the Council, who shall act upon
the recommendation at a public meeting.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of Common
Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of
the Borough's decision.
§ 350-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-41
1:289

ARTICLE X
References
§ 350-42. References.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001, Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 350-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-42
1:291
Chapter 356
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 350-42 AVALON CODE § 350-42
1:292
Part 1
Remova[l AOdfo Rputebdbi7s-h2,- 1S9n0o3w BAyndO rIdc.e NForo. m33 S2i]dewalks
ARTICLE I
Clearing of Sidewalks
§ 356-1. Duty of owners or tenants. [Amended 10-18-1994 by Ord.
No. 1214; 12-17-1996 by Ord. No. 1235]
It shall be the duty of every person or persons being the owners or tenants
of any property abutting on the public streets of the Borough of Avalon to
remove any and all dirt or rubbish which may from any cause accumulate
on the sidewalks on which the said property abuts, within 48 hours of
receiving notice to remove the same; and it shall be the further duty of such
owners or tenants to remove from such sidewalks within 24 hours after the
accumulation thereof, all snow and ice from the sidewalks on which said
property abuts.
§ 356-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this Part 1 shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day after the expiration of the notice to
remove dirt or rubbish, or after the 24 hours following any deposit of snow
or ice upon such sidewalks, shall be taken and deemed to be a new violation
of this Part 1. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under this section, the
Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of Common Pleas
of Allegheny County.
§ 356-3. Enforcement. [Amended 6-6-1958 by Ord. No. 936;
10-18-1994 by Ord. No. 1214]
It shall be the duty of the Mayor and the Police of the Borough of Avalon to
strictly enforce the provisions of this Part 1 and ,upon failure of any person
to comply with the provisions of this Part 1, to file a citation against such
property before the Magisterial District Judge.
§ 356-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-3
1:293

Part 2
Excavations In Streets; Sidewalk Construction, Repair And
[Adopted 7-1M5-a2i0n1t4enBayncOerd. No. 1351]
ARTICLE II
Excavations in Streets
§ 356-4. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence the existence
of which constitutes a clear an immediate danger to persons or properties.
MANAGER — The Manager of the municipality or his authorized deputy,
representative or inspector.
NEWLY IMPROVED STREET — Newly constructed cartways, including base
and surfacing of either concrete or asphalt and reconstructed cartways
surfaced with at least 1 1/4 inch top of asphalt. It shall be the prerogative
of the Director of Public Works to define the category of "newly improved
street" and advise the proper utility companies of this designation.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this article.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Allegheny County Sanitary Authority
(ALCOSAN), any company subject to the Borough of Avalon. Cable
television franchise, or any company subject to the jurisdiction of and
control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
STREET — A public street, public easement, right-of-way, public highway,
public alley, public way or public road accepted or maintained by the
municipality, or open for travel and use by the public, whether or not so
accepted or maintained, including the entire area within the right-of-way
thereof.
§ 356-5. Permit required.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel,
opening, or excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street
without first securing a permit from the Manager for each separate
undertaking; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines or
other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may
proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done immediately, provided the
permit could not reasonably and practically have been obtained
beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first
regular business day on which the office of the Manager is open for
business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work
§ 356-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-5
1:295
was begun. In all cases where emergency openings are necessary, the
Police Department shall be notified prior to such opening. Receipt of
Pennsylvania One Call notice will serve as notification to office.
B. Street openings limited. No person to whom a permit has been granted
shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in any amount
greater than that specified in the permit, except that where the
permittee desires to perform additional work not in excess of an amount
greater than 10% of the amount specified in the permit, permittee may
apply to the Manager for an amended permit to permit the additional
work. If the additional work desired to be performed by the permittee
exceeds 10% of the amount in the original permit, an application for a
permit shall be made. Any deposit or bond posted in connection with
the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work
as may be added pursuant to the issuance of an amended permit within
the limit specified herein.
C. Commencement of work. Work for which a permit has been issued shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If
not so commenced, the permit shall be terminated automatically unless
the permittee applies for an extension of time within which to
commence work. If such an extension is granted, the original permit
shall remain in force for the period of time specified in the extension.
Permits which terminate by reason of failure to commence work within
30 days after issuance or within any extension of time granted
hereunder may be renewed only upon the payment of an additional
permit fee as originally required. No work to commence without proof
of PA One Call notification.
D. Permits nontransferable. Permits are not transferable from one person
to another, and the work shall not be performed in any place other than
the location specifically designated in the permit.
E. Expiration of permits. Every permit shall expire at the end of the period
of time which shall be set out in the permit; if the permittee shall be
unable to complete the work within the specified time, he shall, prior to
expiration of the permit present, in writing, to the Manager a request
for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the
requested extension. If the Manager finds that the failure to complete
the work under the permit within the time specified therein was due to
circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the permittee and that
an extension of time to complete the work under the permit is necessary
and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
F. Municipal utility cuts. All street openings required by utilities owned
and/or operated by the municipality shall be made and restored under
the direction and supervision of the Manager. The permit, fee, deposit,
insurance, and bond requirements of this article shall not be applicable
to any openings made by municipally owned and/or operated utilities.
§ 356-5 AVALON CODE § 356-5
1:296
G. State and county highways. The provisions of this article shall not be
applicable in those instances where the street or highway is maintained
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the County of Allegheny;
provided, however, that any person applying for a permit to do work
within the right-of-way of a street or highway maintained by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the County of Allegheny which
otherwise require a permit under the terms of this article shall notify
the Manager at the time that said application is made and at the time
that the work under any permit issued pursuant to said application is
begun, so that proper safety precautions may be taken by the
municipality during the continuation of said work.
H. Rights of municipality. Every permit shall be granted subject to the
right of the municipality or of any other person entitled thereto to use
the street for any purpose for which such street may lawfully be used
not inconsistent with the permit.
I. Revocation of permits.
(1) A permit may be revoked by the Manager, after notice to the
permittee, for:
(a) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of
this article;
(b) Violation of any other applicable provision of the Avalon Zoning
Code, or any law relating to the work;
(c) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of
others.
(2) A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked.
(3) Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served
upon the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice
shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for revoking the
permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to
the person to be notified or by certified or registered United States
mail addressed to the person to be notified.
(4) When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Manager shall do or cause to
be done such work as may be necessary to restore the street or part
thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was made. All
expenses thereby incurred by the municipality shall be recovered
from the deposit or bond the permittee has made or filed with the
municipality.
§ 356-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-6
1:297
§ 356-6. Permit application; fees ; deposits.
A. Duties and responsibilities of applicants. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of any applicant to:
(1) Make written application for such permit with the Manager on such
form as he shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the
Manager has approved the application and plan and issued a
permit and until the permittee has paid and provided all required
fees, deposits, certificates, and bonds. Form Exhibit A.32
(2) Furnish in triplicate a plan showing the work to be performed
under said permit. Two copies of such plan shall be returned to the
applicant at the time the permit is granted.
(3) Agree to save the municipality, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed
under said permit. The acceptance of a permit shall constitute such
an agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or
not.
B. Duties and responsibilities of permittees. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
(1) Pay a minimum permit fee in an amount specified by the Manager
in accordance with a schedule of fees, charges and expenses
determined by the Commission. Said schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the Manager. The Commission may alter the
fee schedule from time to time by resolution adopted at any public
meeting of the Commission; provided, however, that public utility
companies may elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they
accrue, upon written notice to the Manager.
(2) Make a deposit to cover the cost of inspecting the work authorize
by the permit, and, unless the permittee is granted permission to
restore the street surface as provided in § 356-7B(4) of this chapter,
the cost of restoring the street surface removed or damaged by the
work done under the permit. The amount of such deposit shall be
computed by the Manager as provided in this article. In the case of
public utility companies, the municipality may waive this
requirement of a deposit if said public utility companies file with
the municipality their corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the
Solicitor, conditioned upon the payment to the municipality of all
costs which would otherwise be covered by and paid out of such a
deposit. In the event such public utility companies elect to file such
a bond, the municipality shall bill such public utility companies
monthly for such costs as they accrue.
32.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Borough office.
§ 356-6 AVALON CODE § 356-6
1:298
§ 356-7. Street opening regulations.
(3) Furnish a maintenance bond as required in this article, and, when
the permittee is granted permission to restore the street surface as
provided in § 356-7B(4) of this chapter, a performance bond as
required in this article.
(4) Furnish a certificate of insurance as required in this article unless
excepted from such requirement by the provisions of this article.
(5) Submit, when required by the Manager, a list of owners and/or
tenants and/or addresses of all properties abutting the area where
the work authorized by the permit is to be performed.
(6) Present evidence, when required, that all materials, labor and
equipment which are needed to complete such work as authorized
by the permit are available.
(7) Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the
plan [see § 356-6A(2)] at all times while such work is in progress at
the location for which such permit was granted and show such
permit and/or plan upon demand by the municipal public works or
police personnel.
(8) Provide advance notification to operators of underground facilities
about excavation, augering, blasting or other activities which may
endanger underground facilities, using a one-call system if one is in
operation.
A. Opening and excavation restrictions.
(1) No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the
center line of the street before backfilled and the surface of the
street temporarily restored unless specific prior permission is
obtained from the Manager.
(2) No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in
any street at any one time, except by special permission of the
Manager.
(3) All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently or definite location
be determined ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage to
those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary.
(4) Pipe drains, pipe culverts, or other facilities encountered shall be
protected by the permittee.
(5) Any person whose facilities are damaged or caused to be relocated
by the permittee shall notify the permittee and the municipality of
such damage and thereafter may make the necessary repairs or
relocation and file a claim against the permittee with the
municipality for the cost of such repairs or relocation. Public utility
companies concerned shall be notified by the municipality in
§ 356-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-7
1:299
sufficient time to determine the validity of the damage or relocation
claims. The cost of such repair work or relocation work may be
withheld by the Manager from the deposit pending determination
of liability for the damage.
(6) Monuments of concrete, iron, or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent
survey bench mark within the municipality shall not be removed or
disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed unless permission
to do so is first obtained, in writing, from the Manager. Permission
shall be granted only upon condition that the permittee shall pay all
expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument.
(7) When work performed by the permittee interferes with the
established drainage system of any street, provision shall be made
by the permittee to provide proper drainage.
(8) When any earth, gravel, or excavated material is caused to flow,
roll, or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause removal of
same from the street within eight hours after deposit to permit safe
flow of traffic. In the event the earth, gravel, or other excavated
material so deposited is not removed as specified, the Manager
shall cause such removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit.
(9) Required safety devices.
(a) Every permittee shall place around the project such barriers,
barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as shall be
determined by the Manager to be necessary for the protection
of the public. Additional safety requirements may be
prescribed by the Manager and, where applicable, shall be in
conformance with the requirements set forth in the United
States Department of Army Corps of Engineers publication:
Safety Requirements (1941 Edition, Revised 1951) and any
future revisions thereto. Copies of the publication shall be
made available in the office of the Manager for inspection by
the public.
(b) Barricading shall be in compliance with the regulations as set
forth in the municipality's Public Works Manual Street
Barricading and Channelization Manual for Temporary Traffic
Control, 1961 Edition and/or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Title 67, Transportation, Part I, Chapter 203,
Work Zone Control, and any revisions thereto, whichever is
applicable. Copies of the publication shall be made available in
the office of the Manager for inspection by the public.
(c) Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the required
safety devices, such devices shall be installed and maintained
§ 356-7 AVALON CODE § 356-7
1:300
by the municipality. The amount of the cost incurred shall be
paid by the permittee or deducted from his deposit.
(d) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign, or notice erected,
placed or posted in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(10) Access to private driveways shall be provided except during
working hours when construction operations prohibit provision of
such access. Free access must be provided at all times to fire
hydrants.
(11) Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed upon so as to cause as little inconvenience
as possible to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic
or to abate dirt or dust nuisance, the Manager may require the
permittee to provide toe boards or bins; and if the excavated area is
muddy and causes inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary
wooden plank walks shall be installed by the permittee as directed
by the Manager. If the street is not wide enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the
permittee shall keep a passageway at least 1/2 the sidewalk width
open along such sidewalk line.
(12)Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the
permittee obtains written consent from the Manager to do the work
at an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted only in
the case of an emergency or in the event the work authorized by
the permit is to be performed in traffic-congested areas.
(13) In granting any permit, the Manager may attach such other
conditions thereto as maybe reasonably necessary to prevent
damage to public or private property or to prevent the operation
from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or
in a manner likely to create a:
(a) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed;
(b) Restrictions as to the size, weight, and type of equipment,
subject to review with Chief of Police;
(c) Designation of routes upon which materials may be
transported, subject to review and approval of Chief of Police.
(d) Designation of the place and manner of disposal of excavated
materials;
(e) Requirements as to the laying of dust, the cleaning of streets,
the prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious
§ 356-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-7
1:301
to the neighborhood the general public, or any portion thereof;
and
(f) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
(14) Hydra-hammer, headache ball. The use of a mechanical device for
the breaking of pavement, such as a hydra-hammer, headache ball,
etc., will be permitted only under special written permission of the
Manager.
B. Backfilling and restoring opening.
(1) All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be made
properly and backfilled properly by the permittee according to
municipal specifications. Unless permittee has been granted
permission to restore the street surface as provided in Subsection
B(4), permittee also shall place a temporary surface on the
pavement cut, opening or excavation in accordance with municipal
specifications. If the permittee has been granted permission to
restore the street surface but weather conditions are such as to
prevent the completion of permanent restoration of the street
surface at the time backfilling is completed, permittee shall install
temporary surface and maintain same in accordance with
municipal specifications until such time as weather conditions will
permit restoration of the street surface.
(2) The Manager shall be notified by the permittee during the fortyeight-
hour period preceding beginning of backfilling of the date
and approximate time at which backfilling will be begun.
(3) No backfilling shall be accomplished unless or until the Manager is
present or permission has been granted for backfilling after
inspection by the Manager.
(4) The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and
paving base, shall be performed directly by the municipality under
the supervision of the Manager; provided, however, that, upon a
public utility company's application for permission to perform the
work of restoration, the municipality may grant permission to such
public utility company to perform the work of restoration, including
both paving surface and paving base, shall be performed by the
permittee according to municipal specifications and shall be
subject to inspection by the municipality.
(5) If the Manager finds that paving surfaces adjacent to the street
openings may be damaged where trenches are made parallel to the
street, or where a number of cross trenches are laid in proximity to
one another or where the equipment used by cause such damage,
he may require a negotiated contribution from the permittee for
the resurfacing in place of patching of such street if the total area
of the proposed patch or probably damaged area exceeds 25% of
the total pavement surfacing between curb faces or between
§ 356-7 AVALON CODE § 356-7
1:302
§ 356-8. Deposits.
concrete gutter edges. Such negotiations shall be carried on and
contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
(6) After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling
the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence.
(7) Inspections of all work authorized by a permit shall be made by the
Manager at such times and in such manner as required to assure
compliance with the provisions of this article. If the nature of the
work to be performed under any permit is such as to require the
services of a full-time inspector, the Manager shall provide for the
services of such an inspector.
(8) All inspection costs shall be borne by the permittee. Such costs
shall be based upon a schedule of charges on file in the office of the
Manager.
(9) Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of
a permit, the permittee shall notify the Manager in writing. A
certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the Manager to
each permittee no sooner than one year and not later than 18
months after the permanent restoration of the excavation has been
made, providing the work authorized by the permit has been
performed according to municipal specifications. Prior to the
issuance of a certification, the Manager shall make a final
inspection of the restoration to determine whether municipal
specifications have been adhered to.
(10) If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of one
year from date of completion of their permanent restoration, and
permittee fails to make such correction after notification, any
expense incurred by the municipality in correcting such settlement
shall be paid by the permittee or recovered from his bond, unless
the permittee submits proof satisfactory to the Manager that the
settlement was not due to defective backfilling.
(11) In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in
the charge or care of municipality or any of its officers or
employees, and no officer or employee of the municipality is
authorized in any way to take or assume any jurisdiction over any
such opening except in the exercise of the police power, when it is
necessary to protect life and property; provided, however that the
municipality assume charge when making final surface restoration,
unless permittee has been granted permission to perform the work
of restoration of the street surface as provided in Subsection B(4).
A. Computation of deposit. The Manager, upon receipt of a properly
completed application, shall determine the amount of the deposit to be
made by the permittee in accordance with the schedule of charges
§ 356-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-8
1:303
established pursuant to Subsection E; provided, however, that the
minimum deposit required shall not be less than $50. The deposit shall
be paid at the time the permit is issued, and the deposit shall be used
to reimburse the municipality for the cost of any work and/or material
furnished by it in connection with work authorized by the permit, to
cover the cost of all necessary inspections of said work or any other
expenses incurred by the municipality in carrying out the provisions of
this article. In the case of a public utility company, the requirement of
such deposit may be waived if such public utility company files with
the municipality its corporate bond as provided in § 356-6B(2) of this
chapter.
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a certified,
treasurer's or cashier's check or in lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs,
the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the municipality an amount
equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such
deficiency, the municipality may institute an action to recover the same
in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in
full, no additional permits shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly deposit. Whenever any public utility company shall anticipate
applying for permits for more than one street opening or excavation per
calendar year and does not elect to file a corporate bond as
hereinbefore provided, such public utility company may post one
deposit in an amount and form as hereinbefore provided for the
calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of deposits which would
otherwise be required for the anticipated permits.
E. Deposit and cost schedules. The Manager shall establish a schedule of
charges for inspection, labor, materials, and other such expenses as
may be incurred by the municipality in carrying out the provisions of
the provisions of this article. This schedule shall be established by the
Manager in accordance with the reasonably anticipated costs to be
incurred by the municipality in making such inspections, including
reasonable administrative and overhead expenses, and in accordance
with the currently prevailing costs in the area for any labor and
materials which may be provided by the municipality. The Manager
shall revise said schedule from time to time to reflect any increase or
decrease in the costs used to establish said charges. The schedule shall
be open to public inspection in the office of the Manager upon request.
F. Decision on costs. The decision of the Manager as to the cost of any
work done or repairs made by him or under his direction, pursuant to
the provisions of this article, shall be final and conclusive as to such
cost.
G. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed and after restoration of
the opening, the Manager shall refund to the permittee his deposit less
§ 356-8 AVALON CODE § 356-8
1:304
§ 356-9. Bond requirements.
all costs incurred by the municipality in connection with said permit in
no event shall the permit fee be refunded.
A. Performance bond where municipality does not restore opening. In
those instances where the applicant or permittee has received or
intends to apply for permission to perform the work of restoration of the
street surface, each such applicant or permittee, upon receipt of a
permit, shall provide the municipality with an acceptable corporate
surety bond to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized
by a permit granted pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond
shall be 100% of the estimated cost of restoring the street opening. The
term of the bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall
terminate upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Manager. If the permittee anticipates requesting
more than one permit per year as required by this article, he may
furnish one continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance in such amount as the Manager deems necessary. The
amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring
pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout the year. In the
case of a public utility company, its corporate bond in a form
satisfactory to the Solicitor may be accepted in lieu of the corporate
surety bond required by this section.
B. Maintenance bond. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall
provide the municipality with an acceptable corporate surety bond
conditioned for compliance with the street opening specifications of the
municipality and the provisions of his Part 1. The Manager shall
determine the amount of the bond, and it shall be in relation to the cost
of restoring the pavement cut to be made by the permittee; provided,
however, the minimum amount of the bond shall not be less than
$2,000. The term of each such bond shall begin from the completion
date of the permanent restoration of the permanent restoration of the
opening by the municipality and shall terminate upon the receipt by the
permittee of a certificate of final inspection from the Manager. If the
permittee anticipates requesting more than one permit a year, he may
file a continuing corporate surety bond conditioned for compliance with
the specifications of the municipality and the provision of this article in
such amount as the Manager deems necessary. The amount of such
bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring pavement cuts to be
made by the permittee throughout the year. In the case of a public
utility company, its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the Solicitor
may be accepted in lieu of the corporate surety bond required by this
section.
C. Default in performance. Whenever the Manager shall find that a default
has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit,
written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety
on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
§ 356-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-9
1:305
§ 356-10. Liability insurance.
Insurance requirements. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit,
shall provide the municipality with an acceptable certificate of insurance
indicating that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury
as well as against claims for property damage which may arise from or
out of the performance of the work, whether such performance be by
himself, his subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him.
Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and underground
work by equipment on the street, and shall include protection against
liability arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance
shall be prescribed by the Manager in accordance with the nature of the
risk involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily
injury shall be in an amount no less than $250,000 for each person and
$500,000 for each accident and for property damages an amount no less
than $100,000, with an aggregate of $300,000 for all accidents. Public
utility companies and authorities may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting such a certificate if they submit satisfactory evidence that they
are insured in accordance with the requirements of this article or have
adequate provision for self insurance. Public utility companies may file an
annual certificate of insurance in lieu of individual certificates for each
permit.
§ 356-11. Openings in new streets.
cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the Manager to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
D. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice the surety must, within
the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed, or, failing therein, indemnify the municipality for the cost of
doing the work as set forth in the notice.
A. Notice of proposed improvement. When the municipality shall improve
or pave any street, the Manager first shall give notice to all persons
owning property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved,
and to all public utility companies and authorities operating in the
municipality and all such persons, and all such persons, Public utility
companies and authorities shall make all connections as well as any
repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the street, within
30 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be extended if
permission is requested in writing and approved by the Manager after
consultation with the Municipal Engineer.
B. Restrictions upon opening newly improved street. No permit shall be
issued by the Manager which would allow an excavation or opening in a
paved and improved street surface less than five years old unless the
applicant can demonstrate clearly that public health or safety require
that the proposed work be permitted or unless an emergency condition
exists.
§ 356-9 AVALON CODE § 356-11
1:306
§ 356-12. General provisions.
C. Penalty for opening newly improved street. If, by special action of the
Manager, a permit is issued to open any paved and improved street
surface less than five years old, a penalty charge shall be made for the
opening, except that the penalty shall be waived in the event the work is
of an emergency nature. The penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale
and shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for each
unelapsed month or fraction thereof of the five-year restricted period.
Said penalty may be waived by action of the Commission.
A. Street list of underground utility installations.
(1) Every person owning, using, controlling, or having an interest in
pipes, conduits, ducts, or other structures under the surface of any
street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas,
electricity, communication impulses, water or steam to or from the
municipality or to or from premises of its inhabitants or for any
other purposes, shall file with the Manager, within 120 days after
the adoption of this article, a written statement containing the
names of the municipality's streets wherein the aforementioned
facilities owned by such person are located.
(2) Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall notify, in writing, the Manager of the changes
necessary to maintain the street list required under Subsection
A(1).
B. Abandoned facilities.
(1) Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other structure
located under the surface of any street is abandoned, or the use
thereof abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling, or
having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such
abandonment, file with the Manager a statement, in writing, giving
in detail the location of the structure so abandoned. Whenever
there are manholes or tunnels associate with any abandoned
underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in
at the time of abandonment and the Manager notified thereof in
writing.
(2) When the municipality plans to pave or improve streets in which
there are abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be
notified to remove them, if in the opinion of the Commission, their
removal is in the best interest of the municipality. If the owner shall
refuse to remove such facilities, the municipality shall remove the
abandoned facilities, and the owner shall reimburse the
municipality for such removal.
C. Notice to property owners and tenants abutting projects.
§ 356-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-12
1:307
(1) If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will
affect the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the
Manager may require the permittee to submit a list of owners and/
or tenants and/or addresses of all properties abutting the area
where the work authorized by the permit is to be performed. Upon
receipt of such a list, the Manager shall notify the affected property
owners and/or tenants of the proposed work to be done.
(2) If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other
subsurface installation(s) in the vicinity of the proposed opening,
the Manager shall notify the owner(s) of such facilities of the
proposed work.
D. Notice to police and fire authorities. The Manager shall notify, in
writing, municipal police and fire authorities of all street opening
permits he grants of a nature that would require a street being closed.
Such notification shall state the nature of the work to be done, proposed
beginning and completion dates, and the location of such project.
§ 356-12 AVALON CODE § 356-12
1:308
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction, Repair and Maintenance
§ 356-13. Notice to construct or repair.
Whenever it shall be determined proper and necessary by the Commission
that sidewalks shall be graded, constructed, paved, curbed, repaved,
recurbed or repaired in any public highway of the municipality, the
Commission shall direct the Manager, by resolution, at any meting of the
Commission, to serve written notices upon the owners of property abutting
on said public highways, requiring them to grade, construct, pave, curb,
repave, recurb or repair such sidewalks within 30 days from the date of
such notice. The notice shall specify the width of the sidewalk, the character
of the same, whether of concrete, brick or other material, and the nature of
the surfacing thereof.
§ 356-14. Municipality may do work upon default of property
owners.
Upon failure of any owner of property abutting on said streets to do and
perform any work required by the notice provided for in§ 356-13, within the
time specified in such notice, the Commission shall cause the same to be
one and collect the cost of the work and material from the abutting property
owners, plus a penalty of 10%, in the manner provided by law.
§ 356-15. Specifications.
Whenever any sidewalk is constructed in a public highway of the
municipality, either by voluntary action of an abutting property owner or
pursuant to notice under § 356-13, the said sidewalk shall be constructed
in conformity with plans and specifications approved by the Municipal
Engineer and shall be subject to his inspection. All such sidewalk pavements
shall be constructed in the location, to the width and of the material
specified in the notice received by the property owner, or, in case the said
sidewalk is constructed without notice, the same shall be constructed in the
location, to the width and of the materials in accordance with specifications
submitted by the Municipal Engineer upon application to him, and said
sidewalks shall conform to the established grade of the street on which the
same are laid, or to such grade as shall be fixed by the Municipal Engineer
and Manager.
§ 356-16. Permit required for work in sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, destroy, remove, deface or
excavate, or otherwise damage any sidewalk or curb in the public highways
of the municipality, except in accordance with permit duly issued by the
Manager upon written application to him.
§ 356-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-17
1:309
§ 356-17. Obstruction of sidewalk prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any dirt, glass, rubbish,
garbage or refuse matter, upon any of the sidewalks in the public highways
of the municipality. The sidewalks shall be kept open and unobstructed at
all times for the use of the public, and the owner of the abutting property
shall keep the sidewalk areas free from weeds, hedges and other similar
obstructions at all times; provided, however that sidewalk food service is
authorized in the LS, C and C-1 Zoning Districts with the written permission
of the Zoning Officer pursuant to standards set forth in § 701.5 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 356-18. Snow removal from sidewalk.
§ 356-19. Removal of obstruction by municipality.
In the case of vacant or unoccupied property of owners residing outside
of the municipality, the Commission may cause any dirt, glass, garbage,
snow, rubbish, weeds, hedges, or other obstructions to be removed from
said sidewalks without notice and collect the cost of the removal thereof
from such nonresident owner or owners.
A. Snow emergency defined. The term "snow emergency," when used in
this section, shall mean the period of 24 hours following the
accumulation of one inch or more of snow. If snow of one inch or more
falls again within that time period, the snow emergency shall extend
automatically for another 24 hours.
B. Vacant properties and multifamily dwellings. All owners, or agents of
owners, of vacant property, or property upon which a multifamily
dwelling stands, abutting any sidewalk or other paved public
pedestrianway are required to keep that sidewalk or other paved public
pedestrianway clear of snow and safe for pedestrian traffic during any
and all snow emergencies.
C. One- or two-family dwellings. All owners, or agents of owners, of
property upon which a one-family or two-family dwelling stands,
abutting any sidewalk or other paved public pedestrianway, and all
tenants or occupants of any such one-family or two-family dwelling, are
required to keep that sidewalk or other paved pedestrianway clear of
snow and safe for pedestrian traffic during any and all snow
emergencies.
D. Commercial or business properties. All owners, or agents of owners, of
property used for commercial or business purposes abutting any
sidewalk or other paved public pedestrianway, and all tenants or
occupants of any such property, are required to keep that sidewalk or
other paved pedestrianway clear of snow and safe for pedestrian traffic
during any and all snow emergencies.
§ 356-17 AVALON CODE § 356-20
1:310
§ 356-20. Driveway through sidewalk area.
All private driveways to be constructed or reconstructed through areas
which have existing sidewalks or areas where sidewalks may be constructed
in the future shall be constructed as follows:
A. Driveways construction materials. The driveway shall be constructed of
six-inch reinforced concrete from the back of curb to the back of the
existing sidewalk or, if no sidewalk currently exists, a minimum of eight
feet from the back of said curb.
B. Driveway grade. The grade of the driveway shall meet the grade of the
existing sidewalk on either side, or if no sidewalk currently exists, the
grade of the driveway shall fall to the back of curb at a minimum slope
of 1 1/2% to a maximum slope of 4%.
C. Driveway width. No driveway shall be less than eight feet in width or
more than 18 feet in width at a point six feet from back of curb. The
maximum width of a driveway at the back of curb shall be no wider than
24 feet, including returns.
D. Street repaving. All street repaving shall be constructed from curb to
curb of opening. The grade to meet existing street grades and to
existing curb levels. Keyways to be 10 feet from center line of opening
on either side of opening. Intersections shall be repaved in their
entirety, with the keyways on a string line from curblines on adjutant
streets. Keyways to be 15 feet from string line, cub to curb on all
existing streets.
E. Handicap ramps. All existing handicap ramps shall be replaced on any
corners in which ramps exist in accordance with ADA regulations. Any
nonexisting ramps to be replaced on corners upon agreement with
Borough office as to location and construction of ramps.
F. Catch basins. All corner catch basins are to be replaced upon inspection
and agreement with Borough Manger and agreement on work
necessary, if movement of catch basin necessary for replacement.
G. Brick streets. All brick streets are to be replaced, using existing bricks
or ones obtained from Avalon reserve, unless permission to use
concrete or asphalt is agreed upon by Avalon Manager. Grading to meet
existing roadway and existing conditions to be reviewed by Borough
Engineer or Manager.
§ 356-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 356-20
1:311
Chapter 362
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 155. Storm sewers — See Ch. 350.
§ 362-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Avalon Swimming Pool
Ordinance."
§ 362-2. Purpose and intention of ordinance.
This chapter is adopted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Avalon.
§ 362-3. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
§ 362-4. Compliance required.
Every swimming pool, wading pool or family pool (as hereinafter defined)
constructed, installed, maintained or operated from and after the date of
this chapter shall comply with the applicable provisions set out herein.
§ 362-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Borough of Avalon.
FAMILY POOL — A swimming pool with a depth at any point in excess of
18 inches, used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or
lessee thereof and his family and by friends or other persons or individuals
invited to use it without the payment of any fee, located on a lot as an
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
C. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 356-20 AVALON CODE § 362-5
1:312
accessory use to a residence. Unless otherwise qualified, the term "family
pool" shall be construed as including both artificial or partly artificial pools.
The term "partly artificial pool," as used in this chapter, shall mean a pool
formed from a natural body of water which has either so limited a flow or
such an inadequate natural circulation that the quantify of water must be
maintained by artificial means. The term "artificial pool," as used in this
chapter, shall mean a pool composed entirely of artificial construction.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a swimming pool, includes
every person having a right of property in such swimming pool, and every
person who has, keeps or maintains a swimming pool on or about any
premises occupied by him.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity. Masculine words shall include the
feminine and neuter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Tri-Borough Planning
Commission.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
POOL — As used herein and not modified by the words "family" or "wading"
includes "family pool," "wading pool" and all other "swimming pools" at
which a charge is made for its use.
WADING POOL — Any artificially constructed pool not designed, intended
or used for swimming and having a maximum depth of 18 inches or less at
any given point.
§ 362-6. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct a pool, except a wading pool, without
having first obtained a permit as provided herein, or, to maintain any pool,
including a wading pool, except in conformity with this chapter.
§ 362-7. Application procedure.
Application for the construction and maintenance of a pool, except a wading
pool, shall be made to the Building Inspector by the owner of the property.
The application shall be accompanied by a duplicate set of plans,
specifications and plot plan of the property. The plot plan shall show the
accurate location of the proposed pool on the property, together with any
other auxiliary facilities and structures, including, but not limited to, source
of water supply, plumbing facilities, discharge facilities, electrical wiring
and fixtures. The plant plan shall also show the location, height and type
of all fencing or enclosures as may be required by this chapter. Each such
application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Borough Permit
Fee Schedule then in effect.
§ 362-8. Construction, maintenance and operation.
A. Materials used in the construction of all pools shall be waterproofed,
and the owner of any pool shall maintain said pool in such condition as
§ 362-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-8
1:313
§ 362-9. Water supply.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable private or public
water system and any pool at a point below the maximum waterline of the
pool or to a recirculatory or heating system of said pool.
§ 362-10. Drainage system. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Reference Chapter 350, Storm Sewers, for proper discharge of chlorinated
and dechlorinated pool water. Reference § 350-19, References, for the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Storm Water Best
Management Practices Manual, Harrisburg, PA.
§ 362-11. Location.
No pool shall be erected nearer to a street property line, back property
line or side property line than a building could be erected in the same use
district as set forth in the Borough's Zoning Ordinance.
§ 362-12. Fencing and locks.
to prevent breaks in the pool and to prevent water from overflowing
into adjacent public or private property.
B. The owner of every pool, except a wading pool, shall maintain excess
residual chlorine in all portions of the water of his pool, when such pool
is in use, of not less than 3/10 parts per million nor more than 6/10 parts
per million. The owner of any pool may adopt such means of
chlorination as will guarantee adherence to the provisions of this
chapter, and upon failure to install and maintain such means or to use
them in an effective manner, the Building Inspector shall direct the
owner of such pool to discontinue the use thereof.
A. Every pool now existing or hereafter constructed or installed within the
Borough shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than
four feet in height; provided, however, that, in the case of a wading
pool, the requirements of this section shall not apply, if but only if, the
wading pool is drained or covered when not in use.
(1) The fence shall be so constructed for any pool as not to have
openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension,
except for doors and gates, and if a picket fence is erected or
maintained, the horizontal spaces shall not exceed four inches.
(2) A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as a part of
such enclosure.
(3) The side of an aboveground pool may be used as a fence or part of a
fence, provided that it is at least four feet in height and the ladder
or stairs to said pool is removed when such pool is not in use.
§ 362-8 AVALON CODE § 362-12
1:314
§ 362-13. Lighting.
All lighting used to illuminate any pool shall be so arranged and shaded
as to reflect light away from adjoining premises. All underwater lighting
shall, at the time of installation, comply with the equipment, installation
and maintenance standards of the Electrical Inspection Bureau of the Fire
Underwriters, and a duplicate copy of any inspection reports made by such
an agency or its successor shall be filed by the owner of the pool within 30
days of its receipt with the Building Inspector.
§ 362-14. Noise.
Any machine or device for the reproducing, producing or amplifying of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace and quiet and comfort of any
neighboring activity or residents is unlawful and prohibited.
§ 362-15. Inspections.
The Building Inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected all pools at
such times as he deems necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises
to take such samples of water from such pools at such times as it may
deem necessary and to require the owner to comply with the provisions of
this chapter. The Building Inspector shall have the power to suspend the
construction or use of said pool until such time as the provisions of this
chapter are fully complied with.
§ 362-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this chapter in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
(4) All gate or door openings through a fence or wall shall be equipped
with a lock operated by a key, keeping the gate closed and locked at
all times when the pool is not in use, except that the door of any
dwelling house which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so
equipped.
B. Owners of any pool in existence of in the process of construction as of
the effective date of this chapter shall within 90 days after the effective
date of this chapter comply with the fencing requirements contained
herein.
§ 362-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-17
1:315
§ 362-17. Additional relief; nuisances.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent the Borough from instituting
proceedings and seeking relief in the courts of equity of the commonwealth
if the Borough shall deem such action necessary to abate any violation of
this chapter which constitutes a public nuisance.
Chapter 367
TAXATION
§ 362-17 AVALON CODE § 362-17
1:316
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 10-14-1966 by Ord. No. 1019]
§ 367-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by
CORPORATION — A corporation of joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.[Added 3-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 1280]
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.[Amended 3-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 1280]
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of
1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code, Part. 1, Subpart B, Art. V (relating
to personal income tax). Employee business expenses are allowable
deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971.
The amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.[Amended 3-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1280]
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by the Borough of Avalon to collect and administer the
tax on earned income and net profits.
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-1
1:317
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform
Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part 1, Subpart B, Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:[Amended 3-18-2003 by Ord. No.
1280]
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Borough of Avalon.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Borough of Avalon.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 367-2. Imposition of tax.
A tax of 1% is hereby imposed on:
§ 367-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the family business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or diary purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
A. Earned income received and on net profits earned by residents of the
Borough of Avalon; and
B. Earned income received and net profits earned by nonresidents for
work done or service performed or rendered in the Borough of Avalon in
the period beginning January 1, 1967, and ending December 31, 1967,
which tax thereafter shall continue in force on a calendar-year basis
without annual re-enactment until such time as the Borough Council of
the Borough of Avalon shall change the rate of tax or by appropriate
ordinance repeal such tax.
A. Net profits.
§ 367-1 AVALON CODE § 367-3
1:318
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall on or before April 15, 1967,
file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the
Officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits during the period
beginning January 1, 1967, and ending December 31, 1967, and
pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax due
thereon as follows: the first installment at the time of filing the
declaration and the other installments on or before June 15, 1967,
September 15, 1967, and January 15, 1965, and on the same dates
of the succeeding years, respectively.
(2) Every taxpayer shall on or before April 15, 1968, and on the same
date of each succeeding year, make and file with the Officer on a
form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing
the amount of net profits earned during the period beginning
January 1, 1967 and ending December 31, 1967, and for each
succeeding year thereafter, the total amount of tax due thereon and
the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final
returns, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the balance of tax due
or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
(a) Any taxpayer may in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly
installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the
Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year the final
return as hereinabove required.
(3) The Officer any be authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(4) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31,
1967, and prior to December 31 of each succeeding year, shall
within 30 days after the discontinuance of business file his final
return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual based income tax return. Every taxpayer shall on or before
April 15, 1967, and on or before April 15 of each succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer a final return showing the amount of earned income
received during the period beginning January 1, 1967, and ending
December 31, 1967, and for succeeding years showing the amount
of earned income received during the period beginning January 1
and ending December 31 of each succeeding year, the total amount
of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of
tax thereon that has been withhold pursuant to the provisions
relating to the collection at course and the balance of tax due. At
§ 367-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-3
1:319
§ 367-4. Collection at source.
the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance
of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case
of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to the collection at source shall make and file with the
Officer on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer a quarterly
return on or before April 30, 1967, July 31, 1967, October 31, 1967
and January 31, 1968 and on the same dates of each succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by his during the three-month periods
ending March 31, 1967, June 30, 1967, and September 30, 1967,
and December 31, 1967, respectively, and on the same dates of
each succeeding year and subject to the tax, together with such
other information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer
asking such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the
Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Avalon, who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
Officer his name and address and each other information as the Officer
may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Avalon who employs
one or more persons other than domestic servants for salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall deduct at the time of payment
thereof the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees, and shall, on or before April 30, 1967, July 31,
1967, October 31, 1967, and January 31, 1968, and on or before the
same dates of each succeeding year thereafter file a return and pay to
the Officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding threemonth
period ending March 31, 1967, June 30, 1967, September 30,
1967, and December 31, 1967, respectively, and for the corresponding
three-month periods of each succeeding year thereafter. Such return
unless otherwise agreed upon between the Officer and employer shall
show the name and social security number of each such employee, the
earned income of such employee during such proceeding three-month
period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political subdivision imposing
the tax upon the employee, the total earned income of all such
employee during such proceeding three-month period and the total tax
deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
§ 367-3 AVALON CODE § 367-4
1:320
§ 367-5. Powers and duties of Officer.
(1) Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods
has failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed
to pay over the proper amount of tax to the Borough of Avalon shall
be required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly.
In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or
before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which
the tax was withheld.
C. On or before February 28, 1967, and on or before February 28 of each
succeeding year thereafter, every employer shall file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of tax paid
to the Officer for the period beginning January 1, 1967, and ending
December 31, 1967, and for each succeeding year thereafter.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1, 1967, and
ending December 31, 1967, and for each succeeding year
thereafter setting forth the employee's name, address and social
security number, the amount of earned income paid to the
employee during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the
political subdivision imposing the tax upon such employee, the
amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish two
copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31, 1967,
and prior to December 31 of each succeeding year shall, within 30 days
after the discontinuance of business, file the returns and withholding
statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided in § 367-9 hereof, every employer who
willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by
this section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was
required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been
recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from employing with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. Each Officer, before entering upon his official duties shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Borough of Avalon. If the Council of the
Borough of Avalon shall, by ordinance or resolution, designate any bond
§ 367-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-5
1:321
previously given by the Officer as adequate, such bond shall be
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
(1) Such bond shall be joint and several with one or more corporate
sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all
duties required of him by virtue of his office, upon the just and
faithful accounting or payment of, according to law, of all monies
and all balances thereof paid to, received by him by virtue of his
office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in office
of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in right
of his office.
(3) Such bond shall be taken in the name of the Borough of Avalon or in
the name of the School District of the Borough of Avalon and the
Borough of Avalon and shall be for the use of such political
subdivision or subdivisions appointing the Officer, where the same
Officer is appointed by the Borough of Avalon, and for the use of
such other person or persons for whom money shall be collected or
received, or as his or her interest shall otherwise appear, in case of
a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of
the principal on the bond.
(4) The Borough of Avalon or, if a joint bond is provided to the School
District and the Borough of Avalon, either political subdivision or
any person may sue upon the said bond in its or his own name for
its or his own use.
(5) Each bond shall contain the name or names of the surety company
or companies bound thereon. The Borough of Avalon or the School
District of the Borough of Avalon and the Borough of Avalon, if a
combined bond is provided, shall fix the amount of the bond at an
amount equal to the maximum amount of taxes which may be in the
possession of the Officer at any gives time.
(6) The Borough of Avalon or the School District of the Borough of
Avalon and the Borough of Avalon, if a combined bond is provided,
may, at any time, upon cause shown and due notice to the Officer,
and his surety or sureties, require or allow the substitution or the
addition of a surety company acceptable to the Borough of Avalon
or to the School District of the Borough of Avalon and the Borough
of Avalon, as the case may be, for the purpose of making the bond
sufficient in amount, without releasing the surety or sureties first
approved from any accrued liability or previous action on such
bond.
§ 367-5 AVALON CODE § 367-5
1:322
(7) The Borough of Avalon or the School District of the Borough of
Avalon and the Borough of Avalon, as the case may be, shall
designate the custodian of the bond required to be given by the
Officer.
C. The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
own involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
until it has been approved by ordinance or resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Avalon. A copy of such rules and regulations
currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
D. With the prior approval of the Town Council of the Borough of Avalon,
the Officer shall refund, on petition of, and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person who the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents, or by any other
official or agent of the Borough of Avalon, as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article shall be confidential except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as
otherwise provided by law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
§ 367-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-6
1:323
§ 367-6. Compensation of Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as determined by the Town Council of the Borough of Avalon from
time to time.
§ 367-7. Suit for collection of tax.
§ 367-8. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which
the tax remains repaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought
for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition,
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the Borough of Avalon for the
recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the
Officer, or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this
Act.
(6) The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided
such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that
the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part
of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact.
§ 367-6 AVALON CODE § 367-8
1:324
be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
§ 367-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 367-10. Authority.
This article and the tax imposed hereunder is adopted under and by virtue
of the authority contained in the Act of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, No. 511, approved the 31st day of
December, 1965, entitled the "Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965," its
supplements and amendments,33 the provisions of which are hereby
accepted and adopted by the Town Council of the Borough of Avalon, and
where the interpretation or terms or provisions of this article are not in
accord with or in compliance with the provisions of said Act, the provisions
of said Act are intended to be adopted and resolved by this article as fully
as though incorporated, set forth and made part of this article.
§ 367-11. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective January 1, 1967.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or
who fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records, and papers, and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or who attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District
Judge, or court of competent jurisdiction in Allegheny County, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days in the Allegheny County Jail.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge or court of competent jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days in the Allegheny County
Jail.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalties imposed by any other section of this article.
33.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 367-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-11
1:325

ARTICLE II
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 4-15-1986 by Ord. No. 1169]
§ 367-12. Title. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007
by Ord. No. 1317]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 367-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in Section 501
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.501, as amended.[Added
12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317; amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency, or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Borough of
Avalon, employing one or more employees in any occupation.
INCOME FROM ALL SOURCES OR COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages,
commissions, tips, bonuses, fees, gross receipts, or any other earned
income.
LOCAL SERVICES TAX COLLECTOR — The person or persons or public
employee, or firm or agency appointed by the Council of the Borough
of Avalon to collect and administer the Local Services Tax levied by this
article.[Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 1317]
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 501 of the
Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.501, as amended.[Added at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
OCCUPATION — Includes any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which any
compensation or income is received.
TAX — The tax levied by this article.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this article.
§ 367-14. Tax rate; purpose; exemptions. [Amended 12-20-2005 by
Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
A. A tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of $52 is hereby
levied upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the
Borough of Avalon.
§ 367-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-14
1:327
§ 367-15. Employer registration; deductions.
B. At least 25% of all funds derived by the Borough of Avalon from the
local services tax may only be used by the Borough for police, fire, and
emergency medical services. The remaining revenue may be used by
the Borough in the following manner:
(1) Road construction and maintenance;
(2) Property tax reductions; and
(3) Property tax relief through a homestead/farmstead exclusion,
where the implementation date for property tax reduction is as of
January 1, 2009.
C. Exemptions from local services tax. Any person whose total earned
income from all sources is less than $12,000 per annum is exempt from
paying the local services tax in the Borough of Avalon. In addition to
this exemption, disabled veterans and members of the armed forces
reserves on active duty are hereby exempt from paying the tax during
the tax year they serve on active duty. However, this tax shall be
prorated for those persons serving in the armed forces on active duty,
where the tax years overlap. The Borough will provide uniform
exemption forms, as prepared by the Department of Community and
Economic Development (hereinafter, the "DCED"), that will be available
for filing with the Borough.
A. Every employer not registered under the provisions of Chapter 367,
Article I, Earned Income and Net Profits Tax, of the Code of the
Borough of Avalon shall, within 15 days after the effective date of this
article, or within 15 days after first becoming an employer, register with
the Local Services Tax Collector, the employer's name, address and
such other information as the Local Services Tax Collector shall
require. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 1317]
B. Deduction of local services tax. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No.
1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
(1) Each employer within the Borough of Avalon is hereby prohibited
from withholding a lump sum of the total, annual local services tax
due from an employee's paycheck. From herein, beginning on
January 1, 2008, each employer within the Borough is hereby
directed to withhold a prorated amount of the total tax divided by
the number of payroll periods. For example, $2 is to be withheld
from each paycheck for bimonthly pay periods, whereas $1 is to be
withheld from each paycheck for weekly pay periods.
(2) Employers shall not be required to deduct the local services tax
from any employees if the employee's earnings do not exceed
$12,000 per annum. Those persons anticipating an annual income
of less than $12,000 may file a certificate, as prepared by the
§ 367-14 AVALON CODE § 367-15
1:328
§ 367-16. Direct payment by taxpayers.
DCED, with the Borough and the employer, along with supporting
documentation such as a W-2 Form from the previous year. Once
a certificate is filed, the employer shall not withhold the local
services tax.
(3) If an employee ultimately earns more than $12,000 during the tax
year, the employer shall withhold the balance due in one lump sum.
(4) After withholding, the employer is to remit to the Borough of
Avalon the amount of local services tax withheld within 30 days
after the end of each quarter (i.e., within 30 days after April 30,
June 30, September 30, and December 31).
(5) The Borough of Avalon shall adopt regulations for backend refunds.
Those who do not apply for a certificate may still apply for a refund
at year's end.
(6) The Borough of Avalon will provide a receipt to any tax payer upon
request.
C. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year during which the tax is in effect shall, within
15 days of discontinuing business or ceasing operation, file a return
hereinabove required and pay the tax to the Local Services Tax
Collector. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 1317]
D. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
pay such tax to the Local Services Tax Collector, shall be liable for such
tax in full, without deduction of the fee hereinafter provided, as though
the tax had originally been levied against such employer. [Amended
12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
E. Each employer may deduct and retain a fee equal to 2% of the total
amount of tax collected through the employer pursuant to this section.
A. Every taxpayer who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason
is not collected under § 367-15 of this article, shall file a return on a
form prescribed by the Local Services Tax Collector and shall pay the
tax directly to the Local Services Tax Collector. Each such taxpayer who
first becomes subject to the tax during the period from the effective
date of this article, to and including September 30, 1986, shall file the
return and pay the tax on or before October 31, 1986, and each such
taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax during the period
beginning October 1, 1986, and ending December 31, 1986, shall file
the return and pay the tax on or before January 31, 1987. [Amended
12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
§ 367-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-16
1:329
§ 367-17. Tax on principal occupation. [Amended 12-20-2005 by
Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
Every individual shall be subject to the payment of the tax on his principal
occupation and his principal employer shall deduct the tax. Evidence of the
deduction must be furnished to the secondary employer who shall not make
any additional deduction, but must notify the Local Services Tax Collector
of the employee's name, address, account number and original deduction.
§ 367-18. Nonresident taxpayers.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Borough of Avalon, be subject to the tax of this article.
§ 367-19. Duties of Local Service Tax Collector.
B. For the calendar year 1987 and for succeeding years as long as this tax
is in existence, each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax
on or before March 31, shall file the return and pay the tax on or before
April 30, and each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax
on or before June 30, shall file the return and pay the tax on or before
July 31, and each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax on
or before September 30, shall file the return and pay the tax on or
before October 31, and each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to
the tax on or before December 31, shall file the return and pay the tax
on or before January 31, of the ensuing year.
A. It shall be the duty of the Local Services Tax Collector to accept and
receive payment of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received from each employer and self-employed individual,
together with the date received. The Local Services Tax Collector shall
make reports and accountings to the Borough of Avalon monthly;
[Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No.
1317]
B. The Local Services Tax Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms
necessary for the administration of the tax; [Amended 12-20-2005 by
Ord. No. 1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
C. The Council of the Borough of Avalon may adopt, promulgate and
enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration of this article, including, but not limited to, refunds,
examinations, corrections and investigations of returns, production of
evidence and records;
D. The Local Services Tax Collector and agents designated by him are
hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any
employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return or to ascertain
the tax due if no return is made. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No.
1290; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
§ 367-16 AVALON CODE § 367-20
1:330
§ 367-20. Collection. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290;
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
The Local Services Tax Collector shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes,
interest, costs, fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If, for
any reason, any tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per
year on the amount of unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of unpaid tax for each month or fraction of month during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Whenever suit
is brought for the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be
liable for the costs of collection as well as for interest and penalties. The
Local Services Tax Collector may accept payment under protest of the tax
claimed by the Borough of Avalon in any case where any person disputes
the Borough of Avalon's claim for tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction
thereafter decides that there has been overpayment to the Local Services
Tax Collector, the Local Services Tax Collector shall refund the amount of
the overpayment to the person who paid under protest.
§ 367-21. Bond required. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290;
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
The Local Services Tax Collector before entering upon his official duties
shall give and acknowledge a bond to the Borough of Avalon in such an
amount which the Council of the Borough of Avalon may deem sufficient.
§ 367-22. Compensation. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290;
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
The Local Services Tax Collector shall receive such compensation for his
services and expenses as shall be determined by the Council of the Borough
of Avalon from time to time.
§ 367-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any regulation
adopted pursuant to it shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial
District Judge, be subject to a fine of not more than $300, or in default
of payment of such fine, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny
County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 367-24. Severability
This tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the taxing
power of the Borough of Avalon, under the Constitution of the United States
and the laws and Constitution of Pennsylvania. If a final decision of a court
of competent jurisdiction holds any provision of this article to be illegal or
unconstitutional, the other provisions of this article shall remain in full force
and effect. The intention of the Council of the Borough of Avalon is that the
provisions of this article shall be severable and that this article would have
been adopted if any such illegal or unconstitutional provisions had not been
included.
§ 367-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-25
1:331
§ 367-25. When effective.
This article shall become effective as per provisions of the Local Tax
Enabling Act of 1965, Dec. 31, P.L. 1257, as amended, July 1, 1986, and
continue until December 31, 1986, and thence continuing on a calendar
year basis beginning January 1, 1987, and ending December 31, 1987,
which tax shall continue in force on a calendar year basis without
reenactment until such time as the Council of the Borough of Avalon shall
change the rate of the tax or by appropriate ordinance repeal said tax.
§ 367-26. Duty to file. [Added 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 1290;
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 1317]
The Borough Manager shall file an exact copy of this article with the
Department of Community and Economic Development, together with the
name, position, and phone number of the Local Services Tax Collector or
officer responsible for compliance with this article.
§ 367-25 AVALON CODE § 367-26
1:332
ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 8-15-1989 by Ord. No. 1184; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 367-27. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Avalon adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under
that article subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under
this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 367-28. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 367-27 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as "The Local Tax
Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid
by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of Avalon,
pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S.
§ 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
§ 367-29. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 367-27 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 367-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-29
1:333

ARTICLE IV
Senior Citizens and Disabled Persons Tax Rebate Program
[Adopted 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 1292]
§ 367-30. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Avalon Borough Senior Citizen Tax
Rebate Ordinance."
§ 367-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Avalon.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A long-time owner/occupant of a principal
residence in Avalon Borough who is:
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during the preceding calendar
year for which a rebate is claimed as shown on the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Property Tax or Rent Rebate Program Form.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except
Medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veterans' disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision thereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workmen's
A single person aged 65 or older during a calendar year in which Avalon
Borough real property taxes are assessed and paid; or
A.
Married persons if either spouse is age 65 or older during a calendar
year in which Avalon Borough real property taxes are assessed and
paid; or
B.
A widow or widower who is 50 years of age or older during a calendar
year in which Avalon Borough real property taxes are assessed and
paid; or
C.
A permanently disabled person 18 years of age or older during a
calendar year in which Avalon Borough real property taxes are assessed
and paid.
D.
§ 367-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-31
1:335
compensation and the gross amount of loss of time insurance benefits, life
insurance benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death
benefit payments), and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by
gift between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend.
LONG-TIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned and occupied the same dwelling place as a
principal residence and domicile in Avalon Borough.
MUNICIPALITY — Avalon Borough.
PERMANENTLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is unable to engage
in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment which can be expected to continue
indefinitely as verified by a sworn declaration of such status.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience.
REAL ESTATE PROPERTY TAXES — Borough of Avalon real estate property
taxes paid to the Tax Collector of Avalon Borough.
SENIOR CITIZENS PROPERTY TAX AND RENT REBATE ASSISTANCE ACT
— The Act of June 27, 2006, P.L. 1873, No. 1, as amended, codified at 53 P.S.
§ 6926.1301.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
TREASURER — The elected Treasurer for Avalon Borough.
WIDOW or WIDOWER — The surviving wife or the surviving husband, as the
case may be, of a deceased individual and who has not remarried as verified
by a sworn declaration of such status.
§ 367-32. Eligible taxpayer rebate. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
All eligible taxpayers in the Borough of Avalon who are long-time owner/
occupants shall be entitled to have a portion of their Borough of Avalon real
estate property taxes rebated if the eligible taxpayer meets the household
income limits and qualifies for a property tax rebate under the Senior
Citizens Property Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance Act.
§ 367-33. Participation rebate program.
Any eligible taxpayer paying property taxes to the Borough of Avalon may
apply to the Township Treasurer and participate in the tax rebate program
authorized under this article. In order to be eligible to participate in the
program, the person must meet the following conditions:
§ 367-31 AVALON CODE § 367-33
1:336
§ 367-34. Rules and regulations. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Borough's Manager/Secretary shall have the authority to issue rules
and regulations with respect to the administration of the tax rebate
program established under this article. Such rules and regulations shall
include, but not be limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof
of residence, proof of qualification for and receipt of a property tax rebate
under the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance Act,
receipt showing payment of Avalon Borough real estate property taxes for
the current year, verification of status as widow, widower or permanently
disabled person, and any other reasonable requirements, conditions and
forms as may be necessary to operate the tax rebate program.
§ 367-35. Amount of property tax rebate. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Eligible taxpayers are entitled to claim a rebate of Avalon Borough property
taxes beginning in 2006 in an amount determined by the percentage factor
set forth in the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent Rebate Assistance
Act, the maximum rebate of which shall not exceed the amount set forth
annually by resolution of the Avalon Borough Council.
A. The person must be a single person aged 65 or older; or be married
persons with either spouse being 65 years of age or older; and
B. The person must be a long-time owner/occupant; and
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident; and
D. If the person or his spouse is not 65 years of age or older, the person
must be an eligible widow, widower or permanently disabled person as
defined herein; and
E. The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive a
property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and Assistance
Act and the annual income cannot exceed the income guidelines of said
Act; and
F. The taxpayer must have paid his Avalon Borough real estate property
taxes in full during the calendar year in which a tax rebate is claimed;
and
G. Income eligibility under the Senior Citizens Property Tax and Rent
Rebate Assistance Act must exist in the preceding calendar year for
which a real estate property tax rebate is claimed; and [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
H. An eligible taxpayer must request the real estate property tax rebate in
the same calendar year in which the real estate property tax is paid.
§ 367-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-36
1:337
§ 367-36. Effective date.
This article is effective January 1, 2006, and shall include Avalon Borough
real estate property taxes paid to Avalon Borough in calendar year 2006.
§ 367-36 AVALON CODE § 367-36
1:338
ARTICLE V
Payment of Real Estate Taxes in Installments; Discounts and
Penalties
[Adopted 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 1348]
§ 367-37. Discount and penalty periods established.
§ 367-38. Installment schedule established.
A. Each year notice of real estate taxes shall be provided to all taxpayers
in the Borough by March 31. Real estate taxes due and owing to the
Borough and paid on or before May 31 of each specific tax year shall be
entitled to a two-percent discount.
B. There shall be no discount or penalty applied to any payments made
between June 1 and July 31 of each specific tax year.
C. Real estate taxes due and owing to the Borough and paid after July 31 of
each specific tax year shall be charged a penalty of 10%.
D. If in any specific tax year tax notices are provided to the taxpayers by
the Borough after March 31, the discount period shall be extended to all
payments made within two months of the notice date, and the penalty
period shall extend to all payments made more than four months past
the notice date.
A. Four equal payments.
(1) The taxpayers of the Borough of Avalon owing taxes on real estate
for any tax year, may pay said taxes on real estate in four equal
installments pursuant to the following schedule:
(a) Twenty-five percent of the tax shall be due and payable on or
before May 31 of each specific tax year;
(b) Twenty-five percent of the tax shall be due and payable on or
before July 31 of each specific tax year;
(c) Twenty-five percent of the tax shall be due and payable on or
before September 30 of each specific tax year;
(d) Twenty-five percent of the tax shall be due and payable on or
before November 30 of each specific tax year;
(2) If any installment is not paid on the dates aforesaid, such
installment shall be deemed delinquent.
B. No abatement or discount shall be allowed on any taxes paid under the
installment schedule.
C. A penalty of 10% shall be applied to each installment payment which
becomes delinquent.
§ 367-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-39
1:339
§ 367-39. Effective date.
This article shall be effective January 1, 2014.
§ 367-39 AVALON CODE § 367-39
1:340
Chapter 385
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 367-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-39
1:341

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 385-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 385-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Avalon.
§ 385-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 385-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor/Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Chief of Police and the police in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Chief of Police may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the streets in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90
§ 385-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:343
§ 385-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 385-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Borough, at intersections in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Chief of Police shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Chief of Police shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under
way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device,
not to proceed.
§ 385-4 AVALON CODE § 385-6
1:344
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 385-7. Speed limits.
Unless otherwise posted, the speed limit for all street within the Borough
is 25 mph. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or
parts thereof described in this section is hereby established at the rate of
speed indicated in said schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or
part of a street.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
(Reserved)
§ 385-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
the following streets:
Intersection
California Avenue at North Home Avenue and South Home Avenue (Home
Avenue crosses over California Avenue and becomes North and South
Home Avenue)
Elizabeth Avenue at Ohio River Boulevard
Fisk Avenue at Ohio River Boulevard
North Home Avenue, New Brighton Road, North Starr Avenue, Union
Avenue (one intersection where all four streets have different names)
§ 385-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) when facing a steady red signal at any of the
following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
California Avenue East South Home Avenue
California Avenue West North Home Avenue
Fisk Avenue South Ohio River Boulevard
New Brighton
Avenue East North Home Avenue
North Home
Avenue North North Starr Avenue
§ 385-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-9
1:345
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
North Starr
Avenue West Union Avenue
Union Avenue South New Brighton Road
§ 385-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the following intersections:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Shade Avenue West Left All Union Avenue
§ 385-11. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 385-12. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than
in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
500 and 600 block of Center
Avenue
East Entire length
600 block of Girard Avenue West Entire length
North School Street North Entire length
Semple Avenue at North
Birmingham Avenue
East Entire length
§ 385-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in this section, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of
the roadway in any no-passing zone described in said schedule:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 385-9 AVALON CODE § 385-14
1:346
§ 385-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
established as through streets; and the driver of any vehicle, upon
approaching any such street at any intersection thereof (except for such
intersections where there are now or shall hereafter be located official
traffic signals), shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case
may be, before entering any such through street:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 385-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established as
stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign On
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of
Belva Street East Florence Avenue
Belva Street West West Division Street
California Avenue North Josephine Street
California Avenue/
Birmingham Avenue
4-way California Avenue/
Birmingham Avenue
California Avenue/Chestnut
Street
4-way California Avenue/
Chestnut Street
California Avenue/North
Chestnut Street
4-way California Avenue/North
Chestnut Street
Center Avenue 4-way North Chestnut Street
Center Avenue South New Brighton Road
Center Avenue South School Street
Center Avenue (one way) South Josephine Street
Center Avenue/North
Chestnut Street
4-Way Center Avenue (one
way)/North Chestnut
Street
Chatsworth Avenue North Sedalia Avenue
Chatsworth Avenue South Erdner Avenue
Cherry Alley South North Home Avenue
Chester Avenue East Union Avenue
§ 385-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-15
1:347
Stop Sign On
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of
Chester Avenue West Sedalia Avenue
City View Avenue North Norwood Avenue
Cleveland Avenue East Florence Avenue
Cleveland Avenue East Orchard Avenue
Cleveland Avenue West California Avenue
Cleveland Avenue West Florence Avenue
Cleveland Avenue West Ohio River Boulevard
Cleveland Avenue West Orchard Avenue
Delp Street East Marie Avenue
Delp Street West California Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue East California Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue/Jackman
Avenue
3-way Elizabeth Avenue/
Jackman Avenue
Erdner Avenue East Sylvan Avenue
Erdner Avenue East Union Avenue
Erdner Avenue West Sylvan Avenue
Eugene Street North South Ohio Street
Eugene Street South South Birmingham
Avenue
First Avenue North Josephine Street
Fisk Avenue East Florence Avenue
Fisk Avenue West California Avenue
Fisk Avenue West Florence Avenue
Florence Avenue North Belva Street
Florence Avenue North Chestnut Street
Florence Avenue North South Birmingham
Avenue
Florence Avenue South Chestnut Street
Florence Avenue South Elizabeth Avenue
Florence Avenue South Locust Street
Florence Avenue South South Birmingham
Avenue
Gardner Avenue East New Brighton Road
Gardner Avenue East Union Avenue
Girard Avenue North North Birmingham
Avenue
§ 385-15 AVALON CODE § 385-15
1:348
Stop Sign On
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of
Girard Avenue South North Birmingham
Avenue
Grandview Avenue North Norwood Avenue
Hamilton Avenue (one way) South Starr Avenue
Harrison Avenue East Florence Avenue
Harrison Avenue East Orchard Avenue
Harrison Avenue West Florence Avenue
Harrison Avenue West Ohio River Boulevard
Harrison Avenue West Orchard Avenue
Hemlock Street North Locust Street
Hemlock Street North South Birmingham
Avenue
Hemlock Street South Chestnut Street
Jackman Avenue North McKinley Avenue
Jackman Avenue North South Chestnut Avenue
Jackman Avenue North South Home Avenue
Jackman Avenue South Prospect Street
Jackman Avenue South South Home Avenue
Locust Street East Orchard Avenue
Locust Street West Hemlock Street
Locust Street West Ohio River Boulevard
Locust Street West Orchard Avenue
Malvern Road North North Chestnut Street
Malvern Road South North Home Avenue
Marie Avenue North North Ohio Street
Marie Avenue North West Division Street
Marie Avenue South North Birmingham
Avenue
Marie Avenue South North Ohio Street
Marie Avenue South North Ohio Street
McKinley Avenue East California Avenue
New Brighton Road South Ballfield
New Brighton Road South Sedalia Avenue
North Birmingham Avenue East Frederick Avenue
North Frederick Avenue North North Birmingham
Avenue
§ 385-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-15
1:349
Stop Sign On
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of
North Ohio Street East California Avenue
North Ohio Street West California Avenue
Oak Street West Jackman Avenue
Orchard Avenue North Belva Street
Orchard Avenue North Chestnut Street
Orchard Avenue North South Chestnut Avenue
Orchard Avenue South Prospect Street
Orchard Avenue/Fisk
Avenue
4-way Orchard Avenue/Fisk
Avenue
Orchard Avenue/South Ohio
Street
4-way Orchard Avenue/South
Ohio Street
Parkview Avenue North North Birmingham
Avenue
Prospect Street West Ohio River Boulevard
School Street East Taylor Avenue
School Street North Frederick Avenue and
Ballfield
School Street West Florence Avenue
School Street West Taylor Avenue
Sedalia Avenue South New Brighton Road
Semple Avenue East New Brighton Road
Semple Avenue North North Birmingham
Avenue/Tot Park
Semple Avenue North Norwood Avenue
Semple Avenue South North Birmingham
Avenue
Semple Avenue South Norwood Avenue
South Birmingham Avenue/
Orchard Avenue
4-way South Birmingham
Avenue/Orchard Avenue
South Ohio Street East Taylor Avenue
South Ohio Street West Taylor Avenue
South Starr Avenue
Spruce Run Road North North Birmingham
Avenue
Spruce Run Road South North Birmingham
Avenue
Spruce Street North South Ohio Street
§ 385-15 AVALON CODE § 385-15
1:350
Stop Sign On
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of
Sylvan Avenue North Sedalia Avenue
Sylvan Avenue South Erdner Avenue
Sylvan Avenue South Sedalia Avenue
Taylor Avenue North Chestnut Street
Taylor Avenue North Elizabeth Avenue
Taylor Avenue North North Ohio Street
Taylor Avenue North South Birmingham
Avenue
Taylor Avenue South Chestnut Street
Taylor Avenue South Elizabeth Avenue
Taylor Avenue South South Birmingham
Avenue
§ 385-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in this section (in addition to intersections with
the through streets established by this chapter) are hereby established
as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a
position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of
a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 385-17. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger
vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or
towing any other vehicle), upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 385-18. Vehicle weight limits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to move steam or gasoline shovels,
large concrete mixers, and other such pieces of machinery on the
§ 385-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-18
1:351
streets of the Borough unless a permit is obtained for this. At the time
of application for permit, the route and time must be given.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated upon any of the
highways of the Borough, any motor vehicle having a gross weight,
including chassis, body and load, of more than 18,000 pounds. The
Chief of Police may issue permits for excessive weights upon good
cause shown and upon application as therein provided, subject to
payment of the fees for hauling permits as provided by Pennsylvania
Statute. The provisions of this section shall not exclude from such
highways the use and operation of hook and ladder trucks and other
fire-fighting apparatus.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, through truck traffic is hereby defined
as being the operation in the Borough of all trucks upon trips which do
not originate in or end in the Borough. It shall be unlawful to operate or
cause to be operated upon any of the highways of the Borough, except
Ohio River Boulevard, North Starr Avenue, South Starr Avenue,
California Avenue, New Brighton Road, and Fisk Avenue, any motor
truck engaged in through truck traffic as defined above, provided that
the provisions of this section shall not exclude from such highways the
use and operation of hook and ladder trucks and other fire-fighting
apparatus.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, without first having secured a
permit therefor, to:
(1) Operate any vehicle or equipment upon the roads and streets of the
Borough when such vehicles or equipment has attached to the
periphery of its wheels or the traction of such vehicle any metal or
metal-clad cleat, block, stud, flange or other similar protuberance,
including metal wheels or metal treads.
(2) Move any such vehicle or equipment to or from a job site or from
one job to another where such movement would require passage
over easements or rights-of-way having underground utility
installations located therein.
E. Applications for a permit to operate any vehicle or equipment, as
specified in Subsections A through D above, shall be made to the Chief
of Police and a permit shall be granted only after such application shall
have been referred to and approved by the Chief of Police.
F. The fee for a permit required by Subsections A, B and D above shall be
set by resolution of Borough Council. It shall be a condition for the
issuance of such permit that the person applying therefor shall agree in
writing to repair and restore any damage caused by the movement of
such vehicle or equipment to the surface of any road or street or any
underground utility installation.
G. The permit required by Subsections A, B and D above shall specify the
route to be followed in the movement of such vehicle or equipment, and
§ 385-18 AVALON CODE § 385-18
1:352
it shall be unlawful to deviate from the specified route. In the case of
movement of such vehicle or equipment on the streets or roads of the
Borough, the moving shall be done either by means of a conveyance
equipped with pneumatic rubber tires, or, if deemed satisfactory, wood
planks or other sufficient protection for the streets or roads shall
be provided and placed upon the street or road and the vehicle or
equipment shall be run upon such planks or other protective material
when this method of movement is approved.
H. The provisions of Subsections D and G shall not apply to vehicles
equipped with pneumatic rubber tires using tire chains when required
for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a
vehicle to slide or skid if such pneumatic rubber tires do not have
attached thereto any metal or metal-clad cleat, block, stud, flange or
other similar protuberance.
I. The streets and parts of streets designated in this section are hereby
declared to constitute through traffic streets for the purpose of
enforcing the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code:
(1) Ohio River Boulevard.
(2) North Starr Avenue.
(3) South Starr Avenue.
(4) California Avenue.
(5) New Brighton Road.
(6) Fisk Avenue.
J. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $15 nor more than $100, plus the costs of
prosecution and the cost of any damage done to the streets, roads or
underground utility installations and, upon default of payment of such
fine, costs or damages, may be committed to imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 385-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-18
1:353

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 385-19. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 385-20. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Birmingham Avenue East From Orchard Avenue to Peach Alley
Chatsworth Avenue West From Erdner Avenue to Sedalia Avenue
Chester Avenue South From Erdner Avenue to Union Avenue
Clive Street North Entire length
Elizabeth Avenue East From California Avenue south to
Jackman Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue East From Ohio River Boulevard to Jackman
Avenue
Erdner Avenue East From New Brighton Road to the first
curve on Erdner Avenue
Erdner Avenue South From the first curve of Erdner Avenue
to Union Avenue
Eugene Avenue North Entire length
Florence Avenue South From Birmingham Avenue to Elizabeth
Avenue
Frederick Street Both From Josephine Street to New Brighton
Road
Girard Avenue South From North Ohio Street to North
Birmingham Avenue
Home Avenue East From California Avenue and thence in a
southerly direction to Hamilton Avenue,
except Sundays and holidays
Jackman Avenue Both Between the easterly side of South
Chestnut Street and the westerly side
of South Home Avenue
Locust Street West From Peach Alley to the Ohio River
Boulevard
McKinley Avenue East Entire length
§ 385-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-20
1:355
Name of Street Side Location
North Birmingham
Avenue
Both From a point 100 feet west of a curve
to Parkview Avenue
North Birmingham
Avenue
East From Parkview Avenue to Semple
Avenue
North Birmingham
Avenue
West From California Avenue to Frederick
Street
North Ohio Street East From California Avenue to Marie
Avenue, except Sundays and holidays
Parkview Avenue South Entire length
Sedalia Avenue Both From Union Avenue to a point opposite
house No. 1011 Sedalia Avenue
Sedalia Avenue Both From Brick Alley to a point opposite
House No. 907 Sedalia Avenue
Sedalia Avenue South From house No. 1011 on Sedalia
Avenue in a westerly direction to Brick
Alley
Sylvan Avenue East From Chester Avenue to Erdner Avenue
Sylvan Avenue West From Erdner Avenue to Sedalia Avenue
Taylor Avenue North From Elizabeth Avenue to Chestnut
Street
Taylor Avenue South From Chestnut Street to Birmingham
Avenue
Union Avenue West Chester Avenue and New Brighton
Road
Valley View Avenue East From City View Avenue to the Avalon
Borough boundary line
§ 385-21. Regulation of off-street parking.
A. Parking on unimproved surfaces in front of buildings used as dwellings.
(1) Parking prohibited. No off-street parking spaces shall be located on
unimproved surfaces in front of the facade of a building used as a
dwelling, or on improved surfaces to either side of the facade of a
building used as a dwelling.
B. Parking in residential areas adjacent to Borough street curbs.
(1) Definitions. As used in this Subsection B, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
PERMITTED CURB CUT — Either:
A safe curb cut in good repair as of the enactment date of this
subsection; or
(a)
§ 385-20 AVALON CODE § 385-21
1:356
§ 385-22. On-street parking of vehicles.
It shall not be lawful hereafter to park any vehicle of greater width than
a passenger automobile, maximum width seven feet; nor higher than a
maximum of seven feet; nor capacity of more than one ton, any time
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any street or alley within the Borough
of Avalon.
§ 385-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs; provided,
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY — Any private parking space(s) or area
located on private residential property, where access to same is
made from a curbed public street or curbed alleyway. A private
driveway may include, but is not limited to, a parking pad, an
accessway or cart-path to a garage or carport, or other similar offstreet
parking.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, or other legal entity.
A curb cut meeting the design and safety standards contained
herein and having obtained a duly executed Borough permit for
the same.
(b)
(2) The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neutral.
(3) Illegal off-street parking.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive his motorized
vehicle onto private residential property without a permitted
curb cut.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park on private
residential property, except upon on a private driveway, in a
legal garage or in another area of the private residential
property that is does not require access over, through or
around a curb.
(c) Limited exceptions may be made by the Mayor, Chief of Police
or Borough Manager in the event of an emergency or other
short-term exigent circumstance.
(4) Private driveways. All new private driveways must be constructed
consistent with Borough rules, regulations and standards
pertaining to street, driveways and sidewalks.
(5) Curb cuts. All new or proposed rehabilitated curb cuts must be
constructed consistent with Borough rules, regulations and
standards pertaining to streets, curb cuts and sidewalks.
§ 385-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-23
1:357
however, that it shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking
enforcement personnel of the Borough to report to the Chief of Police
all violations of any provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the
section violated, the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation,
the location where the violation took place and any other facts that might
be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will pay the fine
within seven days after the time of the notice, or if he will place the fine
enclosed within the envelope provided that act will save the violator from
prosecution.
§ 385-23 AVALON CODE § 385-23
1:358
ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking
§ 385-24. Authorization for contract.
The proper officers of the Borough of Avalon are hereby authorized and
directed to enter into a contract for the leasing and installation of parking
meters, said contract to be made subject to the conditions and in the
manner provided for solely from the operation of said parking meters
without in any manner obligating the Borough of Avalon to pay for same
from any other source.
§ 385-25. Regulations.
§ 385-26. Erection of meters.
On streets so designated, the proper officers shall cause parking spaces, on
the curb or pavements, or by other appropriate means, and in each space so
marked shall erect or cause to be erected a parking meter, which upon the
deposit of a coin or combination of coins of the United States indicated in
the parking meter which will entitle the party parking his car for a limited
time as is indicated on the parking meter, and, the time when such period
has elapsed.
§ 385-27. Deposit of coins.
A. After the installation of parking meters, it shall be unlawful for the
owner or operator of any motor vehicle or any vehicle to park such
vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day upon
positions on either side of California Avenue designated as parking
meter zones, where parking meters have been installed, except
Sundays and the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
B. The parking of any motor vehicle or any vehicle in any part of California
Avenue, whether in a parking meter zone or elsewhere, shall be subject
to the provisions of Article V, Street Sweeping Parking Regulations, and
to emergencies or special events, such as parades, according to
authority of the Mayor and Chief of Police of Avalon.
C. The parking of any motor vehicle or any vehicle in any part of California
Avenue not designated as a parking meter zone, shall be limited to such
parking time as has been fixed by other ordinances of the Borough of
Avalon.
A. In order that Police Officers or persons designated by Borough Council
to patrol meters may properly compute the time during which a vehicle
is parked, the owner or operator of said vehicle shall, upon entering
such parking space, during the time of limited parking, immediately
deposit a five-cent coin, a ten-cent coin, a twenty-five-dent coin of the
United States in the parking meter situated at the side of said parking
§ 385-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-27
1:359
§ 385-28. Parking within lines.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating a parking space, or to park said vehicle in any way that the
same shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by said lines
or markings.
§ 385-29. Coin substitutes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
a slug, device, or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States.
§ 385-30. Tampering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with damage, open
or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the terms of this article.
§ 385-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this article or
aiding, abetting, or assisting in the violation of said provisions should, upon
violation of said provisions, be fined the sum of $10 if paid within seven
days of said violation; the sum of $15 if paid within eight to 15 days of said
violation; and the sum of $25 if paid within 16 to 25 days of said violation. If
not paid within 25 days of the violation and upon conviction thereof before
a Magisterial District Judge, violator shall be fined the sum of $25 and costs
of prosecution. Upon default of payment or upon failure to pay the fine and
costs, the violator shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
space, and operate the timing mechanism of the parking meter
according to instructions thereon.
B. Only one hour of time will be registered on the parking meter. Parking
meters shall include instructions as follows:
1 HOUR FOR EACH QUARTER
C. Failure to operate the meter shall constitute a violation of this article.
Upon the deposit of such coinage, and placing the meter in operation,
the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the
period of time which has been prescribed for the particular amount
deposited. The parking meters, when properly operated, shall be so
adjusted that coins may be deposited at any time throughout the
marked range of the meters and the lawful time availability restored to
the maximum period of 60 minutes. If such vehicle shall remain parked
in any such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall
indicate by a proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired,
such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime, and the parking
of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this article.
§ 385-27 AVALON CODE § 385-31
1:360
ARTICLE V
Street Sweeping Parking Regulations
§ 385-32. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLE — Includes all automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses, boats,
trailers, tractors, house trailers, or the like in which any person or thing
may be carried.
CURB LINE — The word "curb line" as hereinafter used is defined as
follows:
§ 385-33. Parking of vehicles.
On highways which have a curbstone, "curb line" shall mean the street
side of said curb stone.
A.
On highways which have no curbstone, the "curb line" shall mean the
side line of the improvement.
B.
A. On streets on which vehicles are to be parked diagonally under the
provisions of this article, such parked vehicles shall be parked within
the lines marked on such streets for such parking and no vehicle may
occupy more than one of such spaces so marked.
B. No vehicle shall park within 15 feet of the entrance to place of public
assemblage.
C. No vehicle shall park at any time within 20 feet of a regularly marked
transit stop.
D. Emergency parking regulations.
(1) The Mayor or Safety Committee is hereby authorized to prohibit
parking on highways, or parts thereof, which are being
constructed, repaired or improved, for a period not to exceed the
duration of said construction, repair or improvement. When, in the
opinion of the Mayor, the public safety does not require the
prohibition of parking at all times on such highways, or part
thereof, being constructed, repaired or improved, the Mayor or
Safety Committee is authorized to permit parking for such periods
as will not endanger the public safety. In cases where parking is so
prohibited or regulated by Mayor or Safety Committee, proper
signs shall be erected by the Mayor or Safety Committee in
accordance with the Acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in such cases made and provided, giving notice of
such prohibition or regulation.
(2) The Mayor or Safety Committee are also hereby authorized to
prohibit parking on any highway, or part thereof, entirely or for
§ 385-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-33
1:361
§ 385-34. Street sweeping parking regulations.
certain hours to be designated by the Mayor or Safety Committee
for periods not to exceed 60 days as trial periods to study the
effect of parking or the movement of traffic within the Borough of
Avalon. While such trial periods are in effect, proper signs shall be
erected by the Mayor or Safety Committee to show that parking is
prohibited or regulated thereon.
A. Parking of vehicles on the below listed streets, at the below listed time
is prohibited to permit the orderly operation of the street sweeping and
leaf pickup program, from April through November.
(1) Wednesday street sweeper schedule:
Street Side Hours
Cleveland Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Elizabeth Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Eugene Street South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Fisk Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Florence Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Hamilton Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Harrison Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Hemlock Street South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Howden Street North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Jackman Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Locust Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
McKinley Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Orchard Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Prospect Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Birmingham
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Chestnut Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Home Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Ohio Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South School Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Starr Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Taylor Avenue (800
block only)
South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
(2) Thursday street sweeper schedule:
§ 385-33 AVALON CODE § 385-34
1:362
Street Side Hours
California Avenue North 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
Center Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Cleveland Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Delp Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Elizabeth Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Eugene Street North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Fisk Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Florence Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Girard Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Hamilton Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Harrison Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Hemlock Street North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Howden Street South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Jackman Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Josephine Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Locust Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Malvern Road South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Marie Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
McKinley Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Birmingham
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Birmingham
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Chestnut Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Home Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North School Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Orchard Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Park Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Prospect Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Semple Avenue North
Birmingham to
Norwood Avenue
8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Birmingham
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Chestnut Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Home Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Ohio Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
§ 385-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-34
1:363
Street Side Hours
South School Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South School Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
South Starr Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Taylor Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
(3) Friday street sweeper schedule:
Street Side Hours
California Avenue South 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
Center Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Chatsworth Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Chester Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
City View Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Delp Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Erdner Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Girard Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Grandview Avenue North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Josephine Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Malvern Road North 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Marie Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Birmingham
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Chestnut Street East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Home Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North Ohio Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
North School Street West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Norwood Avenue East 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Park Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Parkview Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Ridge Avenue As-designated 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Sample Avenue As-designated 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Sedalia Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Sylvan Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Union Avenue West 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
Valley View Avenue South 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon
§ 385-34 AVALON CODE § 385-34
1:364
§ 385-35. Traffic signs and notices.
The Mayor or the Safety Committee of the Borough of Avalon is hereby
authorized and directed to erect, or cause to be erected, all necessary
notices, signs, warnings, and markings, necessary to give notice of, and to
carry into effect, the provisions of this article.
§ 385-36. General provisions.
§ 385-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this article or
aiding, abetting, or assisting in the violation of said provisions should, upon
violation of said provisions, be fined the sum of $10 if paid within seven
days of said violation; the sum of $15 if paid within eight to 15 days of said
violation; and the sum of $25 if paid within 16 to 25 days of said violation. If
not paid within 25 days of the violation and, upon conviction thereof before
a Magisterial District Judge, violator shall be fined the sum of $25 and costs
of prosecution. Upon default of payment or upon failure to pay the fine and
costs, the violator shall be committed to the Allegheny County Jail for a
period not exceeding 10 days.
B. Vehicles will be permitted to park on the opposite side of street during
such period of sweeping, except the 700 Block of California Avenue
during school hours.
A. The Chief of Police, the Mayor or the Safety Committee is hereby given
authority to close the whole or part of any street or public highway to
vehicular or animal traffic thereon when, in his judgment, such traffic
becomes so congested upon such street or public highway as to
interfere with, or become dangerous to, pedestrian travel thereon.
B. The Chief of Police or Mayor shall be, and he is hereby authorized and
directed to supply patrolmen with tags, which may be used for the
purpose of giving due notice to owners, operators, chauffeurs and
drivers of vehicles when there are any violations of the traffic laws and
ordinances, that they shall appear before the Magisterial District Judge,
designating the date, time and place thereof; provided, however, that
this provision shall not interfere with the right of policemen to arrest on
view of crimes, misdemeanors and the violations of the provisions of
this article.
§ 385-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-37
1:365

ARTICLE VI
Parking of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles
§ 385-38. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Avalon Borough Parking Ordinance."
§ 385-39. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the within this article:
BOAT — A vessel designed to travel on water not exceeding 20 feet in
length. Ski-doos for this purpose shall be considered a boat.
BOAT TRAILER — A trailer designed to haul a boat.
CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Vehicles, including but
not limited to travel trailers, modified vans, pickup coaches, motorized
homes, boats and boat trailers.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for the purposes of vehicular travel.
MOTORIZED HOME or MODIFIED VAN — A portable dwelling designed
and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
OTHER PROHIBITED VEHICLES — Any vehicle which is seven feet high or
seven feet wide shall be deemed an "other prohibited vehicle" for purposes
of this article. For purposes of this article, the term shall also include full
trailers, semi-trailers, house coaches, house trailers, mobile homes, motor
homes, recreational trailers, truck campers and truck tractors as same
are defined in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
OVERNIGHT — Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
PARKING — When prohibited, means the halting of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except momentarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.
PICKUP COACH — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for
use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT — The R-M, R-H and MU Zoning
Districts of the Borough of Avalon. See § 2000-401 of the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
TRAFFICWAY — The entire width between the property lines or other
boundary lines of every way or place of which any part is open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right or custom.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
TRAILER AND CAMPING RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Any licensed or
unlicensed trailer or other vehicle designed or used for living or sleeping
§ 385-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-39
1:367
purposes regardless of whether the wheels are attached or unattached, or a
permanent or semipermanent foundation is constructed underneath or any
structure of a permanent or semipermanent nature of utilities are attached
thereto.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure, built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation purposes, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the
manufacturer, and, when factory equipped for the road, having a body width
not exceeding eight feet, and being of any length, provided its gross weight
does not exceed 4,500 pounds, or being of any weight, provided its body
length does not exceed 29 feet.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks.
§ 385-40. Prohibited parking.
§ 385-41. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this article, any person or
persons, firm, partnership or corporation, violating any of the provisions of
this article shall constitute a summary offense, and, upon conviction by the
issuing authority, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $300 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof,
may be committed by the issuing authority to the Allegheny County Jail in
conformity with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure for a period
not to exceed 10 days. Each and every day that any violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense under this article and shall be
subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
A. At no time shall a trailer, including camping and recreational
equipment, or any other prohibited vehicle be occupied or used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes in the Borough.
B. Commercial vehicles and equipment, including trucks, one-ton capacity
or larger, tandems, tractor-trailers, tractors or other commercial or
construction and cargo-moving vehicles or equipment as well as any
other prohibited vehicles, shall not under any conditions be parked
overnight on any highway or trafficway in any residential zoning district
in the Borough of Avalon.
C. A boat, boat trailer, camping and recreational equipment motorized
home or modified van, pickup coach, trailer, trailer and camping
recreational equipment, travel trailer, or any other prohibited vehicle
shall not be parked or stored on any highway or trafficway in a
residential zoning district in the borough of Avalon and shall be limited
to the interior of on-lot accessory buildings, including an automobile
garage, or to the rear yard on the lot.
§ 385-39 AVALON CODE § 385-41
1:368
ARTICLE VII
Vehicle Repairs on Streets; Parking During Construction
§ 385-42. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article:
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street or alley, except
a device moving upon stationary rails or tracks on a public highway.
§ 385-43. Repair on street prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to repair any motor vehicle or part
thereof, or permit the same to be done to a motor vehicle belonging to
him upon any of the streets, highways, alleys or public property of the
Borough of Avalon; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to
any emergency repair necessary to remove the vehicle from the street.
Any repair which can be made within 48 hours from the time the vehicle
becomes disabled shall be considered an emergency repair.
§ 385-44. Authority to prohibit parking at certain times.
§ 385-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation, violating the provisions of this article or
aiding, abetting, or assisting in the violation of said provisions should, upon
violation of said provisions, be fined the sum of $10 if paid within seven
days of said violation. If not paid within seven days of the violation and,
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit parking on
highways, or parts thereof, which are being constructed, repaired or
improved, for a period not to exceed the duration of said construction,
repair or improvement. When, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, the
public safety does not require the prohibition of parking at all times on
such highways, or part thereof, being constructed, repaired or
improved, the Chief of Police is authorized to permit parking for such
periods as will not endanger the public safety. In cases where parking is
so prohibited or regulated by said Chief of Police, proper signs shall be
erected by the Public Safety Committee in accordance with the Acts of
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in such cases made
and provided, giving notice of such prohibition or regulation.
B. The Chief of Police and the Public Safety Committee are also hereby
authorized to prohibit parking on any highway, or part thereof, entirely
or for certain hours to be designated by the Chief of Police and said
Committee for periods not to exceed 60 days as trial periods to study
the effect of parking or the movement of traffic within the Borough of
Avalon. While such trial periods are in effect, proper signs shall be
erected by the Public Safety Committee to show that parking is
prohibited or regulated thereon.
§ 385-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-45
1:369
upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, violator shall be
fined the sum of $20 and costs of prosecution. Upon default of payment or
upon failure to pay the fine and costs, the violator shall be committed to the
Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
§ 385-45 AVALON CODE § 385-45
1:370
ARTICLE VIII
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 385-46. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound vehicles that are
parked overtime on any street in the Borough, or in metered and unmetered
parking lots in the Borough, in violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 385-47. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 385-46 of this article and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 385-48. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Chief of Police. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Chief of Police that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in
an amount satisfactory to the Chief of Police as sufficient to indemnify
owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles
while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of towing or
storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Chief of Police its
schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article,
and when the schedule is approved by the Chief of Police, those charges
shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage. No different schedule
of charges shall be adopted without approval of the Chief of Police, and no
different charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose
vehicle is removed or impounded under this article by any approved storage
garage. The Chief of Police shall delete from its list of approved storage
garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with
any vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 385-49. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
be sent by the Borough to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 385-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-50
1:371
§ 385-50. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge.
Payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver
of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 385-51. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 385-52. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 385-50 AVALON CODE § 385-52
1:372
ARTICLE IX
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 385-53. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named pursuant to this
article, the Mayor or Chief of Police, in his or her discretion, may declare a
snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the
Borough through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 385-54. Parking and driving restrictions.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 385-55. Snow emergency routes.
The streets or parts of streets described in this section are hereby
designated as snow emergency routes.
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 385-56. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated pursuant to this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to
remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 385-23 of this chapter.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this
article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency
route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires or chains,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable as provided in § 385-57 of this chapter.
§ 385-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-56
1:373

ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous
§ 385-57. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 385-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-57
1:375
Chapter 390
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 345. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 385.
§ 385-57 AVALON CODE § 385-57
1:376
ARTICLE I
Removal of Junked and Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted 8-17-1977 by Ord. No. 1109]
§ 390-1. Purpose; definition. [Amended 8-17-1993 by Ord. No. 1207]
§ 390-2. Public property.
A. The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough by causing the removal of
abandoned, illegally parked, stored, wrecked, junked and stripped
vehicles from both public and private property and to abate public
nuisance caused by the storage of, parking of and accumulation of such
vehicles which are detrimental to the health, safety, morals and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough and which constitute a peril to highway
and traffic safety.
B. "Vehicle" is defined to include any automobile, truck, truck camper,
trailer, boat, bus, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, motorized
pedalcycle, and any device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
A. Authority to impound vehicles. Employees of the Police Department,
assisted by private towing service operators, are hereby authorized to
remove a vehicle, boat and/or boat carrier from a street or highway to
the lot designated or maintained by the Borough when such vehicle is
parked on any of the streets, highways, alleys or public property of the
Borough in violation of any provisions of law or of any ordinance of the
Borough, provided no vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the following subsections of this section.
B. Approved storage lot. The Borough Council shall designate one lot as
approved storage lot for the storage of impounded vehicles, said lot to
be located on New Brighton Road, Avalon, Pennsylvania, and
designated as "Avalon Borough Pound."
C. Storage lot to post bond. The Borough shall post a bond in the amount
of $10,000, to be filed with the Borough Secretary-Manager for the
indemnification of the owner of any such impounded vehicle against the
loss thereof or injury or damages thereto while in the custody of said
designated storage lot in the Borough.
D. Towing and storage charges fixed. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(1) The following are hereby fixed and established as the charges that
shall be made for the towing and storage of any vehicle removed
and impounded under the authority of this article:
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2
1:377
(a) Towed by an Avalon Borough contracted towing company. All
towing fees, service charges, daily storage fees, miscellaneous
fees are set by towing company.
(b) Towed by Avalon Borough and stored at Avalon Borough
Pound: fees are set by resolution. Those fees include the
following:
[1] Towing fee per vehicle.
[2] Service charge as provided by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[3] Storage per day or any fraction thereof.
(c) All accumulated charges shall be paid in cash and a proper
receipt issued, before any towed or impounded vehicle is
released. Proof of ownership of vehicle shall be required in
addition to payment.
(2) All accumulated charges shall be paid in cash and a proper receipt
issued, before any towed or impounded vehicle is released. Proof of
ownership of vehicle shall be required in addition to payment.
E. Notice of intended removal and impounding. In any case where the
violation is not causing immediate harm, and in the discretion of the
Police Department, the Police Department shall give five days' notice of
the intended removal and impounding, either by certified mail or by
affixing a notice to the vehicle if it has no identifiable license plate.
F. Police to notify owners of impounded vehicles. Within 12 hours from the
time of removal of any vehicle under authority granted by this section,
notice of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by
the Police Department to the owner of record of such vehicle. Such
notice shall designate the place from which said vehicle was removed,
the reason for its removal and impounding, and the lot in which it shall
have been impounded.
G. Effect of payment of towing and impounding charges without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made "under
protest," be final and conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any
right to recover the money so paid.
H. Effect of payment of charges under protest. In the event that any towing
and impounding charges so imposed shall be paid "under protest," the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District
Judge or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case such
defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice as is
provided by the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses, and
shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 390-2 AVALON CODE § 390-2
1:378
§ 390-3. Private property. [Amended 8-17-1993 by Ord. No. 1207]
I. Records of vehicles removed and impounded. The Police Department
shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall be able at all
times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners thereof with
information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
J. Owner or operator of vehicle remains liable for fine or penalty. The
payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the
owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for
the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which said vehicle
was removed and impounded.
K. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles. No vehicle shall be removed
under the authority of this article if, at the time of the intended removal
thereof, the owner or person for the time being in charge of such
vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention to remove
such vehicle immediately.
A. Abandoned vehicles.
(1) "Abandoned vehicle" is defined as follows:
(a) The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on
private property for more than 48 hours; and/or
(b) The vehicle does not bear all of the following:
[1] A valid registration plate.
[2] A valid certificate of inspection.
[3] An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
[4] Current registration on a boat, boat trailer or recreational
vehicle. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any vehicle of any kind in
a wrecked, junked, stripped or abandoned condition, or any vehicle
whether occupied or not, in a place where its presence constitutes
a hazard on private property, or for the owner of such vehicle, or
the owner or occupant of any property to allow, permit or suffer the
same to be left upon any privately owned property unless the same
be authorized in conjunction with a business properly operated,
pursuant to the zoning laws, when adopted, and other laws of the
Borough. Such business, however, shall not park, store or leave any
kind of wrecked, junked, stripped or abandoned vehicle on any
street, highway, alley or public property without being subject to
the provisions of § 390-2 of this article.
(3) Abandoned or junked conditions include vehicles with holes in the
body or floorboards, broken glass, windshields and lights, flat tires
§ 390-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:379
or missing wheels, garbage, debris or litter inside, or the vehicle is
up on blocks or jacks for a period of time in excess of 48 hours.
B. Notice to owners. If the Police Department or the Borough Secretary-
Manager, or any of their authorized agents, find that a violation of this
section exists, the Police Department or the Borough Secretary-
Manager shall notify, by certified mail or by affixing a notice to the
vehicle, the owner of the property on which the vehicle is stored or
parked, or the owner of the vehicle, or both, of the violation and order
either or both of the said owners to remove said vehicle or vehicles
within five days thereof.
C. Method of notice. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified
mail to the last known address of the violator. In the event that, on
diligent search, the address of either the property owner or vehicle
owner cannot be ascertained, the posting of the said notice or copies
thereof, on the real property, vehicle, structure or area immediately
adjacent thereto shall constitute sufficient notice.
D. Owner may request hearing. Within five days after notice, the party or
parties affected may request a hearing by filing a written request with
the Borough Secretary-Manager as to why the vehicle shall not be
removed.
E. Failure to request hearing. If a hearing is not requested within the fiveday
period, the said notice shall become an order and the parties
affected shall proceed to remove or have removed the vehicle or
vehicles in question from the property in question in accordance with
the notice and order.
F. Notice of hearing. On proper request, a hearing on the matter shall be
given forthwith and, where more than one party is involved, it shall be
the duty of the party requesting the said hearing to notify all other
parties affected or interested of the time and place of the impending
hearing. If the request is denied after hearing, the party or parties
involved shall be given an additional 48 hours to arrange for its
removal.
G. Failure to act; imposition of costs. If the violation complained of shall
not have been remedied within the period as required by the order, the
Borough of Avalon shall, through its own agents, contractors and/or
employees, remedy the violations and charge the costs thereof to the
real property owner on whose property the vehicles are located. Said
costs shall, after a proper demand and refusal or a failure to pay after
30 days, constitute a lien on the said realty, which shall be filed by the
Solicitor on receipt of all information.
H. Emergency powers. Nothing in this section shall prevent duly
authorized police officials from removing from private property, without
notice, any attended or unattended automobile or vehicle, the presence
of which constitutes a hazard or threat to the life, health, safety, welfare
and morals of the citizens of the Borough of Avalon and which is
§ 390-3 AVALON CODE § 390-3
1:380
§ 390-4. Certification by police officials.
Before any salvors may be ordered to remove any abandoned vehicle,
police officials must certify that they have complied with the notification
requirements as set forth in this article and as required by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 390-5. Unclaimed vehicles.
If an impounded vehicle is unclaimed within seven days of notice to owner,
as provided in § 390-2F, it shall be disposed of by the Borough of Avalon
in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 390-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1993 by Ord. No.
1207; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement proceedings. If the penalty is not paid, the Borough shall
initiate a civil action for collection in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under
this section, the Borough may enforce this article in equity in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County.
imminently dangerous and, in the opinion of the authorized police
officials, constitutes a nuisance which gives rise to the existence of
emergency conditions.
I. Applicability of § 390-2. The provisions of § 390-2, concerning the place
of storage, towing and charges therefor, and the bonding provisions and
the recording of any removal and impounding, shall be followed in any
procedure under this section where the same do not conflict with any
provisions of this section.
§ 390-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-6
1:381

ARTICLE II
Storage of Junked and Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1274]
§ 390-7. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Avalon Borough Abandoned and Junked
Vehicle Ordinance."
§ 390-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances are repealed insofar as they conflict
with the provisions of this article; however, such repeal shall not affect any
act done or any liability or violation accrued under any such prior ordinance
herein repealed or superseded, and all such liabilities or violations shall
continue and may be enforced in the same manner as if such repeal or
supersession had not been made; and any offense or violation committed
and any penalty or forfeiture incurred under any such ordinance herein
repealed or superseded may be prosecuted in the same manner as if this
article had not been approved.
§ 390-9. Construal of provisions.
In the construction of this article, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
B. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future tense.
C. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and is not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive.
F. The Borough intends to favor the public interest as against any private
interest.
G. The headings prefixed to sections and other divisions of this article
shall not be considered to control but may be used to aid in the
construction thereof.
H. General words shall be construed to take their meanings and be
restricted by preceding particular words.
§ 390-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-10
1:383
§ 390-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, boat (registered
or abandoned), or parts thereof, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,34 which is inoperable as defined herein,
and which is stored or kept outside of a fully enclosed building.[Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Avalon.
DISMANTLED OR PARTIALLY DISMANTLED VEHICLE — Any motor
vehicle or part thereof, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which has been rendered inoperable because a part or
parts has or have been removed therefrom.
INOPERABLE — As applied to motor vehicles under this chapter:
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled except one which
is propelled solely by human power or by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
OR PARTS THEREOF — When used in the clause with "abandoned or junked
vehicles" or "dismantled or partially dismantled vehicles," the term shall
mean a component of a vehicle, including but not limited to bumpers,
doors, fenders, tires, windows or windshields, motors, transmissions, axles
or suspension frames, chassis, or any other component of a vehicle which is
either wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperative
as well as including pieces or portions thereof.
PERSON — Includes both natural and artificial persons, associations,
partnerships, firms or corporations. When used in the clause imposing a
fine or imprisonment, the term "person" as applied to a partnership or
association shall mean any member thereof, and as applied to a corporation
shall mean the president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or other high
managerial agent thereof. The term shall also include all owners of the
property on which a violation occurs, including co-owners, a husband and
wife, as well as joint owners. Both an owner and a tenant are jointly
responsible for compliance with the terms of this article if the owner
knowingly allows the premises to be used for a prohibited purpose.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Real property which belongs to or is owned,
controlled or used by any person, association, partnership, firm or
A motor vehicle that does not have a current registration plate or a
current inspection sticker; or
A.
A motor vehicle that does not have the required number of wheels or
tires, does not have one or more of its doors or windows, does not
have an engine or does not have a battery or lacks any part which is
necessary to self-propel it.
B.
34.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 390-10 AVALON CODE § 390-10
1:384
corporation, whether owned or leased and not constituting public property.
For purposes of this article, the term shall also include that portion of any
public right-of-way adjacent to the property line which is not improved with
a cartway for public travel.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Real property which is owned by a municipal or
governmental entity, though not necessarily a place devoted solely to the
uses of the public, but shall include any public street, private street,
highway, road, alley, bridge, park, playground, vacant lot, stream, creek,
public building or similar place within the Borough of Avalon which is open
to the public or to which the public or a substantial group has access.
SALVOR — A person engaged in the business of acquiring abandoned
vehicles for the purpose of taking apart, recycling, selling, rebuilding or
exchanging the vehicle or parts thereof.
SCREENED — When used within this article, the use of any natural objects,
plantings, embankments, fencing, walls or structures or a combination of
any of these, which will effectively hide any junked or abandoned vehicle,
dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, or parts thereof, so as not to be
visible from the highway or abutting properties at all times of the year or by
an occupant of a motor vehicle viewing from a height of 4 1/2 feet above the
pavement.
VALUELESS EXCEPT FOR SALVAGE — A vehicle which is inoperable or
unable to meet the vehicle equipment and inspection standards under
Part IV (relating to vehicle characteristics) of the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4101 et seq., to the extent
that the cost of repairs would exceed the value of the required vehicle.
The term does not include a vehicle which would qualify as an antique or
classic vehicle under the Vehicle Code except for its lack of restoration or
maintenance. A vehicle which is inoperable or unable to meet the vehicle
equipment and inspection standards of Part IV (relating to vehicle
characteristics) to the extent that the cost of repairs would exceed the value
of the required vehicle shall be presumed to be valueless except of salvage
but the presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled
wheel chair or an electrical mobility device operated by and designed for
the exclusive use of a person with a mobility related disability.
VEHICLE SALVAGE YARD — Any land or structure which a salvor uses
for a salvaging operation of two or more unlicensed, inoperative vehicles.
Salvaging includes the storage and sale of vehicular parts or vehicles.
VEHICULAR FLUIDS — A substance or liquid used frequently in motor
vehicles, such as gas, oil or antifreeze.
§ 390-11. Presumption of abandonment.
§ 390-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-11
1:385
§ 390-12. Storing or keeping declared nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to store, maintain,
accumulate or keep any abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or
partially dismantled vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or
parts thereof, in violation of this article and the same is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 390-13. Storage of inoperable motor vehicles.
A. A vehicle shall be presumed to be abandoned under any of the following
circumstances, but the presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance
of the evidence:
(1) The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours.
(2) The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours.
(3) The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the
following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
(4) The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48
hours.
B. Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities which
are left in a manner which do not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic shall not be considered to be abandoned.
A. Residential districts.
(1) No person shall keep, maintain or store and no person in charge of
or in control of any premises or private property, whether as owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned or
junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, or
wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise inoperable motor vehicle,
or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, to remain
outside an enclosed structure on public or private property in any
residential district longer than 10 days.
(2) No person shall keep, maintain or store any motor vehicle which is
leaking any vehicular fluids outside an enclosed structure in any
residential district.
§ 390-11 AVALON CODE § 390-13
1:386
§ 390-14. Salvage yards.
An abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle,
or wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise inoperable motor vehicle, or a
vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, held or stored upon
the property of a salvor in a vehicle salvage yard or by a person engaged
in the business of servicing, repairing, storing or disposing of such motor
vehicles, in conformity with the Zoning Laws of the Borough of Avalon, shall
not be a violation of this article if and only if:
§ 390-15. Relocation of cited vehicles prohibited.
After a warning is issued or a citation filed, it shall be unlawful for any
person to relocate an abandoned or junked vehicle, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicle, or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts
B. Commercial and industrial districts.
(1) No person shall keep, maintain or store and no person in charge of
or in control of any premises or private property, whether as owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned or
junked vehicle, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle, or
wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise inoperable motor vehicle,
or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, to remain
on public or private property in a commercial or industrial district
longer than 10 days unless screened so as not to be visible from the
highway or abutting properties at all times of the year.
(2) No person shall keep, maintain or store any motor vehicle which is
leaking any vehicular fluids outside an enclosed structure in any
commercial or industrial district.
A. Such business is in full compliance with the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L.
162, No. 81, § 1, et seq., as amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 (relating to
salvors) as well as Chapter 253 of the Pennsylvania Code, 67 Pa. Code
§ 253.1 et seq., which establishes rules governing the qualifications and
duties of salvors.
B. Each year upon renewal, such business shall provide the Borough
Building Inspector a valid copy of its license or certificate of
authorization from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. The certificate of authorization is displayed in its place of business.
D. All such vehicles or parts thereof in the salvage yard are screened so as
not to be visible from the highway or abutting properties at all times of
the year.
E. All such vehicles or parts thereof are not leaking vehicular fluids.35
35.Editor's Note: Original § 9F, requiring salvage yards to be located in an I-Industrial
District, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-15
1:387
thereof, to another location in Avalon Borough unless in full compliance with
this article.
§ 390-16. Notice to remove violations; failure to comply.
The Borough Manager, or his or her designee, and Avalon Borough police
officers are hereby authorized and directed to give notice, by personal
service or United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be,
of any premises or location where violations of this article exist, directing
and requiring such owner or occupant to remove or eliminate such violation
within 10 days after the issuance of the notice. If any person shall neglect,
fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period stated therein,
such person shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article for the
violations hereof, and, in addition, the proper officers of the Borough may
remove such violation of this article; and the costs thereof together with
any additional payment authorized by law, may be collected by the Borough
from such person in the manner provided by law and upon the neglect,
failure or refusal to pay the costs of removal, the proper officers of the
Borough may cause a lien to be filed against the property.
§ 390-17. Covering of abandoned or junked vehicle not abatement.
Covering or draping a tarpaulin, car cover or other covering over an
abandoned or junked vehicle, a dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle,
or a vehicle valueless except for salvage, or parts thereof, is not an
abatement of a violation of this article and does not constitute compliance
with § 390-14 of this article.
§ 390-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any section of this article or knowingly permit
his or her property to be used in violation of any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution, per day for each and every offense, and,
in default of payment of any fines or costs imposed, may be sentenced to a
period of incarceration not exceeding 10 days in the Allegheny County Jail.
Whenever such person shall have been notified that he or she is committing
such a violation of this article, each day that he or she shall continue
such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 390-19. Judicial relief.
If the Borough shall deem it necessary to abate a nuisance or nuisances
under this article, nothing herein shall prevent the Borough of Avalon from
instituting proceedings and seeking relief in the courts of equity to abate
said nuisance or nuisances,
§ 390-15 AVALON CODE § 390-20
1:388
§ 390-20. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable. If any provision, section,
clause, sentence, phrase or word of this article is for any reason held
unconstitutional, invalid or illegal by any court of competent jurisdiction,
said holding shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this article.
It is hereby declared as legislative intent that this article would have
been enacted had such unconstitutional, invalid or illegal portion not been
included. The Borough of Avalon does not intend to violate the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution of the United
States of America.
§ 390-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-20
1:389
Chapter 399
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 321.
§ 390-20 AVALON CODE § 390-20
1:390
ARTICLE I
Authority to Shut Off Water
[Adopted 3-18-1981 by Ord. No. 1135]
§ 399-1. Authorization.
The Collector of Delinquent Sewage, as agent of the Borough of Avalon,
after obtaining the written approval of the Avalon Borough Council or its
designated agent, given the authority to do so, be and hereby is authorized
and directed under and in accordance with the provisions of this article to
direct and authorize the Westview Water Authority to shut off water services
to the aforesaid owners and occupants, and to provide the Westview Water
Authority with the necessary information to enable it to proceed to shut
off the water to the aforesaid owners and occupants, such direction and
authorization and information to be provided in a manner and form
substantially as follows:
"You are hereby authorized and directed to shut off the supply of water to
the premises located at (give address) for the reason that (name of owner
or occupant), owner or occupant (strike out one) of the above premises
has neglected or failed to pay for a period of 30 days from the due date
thereof, a rental rate or charge for sewer, sewage or sewage treatment
service imposed by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority.
"I certify that the owner or occupant of the premises above set forth is
the person responsible for payment of the overdue charge and that such
rentals, rates or charges are, in fact, overdue.
"I certify that the above claim or lien for the aforesaid service or services
has been assigned by the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority to the
Borough of Avalon.
"I further certify that written notice to the effect that the water supply
would be shut off at the above premises was mailed to __________, owner or
occupant (strike out one), at (address) on (date), and further, that a written
notice to the effect that the water supply would be shut off at the above
premises was posted at a main entrance to the aforesaid premises on (date)
by (name or poster). Copies of the notice sent and the notice posted are
attached hereto and made part hereof.
"I further certify that no written notice has been given the Borough of
Avalon or the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority stating that __________,
the aforesaid owner or occupant has a defense to the aforesaid overdue
sewage rentals, rates and charges.
AUTHORIZED OFFICER
§ 399-2. Compensation.
The Borough of Avalon is authorized and directed to pay to the Westview
Water Authority a compensation for said shut-off and turn-on services, in an
amount to be agreed upon between the Borough and the Authority.
§ 399-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-3
1:391
§ 399-3. Liability.
That the Borough shall indemnify the Authority and hold it harmless from
any claims whatsoever arising out of the shutting off of water to any of
the owners or occupants of the properties affected. All expenses and costs
incurred by the Borough of Avalon in shutting off the water will be borne by
the owner or occupant as the case may be.
§ 399-3 AVALON CODE § 399-3
1:392
Chapter 415
ZONING, JOINT
[The zoning laws and regulations for the Borough of Avalon are
contained in the Avalon-Bellevue-Ben Avon Joint Zoning Ordinance,
adopted 9-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1327, as amended. A complete copy of
the Joint Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map, as amended, is on file
in the Borough office and available for public review during normal
office hours.]
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in
nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
332 7-2-1903 Streets and sidewalks: removal of
rubbish, snow and ice from
sidewalks
Ch.356, Part 1
672 12-29-1927 Officers and employees: Borough
Manager
Superseded by
Ord. No. 988
712 5-8-1931 Firemen’s Relief Association Ch. 31
716 1-8-1933 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
735 3-12-1936 Streets and sidewalks: structures
and obstructions on sidewalks
REP
767 3-21-1941 Amusements: circuses, shows
and other entertainment
REP
768 3-22-1941 Amusements: amusement devices Ch. 111, Art. I
829 3-5-1948 Amusements: circuses, shows
and other entertainment
amendment
REP
830 3-4-1948 Amusements: amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 111, Art. I
§ 399-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:393
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
834 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
835 12-3-1948 Amusements: circuses, shows
and other entertainment
amendment
REP
845 12-30-1949 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
852 7-7-1950 Streets and sidewalks: structures
and obstructions on sidewalks
amendment
REP
858 5-4-1951 Property maintenance: trees and
other plant growth near streets
and sidewalks
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1067
860 10-5-1951 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
862 12-7-1951 Peddling and soliciting:
registration of solicitors
Ch. 284, Art. I
912 11-2-1956 Disorderly conduct REP
922 4-5-1957 Junk dealers REP
936 6-6-1958 Streets and sidewalks: removal of
rubbish, snow and ice from
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 356, Part 1
953 10-2-1959 Streets and sidewalks: street
openings
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1351
973 10-12-1962 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
974 10-12-1962 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
979 5-27-1963 Peddling and soliciting: uninvited
peddlers and merchants
Ch. 284, Art. II
985 7-12-1963 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
987 10-11-1963 Streets and sidewalks: street
openings amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1351
988 10-11-1963 Officers and employees: Borough
Manager
Ch. 48, Art. I
991 12-13-1963 Noise REP
1008 5-14-1965 Streets and sidewalks:
replacement and repair of
sidewalks
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1351
1017 8-17-1966 Littering Ch. 243
1019 10-14-1966 Taxation: earned income and net
profits tax
Ch. 367, Art. I
1056 7-31-1970 Auditor, Independent Ch. 7
1060 7-9-1971 Personnel policies NI; see Ch. 59
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:394
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1067 1-14-1972 Property maintenance: trees and
other plant growth near streets
and sidewalks
Ch. 296, Art. I
1068 2-11-1972 Personnel policies amendment NI; see Ch. 59
1070 4-14-1972 Vehicles and traffic NLP; see Ch. 385
1075 4-13-1973 Personnel policies amendment NI; see Ch. 59
1081 5-10-1974 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1088 5-9-1975 Taxation: per capita tax Obsolete; REP
1091 9-12-1975 Pensions: Employee Pension Plan Superseded by
Ord. No. 1363
1092 11-21-1975 Deed transfer tax for 1976 NCM
1093 12-30-1975 Tax rate for 1976 NCM
1094 12-30-1975 Salaries amendment: Mayor Superseded by
Ord. No. 1180
1095 12-30-1976 Salaries amendment: police NCM
1096 1-21-1976 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1232
1097 1-21-1976 Intermunicipal agreement: police
department mutual aid
NCM
1098 3-17-1976 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1099 5-19-1976 Cable television franchise
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1163
1100 7-14-1976 Animals: dogs and cats Ch. 116, Art. I
1101 7-14-1976 Borough swimming pools and
playgrounds repealer: (repeals
Ord. No. 705)
Repealer only
1102 8-18-1976 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1103 12-20-1976 Deed transfer tax for 1977 NCM
1104 12-30-1976 Tax rate for 1977 NCM
1105 12-30-1976 Salaries amendment: police
(1977-1978)
NCM
1106 2-11-1977 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (1978-1981)
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1134
1107 2-11-1977 Intermunicipal agreement: police
department mutual aid
NCM
1108 8-17-1977 Taxation: payment of real estate
taxes in installments
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1348
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:395
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1109 8-17-1977 Vehicles, junked and abandoned:
removal of junked and abandoned
vehicles
Ch. 390, Art. I
1110 12-21-1977 Deed transfer tax for 1978 NCM
1111 1-18-1978 Tax rate for 1978 NCM
1112 5-17-1978 Officers and employees: Assistant
Building Inspector
REP
1113 7-19-1978 Parks and recreation areas:
California Avenue Park
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1276
1114 12-20-1978 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sewer connection charges
Ch. 321, Art. I
1115 12-20-1978 Streets and sidewalks: street
openings amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1351
1116 12-20-1978 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1117 1-17-1979 Deed transfer tax for 1979 NCM
1118 1-17-1979 Taxation: payment of real estate
taxes in installments amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1348
1119 5-16-1979 Cable television franchise
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1163
1120 12-29-1978 Tax rate for 1979 NCM
1121 2-21-1979 Salaries amendment: police
(1979)
NCM
1122 5-16-1979 Firearms and other weapons REP
1123 6-20-1979 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 1268
1124 7-18-1979 Personnel policies amendment NI; see Ch. 59
1125 8-15-1979 Street name change NCM
1126 8-15-1979 Establishing street grade change NCM
1127 12-31-1979 Deed transfer tax for 1980 NCM
1128 12-28-1979 Tax rate for 1980 NCM
1129 12-28-1979 Salaries amendment: police
(1980)
NCM
1130 4-10-1980 Incurring nonelectoral debt NCM
1131 12-30-1980 Deed transfer tax for 1981 NCM
1132 12-30-1980 Salaries amendment: police
(1981)
NCM
1133 1-21-1981 Tax rate for 1981 NCM
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:396
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1134 2-11-1981 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (1982-1985)
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1160
1135 3-18-1981 Water : authority to shut off
water
Ch. 399, Art. I
1136 3-18-1981 Taxation: deed transfer tax
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1184
1137 7-15-1981 Intermunicipal agreement: police
department mutual aid
NCM
1138 10-21-1981 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1139 1-20-1982 Tax rate for 1982 NCM
1140 1-20-1982 Salaries amendment: police
(1982)
NCM
1141 2-17-1982 Amusements: amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 111, Art. I
1142 4-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1143 4-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1144 4-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1145 4-26-1982 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1146 5-19-1982 Alcoholic beverages: public
possession and consumption
Ch. 105, Art. I
1147 5-19-1982 Alarm systems: false alarms Ch. 100, Art. I
1148 7-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic amendment:
vehicle weight limit on bridges
Obsolete;
controlled by
County or
PennDOT
1149 7-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic amendment:
speed timing devices
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1161
1150 8-25-1982 Taxation: mercantile tax REP
1151 8-18-1982 Amusements: amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 111, Art. I
1152 10-20-1982 Building construction
amendment: (fees, etc.)
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1222
1153 1-19-1983 Salaries amendment: police
(1983-1984)
NCM
1154 1-20-1983 Tax rate for 1983 NCM
1155 1-19-1983 Garbage collection fees for 1983 -
1984
NCM
1156 12-23-1983 Tax rate for 1984 NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:397
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1157 10-17-1984 Sewers and sewage disposal:
discharge of waste materials
restricted
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1221
1158 12-28-1984 Tax rate for 1985 NCM
1159 1-16-1985 Salaries amendment: police
(1985-1986)
NCM
1160 1-30-1985 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (1986-1989)
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1182
1161 6-13-1985 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1162 6-15-1985 Floodplain management Superseded by
Ord. No. 1358
1163 8-18-1985 Franchise agreement: Center
Video Corporation
NCM
1164 9-12-1985 Floodplain management
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1358
1165 11-14-1985 Rental property: residential
landlord occupancy reports
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1262
1166 12-30-1985 Tax rate for 1986 NCM
1167 3-18-1986 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1168 3-18-1986 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1169 4-15-1986 Taxation: occupational privilege
tax
Ch. 367, Art. II
1170 6-17-1986 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1171 11-18-1986 Taxation: deed transfer tax
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1184
1172 12-30-1986 Tax rate for 1987 NCM
1173 11-17-1987 Animals: dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 116, Art. I
1174 12-29-1987 Tax rate for 1988 NCM
1175 12-29-1987 Garbage collection fees for 1988 NCM
1176 3-15-1988 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1177 11-15-1988 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1178 12-29-1988 Tax rate for 1989 NCM
1179 12-29-1988 Salaries : Council persons Ch. 80, Art. I
1180 12-29-1988 Salaries : Mayor Ch. 80, Art. II
1181 12-29-1988 Garbage collection fees for 1989 NCM
1182 2-9-1989 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (1990-1993)
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1204
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:398
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1183 3-21-1989 Streets and sidewalks:
replacement and repair of
sidewalks amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1351
1184 8-15-1989 Taxation: realty transfer tax Ch. 367, Art. III
1185 12-27-1989 Tax rate for 1990 NCM
1186 1-16-1990 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1187 1-16-1989 Streets and sidewalks: street
openings amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1351
1188 6-19-1990 Personnel policies amendment NI; see Ch. 59
1189 6-19-1990 Officers and employees: Borough
Manager amendment
Ch. 48, Art. I
1190 10-16-1990 Solid waste: storage, collection
and disposal
Ch. 345, Art. I
1191 10-16-1990 Solid waste: recycling Ch. 345. Art. II
1192 12-27-1990 Tax rate for 1991 NCM
1193 3-19-1991 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 1268
1194 5-22-1991 Environmental Advisory Council REP
1195 5-22-1991 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1196 NI
1197 10-15-1991 Solid waste: storage, collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 345, Art. I
1198 Tax rate for 1992 Failed
12-17-1991
1199 1-10-1992 Tax rate for 1992 NCM
1200 7-21-1992 Agreement: risk management
workmen's compensation pooled
trust
NCM
1201 8-18-1992 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1202 12-29-1992 Tax rate for 1993 NCM
1203 12-29-1992 Garbage collection fees for 1993 NCM
1204 2-16-1993 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (1994-1997)
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1238
1205 6-15-1993 Fire insurance claims Ch. 196
1206 6-15-1993 Building construction
amendment: (fees)
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1222
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:399
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1207 8-17-1993 Vehicles, junked and abandoned:
removal of junked and abandoned
vehicles amendment
Ch. 390, Art. I
1208 9-21-1993 Littering amendment Ch. 243
1209 12-30-1993 Tax rate for 1994 NCM
1210 12-30-1995 Garbage collection fees for 1994 NCM
1211 2-15-1994 Amusements: amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 111, Art. I
1212 7-6-1994 Intermunicipal agreement: North
Boroughs Police Commission
NCM
1213 10-18-1994 Budgetary Reserve Account Ch. 14
1214 10-18-1994 Streets and sidewalks: removal of
rubbish, snow and ice from
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 356, Part 1
1215 11-15-1994 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1216 12-20-1994 Fire insurance claims
amendment
Ch. 196
1217 12-20-1994 Garbage collection fees for 1995 NCM
1218 12-29-1994 Tax rate for 1995 NCM
1219 12-29-1994 Taxation: senior citizen property
tax relief
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1292
1220 12-29-1994 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1221 2-21-1995 Sewers and sewage disposal:
discharge of waste materials
restricted
Ch. 321, Art. II
1222 9-21-9995 Building construction: 1993
BOCA Building Code
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1282
1223 9-19-1995 Property maintenance: 1993
BOCA Property Maintenance
Code
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1263
1224 9-21-1995 Mechanical standards: 1993
BOCA Mechanical Code
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1282
1225 9-19-1995 Fire prevention: 1993 BOCA Fire
Prevention Code
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1282
1226 12-28-1995 Garbage collection fees for 1996 NCM
1227 12-28-1995 Tax rate for 1996 NCM
1228 5-21-1996 Municipal claims and liens Superseded by
Ord. No. 1286
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:400
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1229 6-18-1996 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 1268
1230 7-16-1996 Intermunicipal agreement:
emergency dispatching and
communication service (911)
NCM; repealed
by Ord. No. 1299
1231 8-20-1996 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1232 9-5-1996 Pensions: Police Pension Plan Superseded by
Ord. No. 1293
1233 9-17-1996 Personnel policies amendment NI; see Ch. 59
1234 9-5-1996 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1235 12-17-1996 Streets and sidewalks: removal of
rubbish, snow and ice from
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 356, Part 1
1236 12-30-1996 Reduction in member
contributions to Police Pension
Plan: 1992
NCM
1237 12-30-1996 Tax rate for 1997 NCM
1238 3-18-1997 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (1998-2001)
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1296
1239 6-17-1997 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1240 8-19-1997 Intermunicipal agreement:
Northwest Regional
Communications
NCM
1241 12-16-1997 Tax rate for 1998 NCM
1242 12-16-1997 Reduction in member
contributions to Police Pension
Plan: 1998
NCM
1243 6-16-1998 Animals: dog control Superseded by
Ord. No. 1251
1244 12-30-1998 Reduction in member
contributions to Police Pension
Plan: 1999
NCM
1245 12-30-1998 Tax rate for 1999 NCM
1246 2-16-1999 Property transfers: certification
of sanitary sewer status
Ch. 303, Art. I
1247 3-16-1999 Tax rate for 1999 NCM
1248 3-16-1999 Sewers and sewage disposal:
smoke and dye testing
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1284
1249 3-16-1999 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1293
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:401
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1250 3-16-1999 Reduction in member
contributions to Police Pension
Plan: 1998
NCM
1251 3-16-1999 Animals: dog control Ch. 116, Art. II
1252 3-16-1999 Reduction in member
contributions to Police Pension
Plan: 1999
NCM
1253 5-19-1999 Skateboards, bicycles and similar
devices
REP
1254 6-15-1999 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1293
1255 6-15-1999 Solid waste: storage, collection
and disposal amendment
Ch. 345, Art. I
1256 8-12-1999 Incurring nonelectoral debt NCM
1257 10-19-1999 Building permits REP
1258 12-7-1999 Swimming pools Ch. 362
1259 12-7-1999 Grading and excavating Ch. 214
1260 Vehicles and traffic amendment:
parking on Union Avenue
Defeated
1261 12-30-1999 Tax rate for 2000 NCM
1262 2-15-2000 Rental property: tenant
registration; rental operating
license
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1272
1263 4-18-2000 Property maintenance: 1996
BOCA Property Maintenance
Code
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1332
1264 3-21-2000 Reduction in member
contributions to Police Pension
Plan: 2000
NCM
1265 11-21-2000 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1266 1-16-2001 Tax rate for 2001 NCM
1267 2-20-2001 Officers and employees:
combining positions of Manager,
Secretary and Treasurer
REP
1268 8-21-2001 Zoning Superseded by
Ord. No. 1327
1269 10-16-2001 Intermunicipal agreement: local
government risk management
pool
NCM
1270 12-18-2001 Tax rate for 2002 NCM
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:402
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1271 2-19-2002 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1293
1272 4-16-2002 Rental property: fire safety rental
operating licenses
Ch. 310, Art. I
1273 4-16-2002 Rental property: tenant
registration
Ch. 310, Art. II
1274 8-20-2002 Vehicles, junked and abandoned:
storage of junked and abandoned
vehicles
Ch. 390, Art. II
1275 9-17-2002 Eminent domain NCM
1276 10-15-2002 Parks and recreation areas:
California Avenue Park
Ch. 278, Art. I
1277 12-17-2002 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1293
1278 12-17-2002 Pensions: Employee Pension Plan
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1363
1279 12-30-2002 Tax rate for 2003 NCM
1280 3-18-2003 Taxation: earned income and net
profits tax amendment
Ch. 367, Art. I
1281 7-15-2003 Incurring nonelectoral debt NCM
1282 10-21-2003 Construction codes: 2000
International Codes
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1315
1283 12-30-2003 Tax rate for 2004 NCM
1284 12-30-2003 Sewers and sewage disposal:
illegal connections to sanitary
sewer system
Ch. 321, Art. III
1285 5-18-2004 Construction codes:
administration and enforcement
of Uniform Construction Code
Ch. 155, Art. I
1286 6-15-2004 Municipal claims and liens Ch. 255
1287 12-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; See Ch.
385
1288 12-29-2004 Tax rate for 2005 NCM
1289 1-18-2005 Intermunicipal Agreement:
Quaker Valley Council of
Governments Municipal Appeals
Board
NCM
1290 12-20-2005 Taxation: emergency and
municipal services tax
amendment
Ch. 367, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:403
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1291 3-15-2005 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1292 4-19-2005 Taxation: senior citizens and
disabled persons tax rebate
program
Ch. 367, Art. IV
1293 5-18-2005 Pensions: Police Pension Plan Repealed by
Ord. No. 1353
1294 6-21-2005 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sanitary sewer surcharge fee
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1302;
expired
3-16-2014
1295 11-15-2005 Intermunicipal agreement:
Spruce Run Sewer Project
NCM
1296 11-15-2005 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (2006-2009)
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1326
1297 Voided
1298 1-17-2006 Tax rate for 2006 NCM
1299 1-17-2006 Intermunicipal agreement:
emergency dispatching and
communication service (911)
rescission
Repealer only
1300 1-11-2006 Rental property: water and sewer
service in landlord's or owner's
name
Ch. 310, Art. III
1301 2-21-2006 Intermunicipal agreement:
Bellevue police officers entering
Avalon for law enforcement
NCM
1302 3-21-2006 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sanitary sewer surcharge fee
Repealed by
Ord. Nos. 1329
and 1360
1303 3-21-2006 South School Street
improvements: conversion to twoway
street
NCM
1304 3-21-2006 Solid waste: disposal of rubbish
and grass on Borough property
Ch. 345, Art. III
1305 4-18-2006 Property transfers: prior
notification
Ch. 303, Art. II
1306 5-17-2006 Smoking: smoking prohibited in
Borough building
Ch. 334, Art. I
1307 8-15-2006 Incurring nonelectoral debt NCM
1308 9-19-2006 Municipal claims and liens
amendment
Ch. 255
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:404
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1309 Dogs and cats Tabled
1310 Street openings Superseded by
Ord. No. 1351
1311 12-28-2008 Salaries amendment: Tax
Collector (2006-2009)
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1326
1312 12-28-2006 Taxation: realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 367, Art. III
1313 12-28-2006 Tax rate for 2007 NCM
1314 4-17-2007 Burning, open : recreational
burning
Ch. 139, Art. I
1315 5-16-2007 Construction codes: 2006
International Codes
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1332
1316 9-18-2007 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1317 10-16-2007 Taxation: local services tax
amendment
Ch. 367, Art. II
1318 10-16-2007 Planning Commission, Joint Ch. 64
1319 Dogs and cats Withdrawn
12-8-2007
1320 12-28-2007 Tax rate for 2008 NCM
1321 4-15-2008 Animals: exotic animals Ch. 116, Art. III
1322 Voided
1323 7-29-2008 Increasing indebtedness NCM; repealed
by Ord. No. 1324
1324 8-22-2008 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1325 1-6-2009 Tax rate for 2009 NCM
1326 1-20-2009 Salaries: Tax Collector Ch. 80, Art. III
1327 9-15-2009 Zoning, joint: adoption of Tri-
Borough Joint Zoning
NI; see Ch. 415
1328 9-22-2009 Incurring nonelectoral debt NCM
1329 1-19-2010 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sanitary sewer surcharge fee
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1360
1330 8-17-2010 Emergency services: excessive
police calls
Ch. 172, Art. I
1331 12-30-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
1332 3-15-2011 Construction codes: adoption of
various international standards
REP
1333 8-16-2011 Increasing indebtedness NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:405
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1334 Waste management contract NCM
1335 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
1336 2-21-2012 Solid waste: waste dumpsters
and street storage
Ch. 345, Art. IV
1337 2-21-2012 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1353
1338 3-20-2012 Zoning, joint amendment: airport
zoning
NI; see Ch. 415
1339 4-17-2012 Intergovernmental cooperation
agreement: joint emergency
operations plan
NCM
1340 No smoking zones in parks Not adopted
1341 Increase fire inspection fees NCM
1342 8-21-2012 Sewers and sewage disposal:
Grease removal systems
Ch. 321, Art. IV
1343 8-21-2012 Zoning, joint amendment: low
impact residential commercial
business
NI; see Ch. 415
1344 2-19-2013 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
1345 Bond NCM
1346 6-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; See Ch.
385
1347 8-20-2013 Storm sewers Ch. 350
1348 11-19-2013 Taxation: payment of real estate
taxes in installments; discounts
and penalties
Ch. 367, Art. V
1349 12-17-2013 Property maintenance: trees and
other plant growth near streets
and sidewalks amendment
Ch. 296, Art. I
1350 2-18-2014 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
1351 7-15-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
excavations in streets; sidewalk
construction, repair and
maintenance
Ch. 356, Part 2
1352 Intergovernmental agreement NCM
1353 5-22-2014 Pensions: Police Pension Plan See Ch. 55, Art.
I; reference only
1354 5-22-2014 Enforcement of ordinances:
issuance of violation tickets and
notices of violation
Ch. 24, Art. I
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:406
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1355 6-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment NLP; see Ch. 385
1356 6-17-2014 Rental property: tenant
registration amendment
Ch. 310, Art. II
1357 6-17-2014 Rental property: fire safety rental
operating licenses amendment
Ch. 310, Art. I
1358 9-16-2014 Floodplain management Ch. 202
1359 10-21-2014 General obligation note NCM
1360 10-21-2014 Sewers and sewage disposal:
sanitary sewer surcharge fee
Ch. 321, Art. V
1361 11-18-2014 Intergovernmental agreement:
Pennsylvania Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative IPMHIC)
NCM
1362 12-29-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
1363 12-28-2015 Pensions: Employee Pension Plan See Ch. 55, Art.
II; reference only
1364 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
1365 6-21-2016 Street vacation NCM
1366 12-14-2017 Storm and sewage line
maintenance program
Ch. 321, Art. VI
1367 8-16-2016 Increasing indebtedness NCM
1368 12-20-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
1369 2-21-2017 Pensions: Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art.
I; reference only
1370 7-18-2017 Franchise agreement: Comcast NCM
1371 8-15-2017 Zoning, joint amendment NI; see Ch. 415
1372 8-15-2017 Zoning, joint amendment NI; see Ch. 415
1373 8-15-2017 Zoning, joint amendment NI; see Ch. 415
1374 12-14-2017 Salaries: Council persons
amendment
Ch. 80, Art. I
1375 1-16-2018 Tax rate for 2018 NCM
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
1376 1-16-2018 Fire Safety: Commercial
Fire Safety Operating
Licenses
Ch. 198, Art.
I
2
1377 1-16-2018 Officers and Employees:
Fire Marshal
Ch. 48, Art.
IV
2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:407
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
1378 8-21-2018 Franchise Agreement:
Verizon
NCM 2
1379 9-18-2018 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I 1
1380 9-18-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement: Joint
Delinquent Tax Collection
NCM 2
1381 9-18-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement: Avalon-
Bellevue-Northgate School
Safety Agency
NCM 2
1382 Voided
1383 11-20-2018Stormwater Management Ch. 350 2
1384 12-13-2018Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 284 2
1385 12-13-2018Tax Rate NCM 2
1386 2-19-2019 Zoning, Joint Amendment NI; see Ch.
415
2
1387 2-19-2019 Zoning, Joint Amendment NI; see Ch.
415
2
1388 2-19-2019 Zoning, Joint Amendment NI; see Ch.
415
2
1389 3-19-2019 Noise Ch. 260 2
1390 4-16-2019 Fire Safety: Key Lock
Boxes
Ch. 198, Art.
II
2
§ DL-1 AVALON CODE § DL-1
1:408

Avalon-Bellevue-Ben Avon
Joint Zoning Ordinance
__________________________
For: Tri-Borough Communities
By: Environmental Planning and Design, LLC
April 2009

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I – Title, Intent and Purposes ...................................................................................................... 2000.1
§2000-100. Effectiveness.
§2000-101. Title.
§2000-102. General Intent.
§2000-104. Abrogation.
§2000-105. Repealer.
§2000-106. Severability
ARTICLE II – Interpretation ....................................................................................................................... 2000.3
§2000-200. Interpretation.
ARTICLE III – Definitions .......................................................................................................................... 2000.4
§2000-300. .Definitions.
ARTICLE IV –District Regulations ........................................................................................................... 2000.37
§2000-400. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
§2000-401. District Purposes.
§2000-402. District Boundaries.
§2000-403. Official Joint Zoning Map.
§2000-404. Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses and Uses by Special Exception.
§2000-405. Land Uses.
§2000-406. Dimensional Standards.
§2000-407. Permitted Projections into Required Setbacks.
§2000-408. Height Exceptions.
§2000-409. Accessory Buildings, Structures, Uses and Events.
§2000-410. Bufferyard.
§2000-411. Vegetation within Bufferyard.
§2000-412. Conflict Between Bufferyard and Yard Requirements.
§2000-413. Exsisting structures in Bufferyards
§2000-414. Stormwater Management Facilities within Bufferyards
§2000-415. Screening and Landscaping for Off-Street Parking and Service Structures
§2000-416. Vegetation Preservation .
§2000-417. Basement Structures.
§2000-418. Temporary Construction Trailers or Sheds
§2000-419. Outdoor Display and Storage
§2000-420. Signage.
§2000-421 Hospital Overlay.
§2000-422 BYOB Establishment
ARTICLE V - Supplemental Regulations - RESERVED
ARTICLE VI – Uses by Special Exception ................................................................................................ 2000.70
§ 2000-600. Procedure.
§ 2000-601. Apartments, Garden.
§ 2000-602. Boarding House.
§ 2000-603. Duplex.
§ 2000-604. Quadplex.
§ 2000-605. Single-Family Dwelling
§ 2000-606. Townhouse.
§ 2000-607. Agriculture Activites.
§ 2000-608. Automobile Rental.
§ 2000-609. Automobile Sales (car, truck motorcycle, boat, or trailer).
§ 2000-610. Automotive Services
§ 2000-611. Bed and Breakfast.
§ 2000-612. Billboard
§ 2000-613. Car Wash
§ 2000-614. Cemetary.
§ 2000-615. Cinema.
§ 2000-616. Community Center.
§ 2000-617. Conference Center.
§ 2000-618. Convenience Store.
§ 2000-619. Country Club/Golf Course.
§ 2000-620. Day Care Center (adult or child)
§ 2000-621. Day Care Home (adult or child).
§ 2000-622. Driving Range.
§ 2000-623. Dry Cleaning Facility
§ 2000-624. Emergency Services.
§ 2000-625. Exercise/Fitness Facility.
§ 2000-626. Farmers Market
§ 2000-627. Feed Store.
§ 2000-628. Food Packaging Facility.
§ 2000-629. Funeral Home.
§ 2000-630. Gasoline/Energy Recharge Station.
§ 2000-631. Grocery Store.
§ 2000-632. Home-Based Business.other.
§ 2000-633. Hotel/Motel.
§ 2000-634. Kennel
§ 2000-635. Nursery.
§ 2000-636. Office, Medical.
§ 2000-637. Parking Surface Lot, Private.
§ 2000-638. Parking Structure, Private.
§ 2000-629. Pet Cemetary
§ 2000-640. Place of Assembly.
§ 2000-641. Place of Worship
§ 2000-642. Post Office.
§ 2000-643. Public Facility.
§ 2000-644. Public Safety Building.
§ 2000-645. Public Works Facility.
§ 2000-646. Railroad Facility.
§ 2000-647. Recreation, Indoor (Bowling, Paintball, Billiards, Arcades, etc.)
§ 2000-648. Recreation, Outdoor (Athletic Fields, Go-Carts, etc.).
§ 2000-649. Research Facility
§ 2000-650. Roadside Stand
§ 2000-651. School, Academic.
§ 2000-652. School, Commercial.
§ 2000-653. School, Kindergarten, Pre-Nursery, etc.
§ 2000-654. Storage Facility, Self-Service
§ 2000-655. Storage Outside
§ 2000-656. Swimming Pool, Public
§ 2000-657. Tattoo/Piercing Establishment
§ 2000-658. Terminal, Freight
§ 2000-659. Terminal, Passenger.
§ 2000-660. Wholesale Buisness.
ARTICLE VII - Conditional Uses.............................................................................................................. 2000.97
§ 2000-700. Procedure.
§ 2000-701. Apartments, High-Rise.
§ 2000-702. Group Care Facilty.
§ 2000-703. Halfway House.
§ 2000-704. Mobile Home Park
§ 2000-705. Nursing Home.
§ 2000-706. Personnal Care Home
§ 2000-707. Check Cashing Services.
§ 2000-708. Cinema
§ 2000-709. Communications Tower.
§ 2000-710. Consignment Store
§ 2000-711. Correctional Facility.
§ 2000-712. Crematorium.
§2000-713. Drive-in Theater
§2000-714. Food Processing Facility.
§2000-715. Junkyard.
§2000-716. Medical Clinic
§ 2000-717. Mobile Home Park.
§ 2000-718. Oil/Gas Well
§ 2000-719. Rifle Range
§ 2000-720. Sexually Oriented Business
§ 2000-721. Tavern/Bar.
§ 2000-722. Tower,Non-Communications.
§2000-723. Water Storage
§2000-724. Wind Turbine, Commercial
§2000-725. All Other Uses.
ARTICLE VIII –Parking and Loading ..................................................................................................... 2000.115
§2000-800. Off Street Parking Requirments.
ARTICLE IX - Performance Standards .................................................................................................... 2000.124
§2000-900. Compliance Required.
§2000-901. Fire Protection.
§2000-902. Radioactivity; Electrical Disturbances.
§2000-903. Noise.
§2000-904 Vibrations.
§2000-905 Odors
§2000-906 Smoke.
§2000-907. Air Pollution.
§2000-908 Glare.
§2000-909. Erosion.
§2000-910 Water Pollution.
§2000-911 Excavation, Filling and Grading.
§2000-912 Floodway Development.
§2000-913 Disturbance Near Water Courses.
ARTICLE X - Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots ....................................................................... 2000.126
§2000-1000. Procedure.
§2000-1001. Non-Conforming Uses.
§2000-1002 Non Conforming Structures.
§2000-1003 Non-Conforming Lots
ARTICLE XI - Application and Review Process...................................................................................... 2000.128
§2000-1100. Requests for Reasonable Accommodation.
§2000-1101. Special Exception Procedures of Approval.
§2000-1102. Conditional Uses Procedure for Approval.
§2000-1103. Use of Flood-Prone Land.
ARTICLE XII – Rezoning Applications .................................................................................................. 2000.139
§2000-1200. Purpose of Rezoning Applications.
§2000-1201. Rezoning Application Forms.
§2000-1202. Review of Rezoning Applications.
§2000-1203. Application Criteria.
§2000-1204 Rezoning Applications Plans, Analyses and Reports
§2000-1205 Additional Information
ARTICLE XIII – Permits. ....................................................................................................................... 2000.143
§2000-1300. Administration and Enforcement.
§2000-1301. Building Permits.
§2000-1302. Occupancy Permits.
§2000-1303. Certificate of Zoning Compliacne.
ARTICLE XIV – Amendments................................................................................................................ 2000.149
§2000-1400. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments.
§2000-1401. Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments.
§2000-1402. Procedure for Joint Municipal Curative Amendments.
ARTICLE XV – Enforcement ............................................................................................................... 20000.153
§2000-1500. Enforcement.
ARTICLE XVI – Outline of Administrative Roles and Duties. 2000.155
§2000-1600 Joint Planning Commission.
§2000-1601.Borough Councils.
§2000-1602. Zoning Hearing Boards.
§2000-1603. Applicable Zoning Officer
ARTICLE XVII. Schedule of Fees and Financing Responsibilities 2000.163
2000.1
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE I
Title, Intent and Purposes
§2000-100. Effectiveness. The classes of Zoning Districts specified herein and the following regulations
are hereby established in full effect.
§2000-101. Title. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the “Avalon-Bellevue-Ben
Avon Joint Zoning Ordinance” in accordance with and exercising the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, for the Borough of Avalon, Borough of Bellevue and
Borough of Ben Avon (Tri Borough Communities).
§2000-102. General Intent.
A. To protect public health, safety, morals and general welfare in the Tri-Borough Communities.
B. To encourage practical and coordinated community development.
C. To establish proper density of population in the various Zoning Districts and provide adequate
light, air and amenity.
D. To facilitate the provision of adequate public highways and streets, vehicle parking and loading,
public transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, public and private schools, parks and open
spaces and other public requirements, such as public utilities and rights-of-way.
E. To prevent the overcrowding or improper or incompatible development or use of land and to
prevent blighting conditions and congestion or hazard in travel and transportation.
F. To secure safety of health, life and property from fire, flood, panic, noise, noxious fumes,
explosion and other dangers.
G. To preserve forests, floodplains, steep hillsides, recreation and other natural resource lands from
conflict with intense development and from erosion, and to manage the release of stormwater to
minimize downstream flooding.
H. To facilitate generally orderly and compatible development and redevelopment within each Tri-
Borough Community and public programming of improvements.
§2000-103. Community Development Objectives.
In addition to the general intent of this Ordinance, the following specific Community Development
Objectives have been considered as a basis upon which the regulations and controls of this Ordinance are
derived:
A. The present atmosphere of the Boroughs should be maintained and development channeled into a
logical sequence rather than permitted to occur in a haphazard arrangement.
B. Growth and redevelopment should be channeled into areas where adequate infrastructure is
located.
C. Within the capability of existing or anticipated public facilities, services and streets, a range of
housing types and densities oriented towards the changing needs of those seeking housing in the
Boroughs should be encouraged.
2000.2
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
D. Interconnecting streets shall serve the development of the Boroughs in a logical and continuous
manner. Planning shall be the responsibility of the Planning Commission and streets shall meet
the standards of construction set forth by the Boroughs.
E. Development standards should encourage a variety of site design opportunities while at the same
time maintaining adequate health and safety standards.
F. Commercial growth should be related to the needs of the residential and institutional activities in
the Boroughs adjoining municipalities.
G. Non-residential uses should be encouraged to develop to complement and minimize impacts on
surrounding residential uses. Points of access to commercial developments on the same highway
should be designed to avoid congestion.
H. Recreational development shall provide for the needs of the Borough and open space areas shall
be located to serve the maximum number of residents.
I. Objectives of the communities’ Comprehensive Plan shall be considered as part of zoning
activities, land use relationships and infrastructure services.
§2000-104. Abrogation. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, other than
enumerated in §2000-105 herein or interfere with any existing ordinance or enactment or with any rule,
regulation, or permit adopted or issued. If this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or land, then the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
§2000-105. Repealer. Ordinances __, as amended, are hereby expressly repealed; provided, further that
nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any
rights acquired or liability incurred, or any permit issued or approval granted or any cause or causes of
action arising prior to the enactment of this Ordinance. All ordinances or parts of ordinances and all
resolutions or parts of resolutions which are inconsistent herewith by virtue of references or incorporation
of requirements contained in the pre-existing Zoning Ordinances as amended shall, as nearly as possible,
be construed to reference this Ordinance.
§2000-106. Severability.
A. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional
or invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof, other than the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
B. In any challenge to the validity of the joint municipal zoning ordinance, the court shall consider
the validity of the ordinance as it applies to the entire area of its jurisdiction as enacted and shall
not limit consideration to any single constituent municipality.
2000.3
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE II
Interpretation
§2000-200. Interpretation.
A. In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this Ordinance and any other ordinance or
regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
B. In interpreting and applying this Ordinance, its provisions shall be considered minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
C. In interpreting the language of this Ordinance to determine the extent of the restriction upon the
use of property, the language shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning
of the language written and enacted by the Tri-Borough Communities, in favor of the landowner
and/or developer and against any implied extension of the restriction.
2000.4
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§2000-300. Definitions.
A. Certain words used in this Ordinance are defined below. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular. The
word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive.
B. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words, terms or phrases shall have the specific
meanings indicated:
Access: A means of vehicular or pedestrian approach, entry to, or exit from a
property.
Accessory Dwelling: A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with and clearly
subordinate to a primary dwelling unit, whether a part of the same
structure as the primary dwelling unit or a detached dwelling unit on the
same lot.
Accessory Use: A use subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use; is
subordinate to and contributes to the convenience or necessity of the
principal use; and is located on the same lot with the principal use or
main building.
Accessory A structure subordinate to the principal structure(s) on a lot and
Structure: used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
structure(s).
Administrator: The designated employee and/or contact representing a Borough to be
the administrative head of community planning activities.
Agricultural Farming, including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best
Activities: management practices, seeding, cultivating, keeping of poultry and
animals less than 200 pounds in weight or harvesting for the production
of food and fiber products (except commercial logging and timber
harvesting).
Alley: A public or private vehicular drive permanently reserved as a secondary
means of access to an abutting property.
Amendment: A change in the wording, context or substance of this Ordinance or a
change in the zoning or district boundaries of the Official Zoning Map to
be made a part of this title.
Amphitheater: A structure or natural formation suited for seating people on a sloped
area for the viewing of performances.
Area: The two-dimensional measurement of space between known lines or
boundaries.
2000.5
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Art Gallery: A business establishment engaged in the sale, loan or display of art
books, paintings, sculpture or other works of art.
Assembly or See Industry, Light.
Fabrication Facility:
Assisted Living Any premise in which food, shelter, personal care, assistance or
Residence: supervision and supplemental health care services are provided for a
period exceeding twenty four (24) hours for four (4) or more adults who
are not relatives of the operator and who require assistance or
supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet, financial
management, evacuation from the residence in the event of an
emergency or medication prescribed for self-administration.
Automobile: Any device in, upon which or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street, excepting tractors, agricultural
machinery, devices moved by human power or used upon stationary rails
or tracks. An automobile refers to any vehicle licensed as a passenger
vehicle and under five thousand (5,000) pounds delivered weight. Any
other vehicle refers to those including, but not limited to, motor homes,
recreational vehicles, trailers, and boats.
Automobile Rental: Leasing or renting of automobiles, motorcycles and light load vehicles.
Automobile Sales: A business establishment used for the display or sale of automobiles,
non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles
and/or or boats. Such use may also include the servicing or repair of
vehicles of the brand of vehicles sold at the establishment.
Automotive A business establishment used for the repair and maintenance of
Services: automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or similar vehicles.
Awning: Any rigid frame with a membrane covering which is attached to and
projects from a building.
Bakery: A business establishment where breads, cakes, pastries, and the like are
produced for on- or off-premise retail sale/distribution and primarily for
off-premise consumption.
Balcony: An elevated platform that projects from the wall of a structure and is
enclosed by a parapet or railing.
Bank: See Financial Institution.
Basement: The space enclosed by the foundation or ground floor walls of a building
partly or wholly below the average level of the adjacent ground. A
basement shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height
measurements unless one-half (1/2) or more of its height is above the
average finished grade level of the lot.
2000.6
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Bed and Breakfast: An owner-occupied dwelling where limited overnight lodging and
breakfast is provided for compensation to guests. Overnight lodging
occurs within individual sleeping rooms which do not contain cooking
facilities. The dwelling may or may not include a publicly accessible
restaurant as related use.
Billboard: An off-premises sign that advertises an establishment, activity, person,
product, or service that is unrelated to or unavailable on the premises
where the billboard is located.
Boarding House: A building arranged or used for overnight lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation by transient residents arriving upon their own
accord. Overnight loading occurs in individual sleeping rooms with no
cooking facilities. A boarding house may include common areas and a
common kitchen available for use by residents.
Borough: The Borough of Avalon, the Borough of Bellevue and/or the Borough of
Ben Avon.
Buffer/Bufferyard: A strip of land, together with a specified type and amount of planting
thereon, and any structures such as fences or walls which may be
required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between
them.
Building: Any fully enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls, intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment or belongings.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
proposed finished grade at the front of the building to (1) highest point of
the roof for flat roofs, (2) the deck lines for mansard roofs, (3) the mean
height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, and (4)
the highest vertical point for other types and styles and roofs.
Building Permit: A certificate attesting that a project has been reviewed and approved by
the applicable Borough for the construction, major repair, alteration or
renovation, or addition of a building or structure in accordance with this
Ordinance.
Business Services: Establishments engaged in rendering services to businesses and offices
on a fee or contract basis, including but not limited to advertising and
mailing; data processing; secretarial; financial; photocopying; quick
printing and fax; office supplies; building maintenance; equipment
servicing, rental, leasing and sales; employment service; management
and consulting services; and other similar business services.
BYOB Establishment: Any restaurant, except that which can be defined as an adult facility, not
licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, wherein patrons
twenty-one (21) years of age and older may consume alcoholic beverages
2000.7
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
which said patrons have carried onto the premises and where said
restaurant has obtained a valid amusement permit by the applicable
Borough for such operation.
Cafeteria: Any establishment where food and/ or beverages are prepared, served
and consumed, where food and/or beverages are selected by a customer
while going through a serving line and taken to a table for consumption.
Canopy: A rigid, multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal or other material
and supported by a building at one or more points and/or by columns or
posts embedded in the ground at other points. Any structure that extends
above any adjacent parapet or roof of supporting building is not included
within the definition of canopy.
Car Wash: A building or structure used for the purpose of cleaning or reconditioning
the exterior and interior surfaces of automobiles and/or trucks but not
including an incidental one-bay washing facility in a gasoline service
station where washing facilities are accessory to the operation of said
service station. A self-operated vehicular laundering facility not
requiring attendants or employees, regardless of capacity, is also
considered to be a car wash. No vehicle repairs or sale of petroleum,
fuels or lubricants shall occur in association with the car wash.
Carport: A structure with a roof and no more than three (3) sides that is used to
cover a single vehicle.
Catering Service: A business establishment which prepares food or meals on-site and
subsequently delivers the product off premise.
Cemetery: A lot used for, or intended to be used for, the burial of human remains,
including, but not limited to, columbarium, mausoleums, and mortuaries
when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within its
boundaries.
Certificate of Use A certificate issued and enforced by the Applicable Zoning Officer upon
and Occupancy: completion of the construction of a new building or structure or upon a
change or conversion of the structure or use of a building which certifies
that all requirements and regulations, including this Ordinance, have
been satisfied.
Check Cashing A business establishment uninsured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Establishment: Corporation (FDIC), that engages, in whole or in part, in exchanging
cash for checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial
paper serving the same purpose.
Cinema: A building with a single or multiple movie theaters, each theater (not
including adult movie theater or adult movie house) capable of providing
performances independent of the others in the building. A cinema may
contain internal common areas for box office or ticket sales, lobby areas,
restrooms, concession stands, signs and marquee displays, and other
2000.8
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
service and maintenance facilities.
Clear Sight Line: An unoccupied space extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines and extending ten (10) feet from the abutting street
right-of-way. Such space shall remain clear of obstructions between
three (3) and twelve (12) feet above grade.
College: An academic institution that provides full-time or part-time educational
or training curriculum that exceeds a secondary education.
Communications Any device used for the transmission or reception of radio,
Antenna: television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service,
or any other wireless communications signal owned or operated by any
person or entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) to operate such a device. This definition shall not include a
satellite dish less than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter or television
antennas or amateur radio equipment including without limitation ham or
citizen band radio antennas.
Communications Any ground-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof,
Tower: including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, or masts, intended
primarily for the purpose of mounting a communications antenna or
similar apparatus above ground.
Community Center: A building where residents of any age may carry on cultural,
recreational, or social activities within interior and/or exterior facilities.
Conditional Use: An authorized use which may be granted only by a Borough Council
pursuant to express standards and criteria prescribed in this Ordinance
after review and recommendations by the Joint Planning Commission
and a hearing conducted by Borough Council pursuant to public notice.
Condominium: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and
the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by
the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common element are vested in the unit owners.
Conference Center: A building used for conventions, conferences, seminars, product
displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with
accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, and food and
beverage preparation and service for on-premise consumption.
Consignment Store: A business establishment in which used personal items such as, but not
limited to, clothes, jewelry/artifacts or small furniture are resold through
a broker for the owner at an agreed-upon price.
Consistency An agreement or correspondence between matters being compared which
denotes a reasonable rational, similar, connection or relationship.
Construction: The erection, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion,
2000.9
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
alteration, improvement or relocation of a building or structure including
the placement of mobile homes.
Contractor's A lot or part thereof used by a contractor or builder to store
Storage Yard: equipment and materials or where a contractor performs shop or
assembly work. A contractor’s storage yard may or may not include a
building or structure and excludes a construction site or any
establishment otherwise defined or classified by this Ordinance.
Convenience Store: A business establishment that offers for sale a limited line of groceries
and household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood,
excluding the sale of gasoline/energy supply for motor vehicles.
Correctional A building used for the detention, confinement, treatment or
Facility: rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or
criminal law. Such facilities include an adult detention center, juvenile
delinquency center, jail, and prison. Such facilities house persons who
are in the custody of city/county/law enforcement, and the facilities are
typically government owned.
Council, Borough: The governing body of each of the Tri-Borough Communities.
Country Club/ A recreational and/or social establishment whose principal use is
Golf Course: golfing and that may include one or more of the following accessory
uses: a clubhouse and/or restaurant, locker rooms, pro shop, swimming
pool, non-commercial driving range and facilities for racquet sports.
Crematorium: A building containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for
use in the act of cremation of human remains.
Cultural Center: A building that provides for the cultural interpretation of a region or
locale, such as but not limited to museums, auditoriums, art galleries and
libraries.
Day Care Center Any premise, which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
(Adult): Welfare as a “day care center” where care is provided for any number of
adults, who are not relatives of the operator, at any one (1) time for part
of a twenty-four (24)-hour day.
Day Care Center, A business establishment, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Child: Pennsylvania, located within a building which is not used as a dwelling
unit, for the care during part of a twenty-four (24) hour day of children
under the age of sixteen (16).
Day Care Home, A business establishment, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Child: Pennsylvania, located within a dwelling, for the care on a regular basis
during part of a twenty-four (24) hour day of not more than six (6)
children under sixteen (16) years of age, excluding care provided to
children who are relatives of the provider. Such use shall be secondary
to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and persons who do not
2000.10
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
reside in the dwelling shall not be employed.
Day Care Home A residential dwelling in which care is provided for up to six (6) people,
(Youth): between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years of age, for less than twentyfour
(24) hours per day provided that such establishment is licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or Allegheny County as
appropriate.
Deck: A flat, floored, unenclosed, elevated structure adjoining a building or
another structure.
Density: A term used to express the allowable number of dwelling units per net
acre of land.
Distribution See Industry, Light.
Center:
Dormitory: A building used as a group living facility for students or other groups as
an associated use to a college, university, boarding school or other
similar educational use. Board may or may not be provided. Sleeping
rooms do not contain cooking facilities and no common kitchen is
available to residents.
Drive-In Theater: A lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to
the showing of moving pictures on a paid admission basis to patrons
seated in automobiles.
Drive-Thru: Any accessory use which involves a window, service lane, bay, or other
facility where customers are provided services while inside their
vehicles. Such uses include but are not limited to “drive-in” or “drivethru”
windows at fast food restaurants, pharmacies, financial institutions
and car washes.
Driveway: A private vehicular access connecting a dwelling unit, garage, carport,
other building or parking space with a public street or alley.
Driving Range: An area of land on which golfers can simultaneously practice their skills
from common tees and/or common greens.
Dry Cleaning A business establishment that cleans fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or
Facility: articles of any sort by immersion and agitation or by immersions only, in
volatile solvents including, but not by way of limitation, solvents of the
petroleum distillate type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and
the processes incidental thereto.
Dry Cleaning A business establishment maintained for the pickup and the on-site
Customer Services: delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry without operation of any laundry
or dry-cleaning equipment or machinery.
2000.11
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed for and used exclusively for
residential occupancy.
Apartment: A building containing at least three (3) dwellings for rent,
sometimes designed around courts or common open spaces,
often having private balconies or patios.
Apartment, Garden: A building that contains apartments that does not exceed three
(3) stories and where each dwelling is usually accessed from a
common hall, although individual entrances may be provided.
Apartment, High Rise: A building, which is four (4) or more stories in
height, which contains dwellings for rent and where
units typically share a common entrance and/or common
interior corridor.
Duplex: Two (2) dwellings immediately adjacent to each other and which
share a common wall between the units or are on top of one
another with each unit having direct access to the outside.
Mobilehome A transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
Multi-Family A building containing three (3) or more individual
Dwelling: dwellings.
Quadplex: A single building designed for or occupied exclusively as
residences, where the structure is divided by two (2) common
party walls into four (4) distinct dwelling units where each
dwelling unit has direct access to the outdoors.
Single-Family A detached residential dwelling which is the only principal
Dwelling: structure on the lot, designed exclusively for and occupied
exclusively by one (1) family and containing one (1) dwelling
unit.
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling, with a private entrance from the
outside, which is part of a structure that includes dwellings
attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having a
totally exposed front and rear wall.
Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more habitable rooms which are intended or designed to be
occupied as a residence by one family, with facilities for living, sleeping,
cooking and dining.
Emergency Services: An area utilized for the maintenance, fueling, storage, dispatching or
2000.12
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
parking of vehicles and/or equipment providing rescue or ambulance
services, excepting rescue services offered from a fire station, and where
the area may or may not include buildings utilized in connection
therewith.
Engineer: A professional engineer licensed as such by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also
include the painting of signs on walls, windows, and doors.
Essential Services: A building or structure used for the distribution, collection and/or
maintenance of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, digital
telephone, cable or water transmission or distribution systems, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, street signs, cable
television, or other telecommunications transmission lines provided by
public or private entities, and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general
welfare, but not including buildings. Communication facilities shall not
be considered essential services for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Establishment: Any organization, including a business, whether private, public,
governmental, social, or otherwise, together with its owners, directors,
employees, members, merchandise, inventory, and equipment, founded
for a specific purpose.
Exercise/Fitness A business establishment where passive or active exercises and related
Club: activities are performed for the purpose of physical fitness, improved
circulation or flexibility and/or weight control. The activities shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
Facility: An improved lot or building that accommodates a specific land use.
Family: A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage,
adoption or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit and a single
housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan
based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization
and stability. If not related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship,
such a group shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) individuals. The
term “Family” shall not include persons living together in a Halfway
House, Group Care Facility, Boarding House or Personal Care Home as
defined herein.
Family Group: Any number of householders and up to a maximum of five additional
persons who reside in a “group home” and are in the care of the
householders for the purpose of receiving special supervision or other
specialized services (but not including medical services) in a residential
2000.13
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
environment because of a physical or mental handicap. For the purposes
of this Ordinance a householder shall refer to the supervisor of a family
group.
Farmers Market: A building and/or structured open space area in which the sale of fresh
agricultural products directly to the consumer and where the vendors are
generally individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or have
taken the same on consignment for retail trade.
Feed Store: A business establishment where agricultural and/or home/garden
supplies are sold.
Fence: A constructed barrier of acceptable material or combination of
acceptable materials erected to enclose or screen an area for land or
portions of a building or structure.
Financial Any trust company, savings bank, industrial bank, savings and loan
Institution: association, building and loan association, commercial bank, credit
union, federal association, investment company, or other business
association, which is chartered under federal or state law, and which
solicits, receives, or accepts money or its equivalent on deposit and loans
money as a regular business.
Flea Market: A building and/or structure or open space area in which stalls or sales
areas are set aside and rented or otherwise provided, and which are
intended for use by various unrelated individuals to sell articles that are
either homemade, homegrown, handcrafted, old, obsolete or antique and
may include the selling of new or used goods at retail by businesses or
individuals who are generally engaged in the retail trade. Rummage sales
and garage sales are not considered to be flea markets.
Flex Space: A building that can be subdivided for use by multiple tenants for
business activities related to light industrial, warehousing, and associated
office/ administrative space.
Floodplain: A relatively flat or low area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse
which is subject to partial or complete inundation as defined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of said
agency’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Floodway: The channel of a river and adjacent land area that must be reserved in
order to discharge the waters of the base flood (100-year flood) so that
confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not result in
substantially higher flood levels and flow velocities.
Floor Area Ratio: The ratio of gross floor area of all buildings and structures on a lot to
total lot area.
Food Packaging A business establishment for the storage, assembly,
Facility: packaging, and distribution of prepared foodstuffs, and not including any
2000.14
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
food processing preparation.
Food Processing A business establishment producing or processing foods for
Facility: human consumption and certain related products. Includes: (1) bakery
products, sugar and confectionery products (except facilities that produce
goods only for on-site sales with no wider distribution; (2) dairy products
processing; (3) fats and oil products (not including rendering plants); (4)
fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, and related processing; (5) grain
mill products and by-products; (6) meat, poultry, and seafood canning,
curing, and byproduct processing (not including facilities that also
slaughter animals); and (7) miscellaneous food preparation from raw
products.
Forestry: The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in
accordance with accepted silvicultural principals, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting, and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
Front Line of Face of a building adjacent and nearest to the front lot line.
Building:
Funeral Home: A building, including mortuaries, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, that contains a suitable storage room for the deceased and
may include embalming facilities and that may also provide rooms for
the display of and burial ceremonies of the deceased.
Garage, An accessory building or a portion of the principal building,
Residential: enclosed on no less than three (3) sides with an overhead door, not being
accessible to the general public and designed or used for shelter of
storage of private vehicles and personal property of the occupants of the
principal building.
Garden Center: See Nursery.
Gas Well: See Oil/Gas Well.
Gasoline/Energy Any building, structure or area of land used for storing and dispensing
Recharge Station: flammable liquids, combustible liquids, liquefied flammable gas,
flammable gas or other energy source to power motor vehicles. Sale of
retail goods/services may also be provided as a secondary activity on the
lot.
General Consistency, That which exhibits consistency.
Generally Consistent:
Gift Shop: Retail stores where items such as art, antiques, jewelry books and notions
are sold.
Greenhouse: A business establishment where the principal activity is the growing of
plants for wholesale distribution and includes outside storage and
2000.15
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
display.
Grocery Store: A business establishment where most of the floor area is devoted to the
sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which
typically also offers other home care and personal care products, and
which is substantially larger and carries a broader range of merchandise
than a convenience store.
Group Care A business establishment designated as such or as a Group Care Home
Facility: that provides room and board to persons who are residents by virtue of
receiving supervised specialized services limited to health, social or
rehabilitative services provided by a governmental agency, their licensed
or certified agents, or any other responsible nonprofit social services
corporation. Supervision shall be provided by responsible adults whose
number shall be determined and certified by the sponsoring agency.
However, one responsible adult shall be available for the residents on a
24-hour basis. The residents of the facility need not be related to each
other; however, the number of residents shall not exceed five (5) persons.
This facility shall not include business or professional offices (other than
incidental offices), business activities, fraternal or social clubs, hospitals,
rooming or boarding homes.
Gross Floor Area: The sum of floor areas of a building as measured to the outside surfaces
of exterior walls and/or all areas, either interior or exterior, intended for
conduct of a use.
Habitable Floor Area: The sum of the floor areas of a dwelling unit, as measured to the outside
surfaces of exterior walls and including all rooms used for habitation,
such as living room, dining room, kitchen, basement, bedroom,
bathroom, family room, closets, hallways, stairways, and foyers, but not
including cellars or attics, service or utility rooms, nor unheated areas
such as enclosed porches.
Halfway House: A licensed home for inmates on release for more restrictive
custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more
restrictive custodial confinement, where supervision,
rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream
residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. A
halfway house also includes a dwelling unit occupied on a transient or
short-term basis by persons assigned by a court of law, or referred by a
public, semi-public, profit or nonprofit entity, and managed by or on
behalf of a public, semi-public, profit or nonprofit entity responsible for
the occupants’ care, safety, conduct, counseling and supervision, where
the residents reside there for purposes of transitional alcohol, drug or
substance abuse recovery, shelter for battered persons and their children,
maternity homes, community re-entry services following incarceration,
prison assignment, house arrest or other court-ordered treatment, the
housing of persons accepted for residence on the basis of their status as
juvenile offenders or delinquents, and other similar short-term supervised
assignments.
2000.16
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Hardware Store: A business establishment with less than thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet of gross floor area, primarily engaged in the retail sale of various
basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders’ hardware, plumbing and
electrical supplies, paint and glass, housewares and household
appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery. If greater than 30,000 square
feet, such a facility is a home improvement center.
Health Care A business establishment, whether public or private, principally engaged
Facility: in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of
human diseases, pain, injury, or physical condition that include
diagnostic treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care center,
nursing home, intermediate care facility, life care facility, outpatient
laboratory, or central services facility serving one or more such
institutions.
Height: See Building Height.
Heliport: A structure for the landing or takeoff of helicopters including operations
facilities, such as maintenance, loading and unloading, storage, fueling,
or terminal facilities.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirement for individual listing on the National
Register, individually listed on a local inventory of historic places, at
either the County or Borough level, that has been certified by an
approved state program or determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
Home A business establishment of more than thirty thousand (30,000) square
Improvement feet gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic
Center: hardware lines and building supply materials, such as tools, builders
hardware, lumber, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances,
garden supplies, and cutlery.
Home-Based A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
Business, No Impact: accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential
dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic,
whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to
or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with
residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements.
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
2000.17
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television
reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
Home A business carried on entirely within a building whose principal use is
Based Business, a single family dwelling but does not meet the requirements of a no-
Other impact home based business.
Hospice: An organization licensed under this act to provide a coordinated program
of palliative and supportive services provided in a home, independent
living environment or inpatient setting which provided for physical,
psychological, social and spiritual care of dying persons and their
families. Services are provided by a medically directed interdisciplinary
team of professionals and volunteers, and bereavement care is available
to the family following death of the patient. The term shall also be
deemed to refer to services provided by such an organization.
Hospital: An institution having an organized medical staff established for the
purpose of providing to inpatients, by or under the supervision of
physicians, diagnostic and therapeutic services for the care of persons
who are injured, disabled, pregnant, diseased, sick or mentally ill, or
rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of persons who are injured,
disabled, pregnant, diseases, sick or mentally ill. The term includes
facilities for the diagnosis and treatment of disorders within the scope of
specific medical specialties, but not facilities caring exclusively for the
mentally ill.
Hotel: A business establishment offering overnight accommodations to the
general public and which provide additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. The main entrance to each
hotel guestroom must be accessible from the interior of the building.
Household: Any group of persons, not necessarily related by blood, marriage, or
legal adoption, who reside in the same dwelling unit.
Impervious Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb or
Surface: retain water, including but not limited to building roofs, parking and
driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks, paved recreation areas, golf
courses, swimming pools, and the like.
Industry, Heavy: An enterprise engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products that are predominately from extracted or raw
materials, or a use engaged in storage of or manufacturing processes
2000.18
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing
processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
offensive conditions.
Industry, Light: An enterprise engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding,
assembly, packaging, treatment, or fabrication of materials and products,
from processed or previously manufactured materials. Light industry is
capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of
the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration,
odor, etc. A machine shop is included in this category. Also included is
the manufacturing of apparel, electrical appliances, electronic equipment,
camera and photographic equipment, ceramic products, cosmetics and
toiletries, business machines, fish tanks and supplies, food, paper
products (but not the manufacture of paper from pulpwood), musical
instruments, medical appliances, tools or hardware, plastic products (but
not the processing of raw materials), wood products, electrical
instruments, pharmaceuticals or optical goods, bicycles, and any other
product of a similar nature.
Institution: A business establishment that provides a public service and is operated
by a federal, state, or local government, public or private utility, public or
private school or college, church, public agency, tax-exempt
organization, or non-profit organization.
Joint Planning The Planning Commission of the Tri-Borough Communities.
Commission:
Joint Zoning Map: A part of this Ordinance, the official map of the Zoning Districts of the
Tri-Borough Communities, showing precisely the boundaries and title of
each Zoning District.
Joint Zoning The Chapter of each of the Tri-Borough Communities’ Official
Ordinance: Code governing zoning regulations.
Junkyard: A building and/or structure or lot, or part thereof, used primarily for the
collecting, storage, or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or
reclaimable material, or for the collection, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or two (2) or more unregistered, inoperable
motor vehicles.
Kennel: Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where
domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, are boarded, trained, or bred.
Landfill: Any lot licensed as such by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PA DEP) for the disposal of solid waste, other
than hazardous waste, as defined and regulated by Federal Statute.
Landowner: Any person, agent, firm, corporation, or partnership that alone, jointly, or
severally with others: (1) has legal or equitable title to any premises,
dwelling, or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual
2000.19
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
possession thereof; or (2) has charge, care, or control of any premises,
dwelling or dwelling unit, as agent of the owner or as executor,
administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the beneficial owner.
The person shown on the records of the deed(s) as recorded by with the
Allegheny County Department of Real Estate or designated equivalent of
the county to be the owner of a particular property shall be presumed to
be the person in control of that property.
Landscaping: The modifications of the landscape for an aesthetic or functional purpose
or to mitigate the impacts of development. It includes the preservation of
existing vegetation and the continued maintenance thereof together with
grading and installation of minor structures and appurtenances.
Landscaping Business: A business principally engaged in the decorative and functional
alteration, planting and maintenance of grounds. Such a business may
engage in the installation and construction of underground improvements
but only to the extent that such improvements (e.g., drainage facilities)
are accessory to the principal business and are necessary to support or
sustain the landscaped surface of the ground.
Launching Ramp: A constructed or altered segment of the riverbank or shore used for the
purpose of enabling a recreational boat to be placed into the water from a
trailer or other apparatus used to transport or store the boat.
Laundromat: A business establishment where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing
or other fabrics in machines owned and maintained by the
establishment’s owner.
Library: A building containing printed and pictorial material for study, reference,
or entertainment and that is open to the public or connected with a
permitted educational use and is not conducted as a private for-profit
business.
Life Care Facility: A health care facility for the transitional residency of elderly and/or
disabled persons, progressing from independent living such as in singlefamily,
assisted living, personal care, nursing home to hospice care units
to congregate living where residents share common meals and
culminating in a full health such as a continuing care nursing home
facility.
Loading Berth/ An off-street lot for the temporary parking of a commercial
Space: vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as
a single principal use.
Lot Area: The total area within the lot, excluding the area within any street right of
way.
2000.20
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Lot, Corner: Any lot situated adjacent to the intersection of two (2) or more streets
having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees. A corner lot shall maintain front yard requirements along
the street upon which the principal building faces.
Lot Coverage: The portion or percentage of the lot area covered by impervious surfaces.
Lot Frontage: That part of a lot (a lot line) abutting on a street or way; except that the
ends of incomplete streets, or streets without a turning circle, shall not be
considered frontage.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line, Front That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street,
and in the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension on a
public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot line
shall be designated by the owner and filed with the borough.
Lot Line, Rear: The boundary of a lot that is more distant from and is most nearly
parallel to the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot, Non-
Conforming: A lot, the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or
amendment of this ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption or amendment.
Lot of Record: An area of land designated as a lot by a plan which has been recorded in
the Allegheny County Department of Real Estate, or its designated
equivalent
Lot, Through: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street (also
referred to as Double Frontage).
Marina: A business establishment for secure mooring of boats, including facilities
for storage and repair of boats and sale of boating supplies and fuel, for
use by the owner or resident of the lot, and those other than the owner or
resident of the lot, upon which the facility is located.
Marquee: Any type of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a
building above an entrance and extending over a street or sidewalk, or
part thereof, and not supported by ground posts.
Massage Therapy Any business establishment or part thereof where massage services are
Establishment: provided by a person having graduated from a massage therapy training
program approved by the authorizing board within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or equivalent agency if trained in another state; by a person
2000.21
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
certified through a massage therapy certification examination approved
by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies; by a person
certified through the National Certification Board for Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork; or by a practitioner or member of either of the
American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated
Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), or International Massage
Association (IMA).
Medical Clinic: A business establishment or institution primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical, or other services to individuals, including the offices
of physicians, dentists, and other health care practitioners; medical and
dental laboratories; out-patient care facilities; blood banks; and oxygen
and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services; excluding
hospital
Mixed-Use: A single property containing more than one type of land use or a single
development of more than one building and use, where the different
types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified
complementary whole, and functionally integrated to the use of shared
vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas.
Mobilehome lot A parcel of land in a mobilehome park, improved with the necessary
utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erections
thereon of a single mobilehome.
Mobilehome park A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and
improved that it contains two or more mobilehome lots for the placement
thereon of mobilehomes.
Mortuary: See Funeral Home.
Motel: A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units,
used as individual sleeping units with separate exterior entrances and
designed for year-round occupancy, primarily for transient automobile
travelers. Structures shall provide for accessory off-street parking areas.
Supervision is provided in shifts by 24 hour on-site management.
Municipal: Anything of or pertaining to the Borough of Avalon, the Borough of
Bellevue, or the Borough of Ben Avon, its government, organizational
structure, services or facilities.
Municipal Use: Any building, structure or use of land by a Borough or a municipal
authority/commission created by a Borough Council.
Museum: A business establishment or institution for the purpose of creating,
acquiring, studying, interpreting, exhibiting, or selling to the public for
its instruction and enjoyment a collection of historic, pictorial or
sculptural objects.
Nursery: Building(s) and lands associated therewith, for the growing and sale of
flowers, fruits, vegetables, plants, shrubs, trees, or similar vegetation
2000.22
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
together with gardening tools and implements which are sold at retail
from such building or lot to the general public.
Nursing Home: Any institution or facility in which nursing care and related medical or
other health services are provided for a period exceeding twenty four
(24) hours, for two (2) or more individuals, who are not relatives of the
owner or administrator, who may be acutely ill but not in need of
hospitalization, but who, because of age, illness, disease, injury,
convalescence or physical or medical infirmity need such care.
Obstruction: Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel, rectiliation, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or manner in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or flood-prone area of water either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or is
placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to
the damage of life and property.
Occupancy Permit: A certificate issued by the Applicable Zoning Officer attesting to that the
proposed use or reuse of premises is in accordance with the requirements
of this Ordinance or with a previously issued building permit and may be
legally occupied.
Occupant: A resident or tenant of a dwelling unit or commercial facility on a
temporary or permanent basis.
Office, Medical: A building where one (1) or more licensed medical professionals provide
diagnosis and treatment to the general public without surgical
procedures, overnight accommodation, or pharmacy. Includes such uses
as reception areas, offices, consultation rooms, and x-ray, providing that
all such uses have access only from the interior of the structure.
Office, Professional/ A building where recognized professional(s) such as doctors,
Administrative: lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate brokers, insurance agents, and
others who, through training, are qualified to perform services of a
professional nature; and other offices used primarily for accounting,
corresponding, research, editing, or other administrative functions, but
not including banks or other financial institutions.
Oil/Gas Well: A hole or shaft sunk into the earth to tap an underground supply of oil or
natural gas, including all above ground apparatuses and structures which
facilitate the extraction, storage, metering and conveyance of said
substance.
Outside Storage: See Storage, Outside.
Park: Land that is designated and used by the public for active or passive
recreation. Recreation activities and improvements associated with a
park include, but are not limited to:
2000.23
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. Play areas/playgrounds;
B. Outdoor tennis courts;
C. Outdoor basketball courts;
D. Athletic/sports fields;
E. Golf Courses;
F. Nature trails;
G. Picnic areas; and
H. Swimming pools.
Parking Lot, Any public or private lot utilized to meet the parking
Surface: requirements of this ordinance, including parking aisles that provide
access to the parking spaces, but excluding any streets or driveways that
provide access to the parking lot.
Parking Structure: A building of two or more stories, whether privately or publicly owned,
used for parking more than four automobiles.
Pawn Shop: See Consignment Store.
Performance A building where a performance of work or role may be rehearsed
Studio: and/or performed.
Person: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association, or any
city or state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
Personal Care Any premise in which food, shelter and personal assistance or
Home: supervision are provided for a period exceeding twenty four (24) hours
for four (4) or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do
not require the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility but who
do require assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing,
diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an
emergency or medication prescribed for self administration.
Personal Services: A business establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the
provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature.
Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty and barber shops,
shoe repair shops, and tailor shops.
Pet Cemetery: A non-human cemetery in which household pets may be buried.
Permitted Use: An authorized use allowed by right, which may be granted by the
Applicable Zoning Officer upon compliance with the requirements of
this Ordinance.
Pharmacy: A business establishment that dispenses drugs by prescription. The term
pharmacy may also include the provision of a limited selection of house
ware and foodstuffs.
Place of Assembly: A building and/or lot that is designed for the assembly or collection of
2000.24
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
persons, for civic political, religious, educational, or social purposes, and
where recreation, amusement, or dining may occur as accessory
activities.
Place of Worship: A building and/or lot where people regularly observe, practice, or
participate in religious or spiritual services, meeting and/or activities.
Planning A designated member of the Tri-Borough Communities Joint
Commissioner: Planning Commission.
Plat: A map or layout plan that indicates the location, boundaries, and
ownership of any land, lot, tract, or parcel that has been or is planned to
be subdivided. The individual properties shall conform to lots as
designated on the Official Zoning Map.
Porch: A covered area adjoining an entrance to a building and usually with a
separate roof.
Post Office: An establishment owned and maintained by the United States Postal
Service for the purpose of distributing mail to the public.
Preservation: Maintenance in an existing or natural state in order to prevent
environmental or structural degradation of a functional or visual nature.
Private: Designed or intended for one's exclusive use
Principal Building: A building which contains conducts the main or principal use of the lot
on which said building is situated.
Principal Use: The primary use(s) of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
Print and Publishing A facility for the custom reproduction of written or graphic materials
Facility: on a custom order basis for individuals or businesses. Typical processes
include, but are not limited to, photocopying, blueprint, facsimile
sending and receiving and including offset printing.
Professional Persons who provide expert or professional advice, including, but
Consultants: not limited to architects, attorneys, certified public accountants,
engineers, geologists, land surveyors, landscape architects or planners.
Public: Anything owned or operated by the federal government, state
government or any political subdivision thereof.
Public Hearing: A public hearing held pursuant to public notice intended to inform and
obtain public comment and take evidence, prior to taking action in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Public Meeting: A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388,
No. 84 as amended), known as the “Sunshine Act.”
2000.25
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Public Notice: A notice published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than thirty (30) days and the second publication shall not be less
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
Public (Borough) Any building, structure or other such facility being used by or for the
Facility: governmental or infrastructure activities of the Borough of Avalon,
Borough of Bellevue and/or Borough of Ben Avon.
Public Safety Any building and/or lot maintained for fire protection, law enforcement,
Facility: emergency medical services or other public safety service.
Public Works A facility or agency which under public ownership or authority
Facility: provides the public with water storage, treatment, and distribution
services, maintenance and material storage and services, or other similar
facilities and services.
Railroad Facility: A building directly connected with rail transportation of articles, goods,
and passengers, including such facilities as tracks, sidings, signal devices
and structures, shops and yards for maintenance and storage of rail
machinery, loading platforms, and passenger and freight terminals;
provided, however, that the operation of such facilities as a hobby or as
part of an amusement business shall not be considered a railroad use.
Railroad Freight A heavy rail facility for freight pick-up or distribution; may
Terminal: include intermodal distribution facilities for truck or shipping transports.
Recreation A building where sports, recreation, and/or leisure activities are able
Facility, Indoor: to take place within enclosed building.
Recreation Facility, A building or lot where sports, recreation, and/or leisure activities are
Outdoor: able to take place outside of an enclosed building including a boat
launching ramp.
Recycling, Retail: A recycling facility used for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or
purchase of recyclable materials from the public.
Repair Shop: Any building or lot in which or upon which a business, service, or
industry involving maintenance, servicing, or repairing of goods,
excluding vehicles, is conducted or rendered.
Research Facility: A building or group of buildings, including incubator facilities, used
primarily for applied and developmental research, where product testing
may be an integral part of the operation and goods or products may be
manufactured as necessary for testing, evaluation, and test marketing.
This usage excludes the use of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic,
or explosive materials, chemicals, liquids, gases, or solids.
2000.26
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Restaurant, with A business establishment where food and drink are served to the public
Drive-Thru: and where the design of physical facilities and/or packaging procedures
permit or encourage patrons to order from and/or be served in their
automobiles.
Restaurant, without A business establishment where food and drink are served to the public
Drive-Thru: and where all services take place within the building, tableside, or other
seated location on the lot but not with an automobile. Alcoholic
beverages shall not be permitted in the Borough of Bellevue unless
authorized as a BYOB Establishment as defined by this Ordinance.
Retail Business/ A business establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
Sales: general public for personal or household consumption and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Rifle Range: An area or building specially designed for the safe discharge and use of
rifles, shotguns, pistols, silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, or any
similar firearm for the purpose of sport shooting or military/law
enforcement training.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication,
prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road,
alley, sidewalk, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas
pipeline, water line, sanitary, or storm sewer and other similar uses;
generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.
Riverbank: The area of rising ground bordering a river.
River-Oriented A facility or use which by its nature is required to be on or adjacent
Use: to a river.
Roadside Stand: A temporary building not permanently affixed to the ground and is
readily removable in its entirety, which is used solely for the display or
sale of farm products.
Roof: The cover of any building, including the eaves and similar projections.
School, Academic: Any establishment offering instruction in any branch of knowledge under
the supervision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a lawfully
constituted ecclesiastical governing body, person, partnership, or
cooperation meeting the requirements of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
School, A specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site
Commercial: training of business, commercial, and/or trade skills such as accounting
data processing, and computer repair.
School, Any day care center which receives children between the ages of
2000.27
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Kindergarten, two and six years and which is established and professionally
Pre-, Nursery: operated primarily for educational purposes to meet the developmental
needs of the children served.
Screening An assemblage of materials that are arranged so as to block the ground
level views between grade and a height of six (6) feet. Suitable screening
materials include trees, shrubs, hedges, berms, walls, sign-tight fences,
other similar type materials, or any combination thereof. No wall or
fence shall be constructed of plywood, corrugated metal, fiberglass, or
sheet metal. Landscape screens must achieve the required visual
blockage within two (2) years of installation.
Setback: The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be
separated from a street right-of-way, alley, or lot line.
Sexually-Oriented A business establishment consisting of, including, or having the
Business: characteristics of any or all of the following: adult arcades, adult
bookstores, adult video stores, adult cabarets, adult motels, adult motion
picture theaters, adult theaters, adult escort agencies, nude model studios,
or sexual encounter centers.
A. Adult Arcade: any business establishment where the public is
permitted to operate coin-operated or electronically or mechanically
operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other imageproducing
devices to show images to five or fewer persons, and
where the images describe “specific sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
B. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store: a business establishment
which offers for sale or rental one or more of the following: 1)
books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion pictures, video/CD/DVD cassettes, slides, or any other
visual representations in any form which depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” 2)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designated for use in
connection with “specific sexual activities.”
(1) A business establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing, “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as an “adult
bookstore or adult video store.” Such other business purposes
will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment from
being categorized as an “adult bookstore” or “adult video store”
so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering
for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which
depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
C. Adult Cabaret: a night club, bar, restaurant, or similar business
2000.28
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
establishment which regularly features:
(1) persons who display “specified anatomical areas”; or
(2) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”;
or
(3) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
D. Adult Motel: A hotel or motel or similar business establishment
offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that
(1) provides patrons with closed-circuit televisions transmitters,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way or in any
other manner advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; and/or (2) rents, leases, or lets any room
for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases or lets any single room
more than twice in a 24-hour period.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater: A business establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
F. Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
business establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual
activities.”
G. Adult Escort Agencies: A person or business association, who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of
its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
H. Escort: A person who, for a fee, tip, or other consideration, offers to
act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.
I. Nude Model Studio: A place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
painted or drawn upon, or similarly depicted by the person in a state
2000.29
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
of nudity or other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
J. Sexual Encounter Center: A business establishment other than a
hotel, motel, or similar establishment offering public
accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a
place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or
consort in connection with “specified sexual activities” or the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas.”
K. Specified Anatomical Areas: The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals,
and the following listed areas of the human anatomy when not
completely and opaquely covered: the human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
L. Specified Sexual Activities: Includes any of the following: (1) the
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breast; (2) sex acts, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or
sodomy; (3) masturbation, actual or simulated; (4) excretory function
as part of or in connection with any of the set forth in the subsection
above.
M. Sexually Oriented Businesses are classified as follows:
(1) “adult” arcades;
(2) “adult” bookstores or video store;
(3) “adult” cabarets;
(4) “adult” motels;
(5) “adult” motion picture theaters;
(6) “adult” theaters;
(7) escort agencies;
(8) nude model studio; and
(9) sexual encounter center.
Shopping Center: A group of retail and other commercial business establishments that are
planned, owned, and managed as a total entity with customer and
employee parking provided on-site. The two main configurations of
shopping centers are malls and strip centers.
Sidewalk: Areas located along streets, within the right-of-way or easement,
separated by a curb, planter or both from the street and designated for
preferential use by pedestrians.
Sign: Any structure or device for visual communications that is used for the
purpose of bringing the subject to the attention of the public. Any
awning sign, backlit sign, billboard, ground sign, illuminated sign,
marquee, neon sign, projecting sign, roof sign, temporary sign, wall sign,
2000.30
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
window graphics, window sign, which shall include any other device
making any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any
person when the same is placed outdoors in view of the general public or
when the same is placed indoors where the basic intent if for view by the
general public outside of the building.
A. A-Frame – any sandwich board or sign structure with a triangular
cross-section.
B. ADA Signs – any sign needed for a facility or building to achieve
compliance with the requirements of the American Disabilities Act.
C. Advertising Sign – a sign relating to commercial, industrial, private,
recreational, public utility, or other similar business conducted on the
premises on which the sign is located.
D. Awning Sign – an awning with advertising or a message.
E. Banner – a sign intended to be hung across or within a public right of
way, and includes pennants or streamer designs.
F. Billboard/sign – any structure or portion thereof, situated on private
premises, on which lettered, figure, or pictorial matter is displayed
for advertising purposes, other than the name and occupation of the
user of the premises or the nature of the business conducted thereon
or the products primarily sold or manufactured thereon.
G. Bulletin Board – a structure constructed with flat face(s) used for
posting notices.
H. Center Sign – a business sign that provides information at the
entrance of a complex such as a shopping plaza or mall, office
complex, or industrial park that indicated the businesses located
therein.
I. Directional Sign – a sign directing traffic but bearing no advertising
matter.
J. Directory – a sign listing business or occupants of a building. A
directory is commonly, but not always, located at or near the
building entrance.
K. Election Sign – a sign directing attention to a candidate, political
party, or a ballot.
L. Flag – a piece of cloth or bunting varying in size, color, and design,
used as a symbol, sign, signal, emblem, or advertisement.
M. Ground Sign – any sign, including A-Frame signs, supported by
2000.31
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
uprights or braces placed upon the ground and not attached to any
building or structure, having no more than two (2) faces, and not
exceeding ten feet (10’) above the surrounding ground surface.
N. Identification Sign – signs that identify school, churches, hospitals,
or similar institutions and for lodges, clubs, residential development,
parks, recreational areas, and other public assets and properties.
O. Illuminated Sign – any sign that has characters, letters, figures,
designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes
as a part of the sign proper.
P. Mobile Sign – signs on wheels, runner, casters, parked trailers,
parked vehicles, or other mobile devices.
Q. Motion Sign – any illuminated of non-illuminated sign on, or in,
which the light source or elements of the sign itself are not constant
or stationary.
R. No-Impact Home Based Business Sign – a sign permitted in
association with an occupation conducted in the premises within a
dwelling unit occupied by the operator of the business.
S. Pole Sign – a sign suspended from or supported by a structure which
is anchored to or placed in the ground and which elevates the highest
most point of the sign or structure more than ten (10) feet.
T. Real Estate Sign – a sign advertising the sale, rental, leasing, or
development of the premises.
U. Residential District Sign – a sign located in any residential Zoning
District.
V. Roof Sign – any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly
upon or over the roof or parapet wall of any building or the topside
of a marquee with the principal support on the roof structure or the
marquees.
W. Temporary Sign – a wall, window, awning, projecting, or ground
sign relating to a seasonal or other brief activity that is to be located
at a site for a short period of time.
X. Wall Sign – any sign painted on, or attached to, or erected against the
wall of a building, the front or sides of a marquee or canopy with the
exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall or
the marquee or canopy so that only one side is visible.
Y. Window Sign – a sign attached to, or placed upon, or painted on the
interior or exterior of a window or door of a building or other wise
intended for viewing from the exterior.
2000.32
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Shed: A subordinate structure or building used primarily for storage purposes,
of a height no greater than seven feet, and the total square footage of
which does not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet.
Sign Permit: A certificate issued by the Borough in which the sign is located attesting
that the proposal for the design, construction and maintenance of a sign
has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the requirements of
this Ordinance. Issuance of a sign permit is required prior to the
commencement of any construction activities.
Site Plan: A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of
land. It includes lot lines, streets, buildings, major landscape features,
and depending on requirements, the locations of proposed utility lines.
Social Club: A group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually
cultural, religious, or entertainment, with regular meetings and formal
written membership requirements.
Solicitor: The legal review and/or recommending body as designated by a
Borough.
Special Exception: A special exception is a use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restrictions throughout the zoning division or district but which,
if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood,
would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may
be permitted in such zoning division or district as special exceptions, if
specific provisions for such special exceptions are made in this
ordinance.
Sponsor Council: The Borough Council initiating an amendment to the Joint Zoning
Ordinance.
Stable: A building in which horses area sheltered. A stable may be an accessory
to a residential or other use or a freestanding principal use.
Storage Facility, Any lot designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing
Self-Service: individual storage spaces to tenants who are to have access to such
space for the purpose of storing and removing personal items.
Storage, Outside: The storage of any materials outside the principal or accessory buildings
on a property.
Street: A public thoroughfare, including street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, freeway, parkway, land alley, viaduct, and any other ways used
or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public
or private, which affords primary means of vehicular access to abutting
2000.33
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
property.
Structure: Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or
in land or water whether or not affixed to the land.
Structure, Non- A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply
Conforming with the applicable use or extent of use provisions of this ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance or amendment
or prior to the application of this ordinance or amendment. Such
nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to nonconforming
signs.
Structure, A structure without any foundation or footing and removed when
Temporary: the designated time period, activity or use for which the temporary
structure was erected has ceased.
Studio: A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by an artist,
photographer, or artisan, or used for radio or television broadcasting.
Substantial Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
Improvement: of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before the “start of Construction” of the
improvement.
Sunscreen: A covering consisting of one or more materials for use in lessening the
impacts of sunlight.
Supermarket: A business establishment primarily engaged in retail sale of foodstuffs,
with more than 20,000 square feet of floor area dedicated to sales floor
area.
Swimming Pool, A body of water or receptacle for water having a depth at any point
Public: greater than two (2) feet and surface area grater than 100 square feet
intended for admission by the public for recreational purposes, for a fee
or not, including swimming and bathing.
Tattooing/ A business establishment whose principal business activity, either in
Piercing terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of one or
Establishment: more of the following: 1) placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols or
other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other
substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of
the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture
the skin; or 2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the
purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.
Tavern/Bar: A business establishment where the principal use is the serving of
alcoholic beverages by the drink to the general public and where food or
packaged beverages may be served or sold as an accessory use.
2000.34
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Terminal, Freight: A building and/or structure and adjacent loading area where cargo is
stored and where commercial vehicles load and unload cargo on a
regular basis which may or may not include facilities for maintenance,
fueling, storage or dispatching of the vehicles.
Terminal, A building or lot where the principal use is the handling,
Passenger: receiving, and transfer of passenger traffic, and may include as an
accessory use the loading, unloading, receiving, dispatching, weighing,
consolidating, classifying, distribution, movement, or transfer of freight,
as well as all equipment and facilities used to accomplish the foregoing
activities. Such uses shall not include permanent storage of freight or
light manufacturing activities.
Theater: A business establishment, other than an adult movie theater or adult
movie house, inside a completely enclosed building devoted to showing
pictures and/or live dramatic or musical performances. A theater usually
contains an auditorium in addition to other performance-related facilities.
Tower, Non- A manmade structure, higher than its diameter, generally used for
Communication: observation, storage, power generation or electronic transmission,
exclusive of communication or water tower.
Tower, Water: A vessel for the use of water storage by a public or private authority,
agency or corporation for the purposed of providing water supply.
Trail: A way designed for and used by pedestrians, cyclists equestrians and
designated motorized vehicles.
Tri-Borough The Boroughs of Avalon, Bellevue, and Ben Avon, consolidated
Communities: into one regulatory unit for the purposes of land use planning and
development.
Use: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Use, Conditional: A use or occupancy of a building or lot permitted only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit and subject to the limitations and conditions
specified therein.
Use, Non-
Conforming: A use, whether of land or structure, which does not comply with the
applicable use provisions in this ordinance or amendment heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of
such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance such relaxation will not be
contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions peculiar to
the property and not the results of actions of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue
2000.35
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
hardship. Such a relaxation shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of
this Ordinance and Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Planning Code.
Vehicle: A conveyance propelled or driven by any kind of power, including
muscular power, but does not include conveyances running only on rails.
Veranda: An open gallery, similar to a porch, attached to the exterior of a building,
usually with a roof and extending along more than one side.
Veterinary Office A business establishment where animals or pets are given medical or
(No-boarding): surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment and
may not include boarding facilities except for in-patient medical
requirements. Also referred to as an animal hospital.
Water Storage: Any impoundment of water by a public or private authority, agency or
corporation for the purpose of providing water supply or recreation to the
general public.
Wholesale Business: A business establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business customers or
other wholesalers, rather than to the general public which includes the
warehousing of merchandise and which may include distribution of such
merchandise on the site of the principal business.
Wind Turbine: A wind-driven machine that converts wind energy into electrical power.
Residential Wind Turbine - A wind turbine used for residential-scale
purposes.
Commercial Wind Turbine - A wind turbine used for non-residentialscale
purposes.
Yard: The area of property between property lines and setback lines, or
dimensions as herein noted in the Zoning Ordinance for each Zoning
District, within which enclosed buildings, or structures, or any portion
thereof, shall not be constructed. Fences, walls, and storage may be
permitted in any yard subject to height limitations as indicated herein.
A. Front Yard: The land area extending across the full width of the lot
and abutting the front lot line. The depth of the front yard shall be
considered to be the horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line parallel thereto known as the front line of the buildable
area of the lot.
B. Rear Yard: The land area extending between the side lot lines of the
lot and abutting the rear lot line. The depth of the rear yard shall be
considered to be the horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
a line parallel thereto known as the rear line of the buildable area of
the lot.
2000.36
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
C. Side Yard: The land area extending between the rear line of the front
year and the rear lot line and abutting the side lot line. The width of
the side yard shall be considered to the horizontal distance between
the side lot line and the line parallel thereto known as the side line of
the buildable area of the lot. If no front yard is required, the front lot
line shall be the front boundary of the side yard. In the case of
through lots, the yards remaining after the full and half-depth front
yards have been established shall be considered to be side yards.
Zoning: The designation of specified districts within a community, reserving
them for certain uses together with limitations on lot size, heights of
structures and other stipulated requirements.
Zoning District: An area accurately defined as to boundaries and location on the Zoning
Map and within which area only certain types of land uses are permitted
and within which other types of land uses are excluded.
Zoning Hearing The Zoning Hearing Board of each Borough member of the Tri-Borough
Board: Communities.
Zoning Map: See Joint Zoning Map.
Zoning Officer: The person(s) designated by the Borough Council members of the Tri-
Borough Communities to administer the Joint Zoning Ordinance or as
otherwise defined by the applicable Multi-municipal Implementation
Agreement(s).
Zoning Permit: A document signed by the Applicable Zoning Officer as a condition
precedent to the commencement of a use which document acknowledges
that such use complies with the provisions of this Ordinance or an
authorized variance therefrom.
2000.37
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§2000-400. Establishment of Districts. For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this
Ordinance, the Tri-Borough Communities are divided into the following Zoning Districts, which are
shown by the district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map:
A. R-L – Low Density Residential District.
B. R-M – Moderate Density Residential District.
C. R-H – High Density Residential District.
D. MU – Mixed Use District.
E. C-NC – Neighborhood Commercial District.
F. C-HC – Highway Commercial District.
G. C-BE – Business Enterprise District.
H. C-MW: Manufacturing and Warehousing District
I. COS: Civic and Open Space Conservation District.
J. T: Transportation District.
§2000-401. District Purposes.
A. R-L – Low Density Residential District.
The purpose of this District is to protect the character of existing single family neighborhoods
and accommodate additional single family infill-type residential development at a similar scale
and density.
B. R-M – Moderate Density Residential District.
The purpose of this District is to accommodate a variety of housing types including single-family
and multi-family dwellings.
C. R-H –High Density Residential District.
The purpose of this District is to accommodate a variety of housing types including primarily
multi-family dwellings within close proximity to community services.
D. MU – Mixed-Use District.
The purpose of this District is to enhance the character and vibrancy of the traditional downtown
business districts situated near Lincoln and California Avenues while promoting pedestrian
access and dense urban form.
2000.38
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
E. C-NC – Neighborhood Commercial District.
The purpose of this District is to provide sufficient space and pedestrian access for the
development of small-scale retail business and consumer service-oriented business geared toward
the needs of adjoining residential neighborhoods.
F. C-HC – Highway Commercial District.
The purpose of this District is to provide sufficient space for safe, convenient and efficient
vehicular access from Rt. 65 necessary to accommodate larger community-scale retail business,
restaurant and office uses catering to the needs of the community.
G. C-BE – Business Enterprise District.
The purpose of this District is to encourage the development of low intensity office and industrial
uses in appropriate locations along Rt. 65 where the public health, safety and welfare of
surrounding lower density neighborhoods can be protected.
H. C-MW – Manufacturing and Warehousing District.
The purpose of this District is to encourage the development of more intense manufacturing or
similar industrial uses in appropriate locations along existing railroad routes and where
topography protects the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods.
I. COS – Civic and Open Space Conservation District.
The purpose of this District is to conserve environmentally sensitive/significant areas and to
protect residents from landslide-prone areas by restricting development and providing for
compatible institutional and recreational uses such as schools and athletic fields.
J. T – Transportation District.
The purpose of this district is to control development along the Boroughs’ riverfront and to
provide for other transportation infrastructure.
§2000-402. District Boundaries. District boundaries that coincide with roads, streets, alleys, property
lines, streams and transportations rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow their center lines. The vacation
of streets, roads or rights-of-way shall not effect the location of such district boundaries. When the
Applicable Zoning Officer is unable to determine the location of a district boundary by such center lines,
by the scale of dimensions stated on the Official Joint Zoning Map or by the fact that it clearly coincides
with a property line, the Applicable Zoning Officer shall refuse action and submit the requested review to
the applicable Borough’s Zoning Hearing Board. As authorized by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code §209.1 (b) (10.1), the Joint Planning Commission may present testimony before any board
at the request of the governing body regarding said issue(s).
§2000-403. Official Joint Zoning Map.
A. The Tri-Borough Communities are hereby divided into Zoning Districts as shown on the Official
Joint Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
B. The Official Joint Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of a designated representative
of each Borough and shall bear the seal of all three boroughs under the following words: ‘‘This is
to certify that this is the Official Joint Zoning Map referred to in Article IV of Ordinance Number
2000.39
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
2000 of the Tri-Borough Communities, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania,’’ together with the date
of adoption of this Ordinance.
C. No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Joint Zoning Map or matter shown
thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized
change by any person shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as
provided.
D. The Official Joint Zoning Map, on file in the municipal building of each Tri-Borough
Community, shall serve as the final authority in designating the current zoning status of lots,
buildings, and other structures in the Tri-Borough Communities.
E. Any amendments legally adopted to change any district boundaries of the Official Joint Zoning
Map shall be noted on such map by ordinance number and date of adoption of the amendment.
The Official Joint Zoning Map shall be changed to reflect the amendment within thirty (30) days
of adoption.
§2000-404. Permitted Uses, Conditional Uses and Uses by Special Exception.
A. No building, structure or lot shall be constructed or improved or used for any purpose or in any
manner other than the one (1) or more of the principal permitted uses, conditional uses or uses by
special exception granted by right to the Zoning District in which such building, structure or lot is
located.
B. In addition to the basic zoning requirements defined by this Article IV of this Ordinance, all uses
by special exception shall conform to all applicable requirements and provisions defined by this
Article VI of this Ordinance. All conditional uses shall conform to all applicable requirements
and provisions defined by this Article VII of this Ordinance.
C. The letter “P” denotes a permitted use by right, subject to the requirements specified by this
Chapter and after a zoning certificate has been issued in accordance with this Ordinance.
D. The letter “C” denotes a use that is conditional, subject to the requirements specified by this
Chapter and provided that a Council grants the conditional use pursuant to this Ordinance.
E. The letter “S” denotes a use that is a special exception subject to the requirements specified by
this Ordinance and provided that a Zoning Hearing Board grants the special exception pursuant to
this Ordinance.
2000.40
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-405. Land Uses.
Table 1: Land Use Table
Land Use
R-L Low Density
Residential District
R-M Moderate Density
Residential District
R-H High Density
Residential District
MU Mixed-Use District
C-NC Neighborhood
Commercial District
C-HC Highway
Commercial District
C-BE Business Enterprise
District
C-MW Manufacturing
and Warehousing District
COS Civic and Open
Space Conservation
District
T Transportation District
Residential
1 Accessory Dwelling S S
2 Apartments, Garden S P S S
3 Apartments, High-Rise C P
4 Boarding House S S P P
5Duplex P P S S
6 Group Care Facility C C C
7 Halfway House C C C
8 Mobile Home Park C
9 Nursing Home/Life Care C C C C P P
10 Personal Care Home C C C C
11 Quadplex S P S
12 Single-Family Dwelling P P P S S S S
13 Townhouse P P S S
Non-residential
1 Agricultural Activities S P
2 Amphitheater P P
3 Assembly or Fabrication Facility, see Industry,
Light
4 Automobile Rental S P P
5 Automobile Sales (car, truck, motorcycle, boat
or trailer)
S P P P
6 Automotive Services S P P P
7Bakery P P P P P
8 Bed and Breakfast S P P P
9 Billboard S
10Business Services P P P P
2000.41
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Land Use
R-L Low Density
Residential District
R-M Moderate Density
Residential District
R-H High Density
Residential District
MU Mixed-Use District
C-NC Neighborhood
Commercial District
C-HC Highway
Commercial District
C-BE Business Enterprise
District
C-MW Manufacturing
and Warehousing District
COS Civic and Open
Space Conservation
District
T Transportation District
Non-residential
11 Car Wash S P P P
12Catering Service P P P P
13 Cemetery P P S
14 Check Cashing Establishment S S
15 Cinema C C C
16Communications Antenna P P P P P P P P P P
17 Communications Tower C C
18 Community Center S S
19 Conference Center P P S
20 Consignment Store S S P S
21 Contractor's Storage Yard P P
22 Convenience Store S S P P
23 Correctional Facility C P
24 Country Club/Golf Course P P S
25 Crematorium C P P
26 Day Care Center (adult or child) S P P P
27 Day Care Home (adult or child) S P P P
28 Drive-In Theater C C
29 Driving Range P S S
30Dry Cleaning Customer Services P P P P
31 Dry Cleaning Facility S P P
32 Emergency Services S
33Essential Services P P P P P P P P P P
34Exercise/Fitness Facility P P P P
35 Farmers Market S S P P
36 Feed Store S P P
37Financial Institution P P P P
38 Flea Market P P
39 Flex Space P P
40 Food Packaging Facility S S P P
C C
S
2000.42
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
41 Food Processing Facility C C C C
42Forestry P P P P P P P P P P
43 Freight Terminal P P
44 Funeral Home/Mortuary S P P P
45 Gallery P P P
46 Gasoline/Energy Recharge Station S S S
47 Greenhouse P P
48 Grocery Store S S P P S
49Hardware Store P P P P P
50 Heliport P P
51Home Based Business, No Impact P P P P P
52 Home Based Business, Other S S S S
53 Hospital P
54 Hotel/Motel S S P P
55 Industry, Heavy (manufacturing, etc.) P
56 Industry, Light (warehousing, distribution, etc.) P P
57 Junkyard C P
58 Kennel S S P
59 Landfill P
60Laundromat P P P P
61Library P P P
62 Marina P P
63Massage Therapy Establishment P P P P
64Medical Clinic P P P P
65 Methadone Treatment Facility C 66 Municipal Facility S S S
67Museum P P P
68 Nursery S P P S S
69Office, Medical S S P P
70Office, Professional/Administrative P P P P
C C C C
Medical Office (See Office, Medical) P
2000.43
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Legend:
P - Principal Use Permitted by Right
C - Principal Use Permitted (Conditional)
S - Principal Use Permitted by Special Exception
Land Use
R-L Low Density
Residential District
R-M Moderate Density
Residential District
R-H High Density
Residential District
MU Mixed-Use District
C-NC Neighborhood
Commercial District
C-HC Highway
Commercial District
C-BE Business Enterprise
District
C-MW Manufacturing
and Warehousing District
COS Civic and Open
Space Conservation
District
T Transportation District
Non-residential
71 Oil/Gas Well C C C
72 Park P P P P P P P P P P
73 Parking Surface Lot, Private S S S S S
74 Parking Surface Lot, Public P P P P
75 Parking Structure, Private S S S S S
76 Parking Structure, Public P P P P
77 Performance Studio P P P
78 Personal Services P P P P
79 Pet Cemetery P P P S
80 Pharmacy P P P S
81 Place of Assembly S S S P P P S
82 Place of Worship S S S P P P S
83 Post Office S S S S
84 Printing and Publishing Facility P P
85 Professional Services P P P P
86 Public Facility P P P P P S P
87 Public Safety Facility (fire, police, emergency
services etc.)
S S S S P P P P
88 Public Works Facility S S S S P P P P
89 Railroad Facility S P P
90 Recreation, Indoor (bowling, paintball,
billiards, arcades, etc.)
S S P P P S
91 Recreation, Outdoor (athletic fields, go-carts,
etc.)
S S P P
92 Recycling, Retail P
93 Repair Shop (electrical and household
appliances, etc.)
P P P P
94 Research Facility S P P
95 Restaurant, with Drive-Thru P P P
P
2000.44
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Land Use
R-L Low Density
Residential District
R-M Moderate Density
Residential District
R-H High Density
Residential District
MU Mixed-Use District
C-NC Neighborhood
Commercial District
C-HC Highway
Commercial District
C-BE Business Enterprise
District
C-MW Manufacturing
and Warehousing District
COS Civic and Open
Space Conservation
District
T Transportation District
96 Restaurant, without Drive-Thru1 P P P P P
97 a. Retail Business <5,000 sq. feet P P P P
b. Retail Business >5,000 - 20,000 sq. feet P P P
c. Retail Business >20,000 sq. feet p p
98 Rifle Range C C
99 Roadside Stand S S S
100 School, Academic C C C C
101 School, Commercial S S P P
102 School, Kindergarten, Pre-, Nursery S S S P
103 Sexually-Oriented Business C
104 Social Club P P P P
105 Stable C
106 Storage Facility, Self-Service S S P P
107 Storage, Outside S P P
108 Swimming Pool, Public S S S S P
109 Tattoo/Piercing Establishment S S
110 Tavern/Bar C C C C C
111 Terminal, Freight S S P P
112 Terminal, Passenger S S P P
113 Theater C C P S C
114 Tower Non-communications C C C C C C
115 Trail P P
116 Veterinary Office (no overnight boarding) P P P P P
117 Water Storage C
118 Wholesale Business S P P
119 All Other Uses C C
2000.45
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-406. Dimensional Standards.
A. Lot Dimensions
(1) Development that occurs on a private street shall be developed to the dimensional
standards applicable to development on a public street.
(2) Lot dimensions shall be in accordance with Table II and/or Table III as applicable.
Table II: Residential District Lot Dimensions
R-L R-M R-H
Lot Size (minimum) [single family) 6,000 s.f. 3,500 s.f. 2,000 s.f.
Size (minimum) [two-family/multi family) 3,000 s.f. 2,000 s.f. 1,000 s.f.
Lot Frontage (minimum) 40' 25' 15'
Building Coverage (maximum) 40% 60% 60%
Building Height (maximum) 35' 45' 65'
Table III: Non-Residential Lot Dimensions
M-U C-NC C-HC C-BE C-MW COS T
Lot Size (minimum) N/A 5,000 s.f. 5,000 s.f. 10,000 s.f. 20,000 s.f. N/A N/A
Lot Frontage (minimum) N/A 65' 100' 100' 200' N/A N/A
Building Coverage (maximum) 85% 75% 60% 50% 60% 20% 75%
Building Height (maximum) 80' 35' 35' 45' 55' 45' 55'
B. Yard requirements for residential shall be as set forth in Table IV and the yard requirements for
non-residential districts shall be as set forth in Table V, except as set forth subsequently in this
subsection.
Table IV: Residential District Setback Standards.
R-L R-M R-H
Front Yard (maximum) 25' 15' 15'
Rear Yard [through lot] (minimum) 35' 15% of lot
depth (25' min)
15% of lot
depth (25' min)
Rear Lot [adjoining alley] (minimum) 35' 25' 25'
Side Yard (minimum) [abutting street] 25' aggregate* 15' aggregate* 12' aggregate*
Side Yard (minimum) [not abutting street) 15' aggregate* 10' aggregate* 8' aggregate*
* Aggregate side yard dimensions include both side yards added together. Minimum side yard shall be
five (5) feet.
Table V: Non-Residential District Setback Standards.
M-U C-NC C-HC C-BE C-MW COS T
Front Setback (maximum) 5' 35' 75' 50' 50' 30' 5'
Rear Y ard (minimum) [through lot] 20' 30' 30' 50' 75' 30' 5'
Rear Yard (minimum) [adjoining alley] 15' 20' 20' 40' 65' 30' 5'
Side Yard (minimum) [abutting street] 5' 10' 10' 20' 30' 15' 5'
Side Yard (minimum) [not abutting street] 0' 10' 15' 25' 35' 15' 5'
2000.46
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(3) Basic Lot Types and Configuration
(4) For each story over two (2), a multi-family unit shall
have an additional five (5) foot setback applicable to
all yards; no adjusted front yard of said proposed
development shall deviate more than thirty percent
(30%) greater than that of development on an
adjoining lot.
(5) Lot frontage for the principal structure shall be built
along the required front yard setback. Porches shall
also be permitted to fulfill this requirement. No
structure shall be built within a required setback.
(6) Interior Lot not adjoining a Corner Lot.
(a) Required Front Yard Setback.
(i) The required front yard setback for a subject
lot shall be determined by calculating the
average front yard setback of the adjoining
lots.
(ii) If an adjoining lot is vacant, the landowner
and/or developer shall assume the required
2000.47
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
setback of the adjoining lot is the minimum front yard setback defined in Tables 4
and 5 for the zoning district in which it is situated.
(b) Required Side Yard Setback
(i) The required side yard setback for a subject lot shall be determined by calculating
the average side yard setbacks of the adjoining lots.
(ii) If an adjoining lot is vacant, it shall be assumed that the established setback of the
adjoining lot is the minimum required side yard setback defined in Tables 4 and 5 for
the zoning district in which it is located.
(7) Interior Lot adjoining a Corner Lot.
(a) Front Yard Setback
(i) The front yard setback of the subject lot shall be the average of the adjoining
existing corner lot and the adjoining existing interior lot.
(ii) If the adjoining lot is vacant, the minimum setback defined in Tables 4 and 5 for the
zoning district in which the lot is located shall apply.
(b) Side Yard Setback
(i) The required side yard setback for a subject lot shall be determined by calculating the
average side yard setbacks of the adjoining lots.
(ii) If an adjoining lot is vacant, it shall be assumed that the established setback of the
adjoining lot is the minimum side yard setback defined in Tables 4 and 5 for the
zoning district in which it is located.
(8) Corner Lot. A corner lot shall have two (2) front yards one (1) side yard and one (1) rear yard
said front yards shall abut public right-of-way not inclusive of an alley. If the lot abuts an
alley the rear yard shall parallel said alley.
(a) Front Yard Setback.
(i) The required front yard setback of the subject (corner) lot shall be equivalent to that
of the two (2) adjoining lots.
(ii) If the adjoining (interior) lot is vacant, the front yard setback of the subject corner lot
shall be equivalent to the minimum front yard setback defined in Tables 3, 4 and 5
for the zoning district in which the subject lot is located.
(b) Side Yard Setback.
(i) The required side yard setback for a subject lot shall be determined by calculating the
average side yard setbacks of the adjoining lots.
C. Height. In order to maintain the character of existing historic and/or established development,
building height for proposed development, infill, redevelopment and/or replacement shall be
determined based upon the context of existing development.
1. The minimum height of any principal building and/or structure in the MU district shall be
thirty-six (36) feet.
2. Proposed roof heights, cornice lines, eaves, parapets and porches of a proposed building or
structure shall respect the architectural context of the adjoining lots and, when feasible, shall
maintain the scale and character of existing development.
2000.48
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
3. The maximum height for buildings shall be as defined for the zoning district in which it is
located, unless the heights for the majority of buildings on the block are greater than the
maximum permitted for the zoning district. In this circumstance, the maximum height shall
be the height of the adjoining properties.
§2000-407. Permitted Projections into Required Yards.
A. The following shall be permitted to project into any required yard in any Zoning District as
follows:
(1) Typical architectural features, including, but not limited to, bay windows, window sills,
cornices and eaves, shall be permitted to project into required yards no more than thirty-six
(36) inches.
(2) Decks and unenclosed porches without enclosed habitable foundations shall be permitted to
project into required front and side yards no more than three (3) feet and into the required rear
yard no more than twenty (20) feet so long as a minimum of five (5) feet remain between the
structure and the lot line.
2000.49
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(3) Steps and open fire escapes shall be permitted to project into required yards no more than six
(6) feet.
(4) Awnings and/or sunscreens shall be permitted to project into required front and side yards no
more than four (4) feet.
§2000-408. Height Exceptions.
A. The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to the following structures: Place of
worship steeples or spires; steeples; chimneys; elevator bulk heads and other mechanical
equipment that is part of a principal structure; conveyors; flagpoles; silos; standpipes; water
towers; derricks; public utility structures; and other structures not intended for human habitation
which do not exceed the height limitations of the Zoning District by more than fifteen (15) feet.
B. All principal buildings or structures and accessory parking structures shall also be subject to all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Allegheny County Airport Authority
height restrictions.
§2000-409. Accessory Buildings, Structures, Uses and Events.
A. See Table I for additional accessory uses, other than those listed below, with specific Zoning
District Requirements.
B. Accessory buildings, structures, uses and events permitted within Residential Zoning Districts of
the Tri-Borough Communities include:
(1) Cultivation of plants as an avocation, including the erection and maintenance of greenhouses
and garden equipment storage buildings, trellises, etc., but involving no commercial sales or
advertising.
(2) Fences, walls or hedges in accordance with §2000-409(C).
(3) Garage or parking area meeting requirements of §Article VIII limited to one (1) detached
garage per lot.
(4) The keeping of animals, limited to two hundred (200) pounds and structures for the housing
of such animals on a lot of at least eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area and, except
for poultry or fowl, restricted to four (4) animals per forty thousand (40,000) square feet, to
be confined on the lot by a fence or similar enclosure located at least five (5) feet from the lot
line, and where the structures shall be located at least 100 feet from any dwelling on the
subject lot, and when only for the private non-commercial use of the occupants of the
dwelling on the same lot.
(5) Shelter for domestic pets but not including a kennel when located not less than 60 feet from
any street line and not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any lot line.
(6) Private swimming pool, tennis court, or similar private recreation facility for the use of the
residents of the lot containing the facility and their guests only.
(7) Private satellite dish or antenna less than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
2000.50
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(8) Signs in conformance with §2000-420 of this Ordinance.
(9) No-Impact Home-Based Business.
(10) Awnings
(11) Residential Wind Turbines and Residential Solar Collection Panels
(12) Setback of Accessory Buildings from Side or Rear Lot Lines. When an accessory building
not on a permanent foundation will occupy one hundred twenty (120) square feet of area on
the ground or less, it may be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot
line but not forward of the front setback line. Other accessory structures, regardless of size,
when the use is for a garage, carport or picnic shelter, but not including a barn for animals,
may not be located within the setback distance prescribed by this Ordinance.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures in Mixed-Use and Non-residential Zoning Districts.
(1) Amusement game machines not located in a commercial recreation and entertainment facility
limited to three machines per establishment located within and accessible only from the
principal use.
(2) Ancillary business services limited to serving the offices occupying the same building, such
as copying and printing services, mail packaging and receiving, secretarial services and retail
sales of office supplies, etc.
(3) Automated teller system accessory to a use.
(4) Day care center restricted to children of employees or users of services offered by principal
use.
(5) Fences, hedges and/or walls subject to provisions of §2000-409(C).
(6) Individual apartment of the owner, or manager, or an employee of the business occupying the
lot, such apartment in the same principal structure on the lot occupied by the business.
(7) Laboratory and/or pharmacy within a clinic and a branch bank within an office building.
(8) Off-street loading areas subject to requirements of Article VIII.
(9) Off-street parking areas and/or garages for the exclusive use of customers patronizing the
establishment on the premises and for employees of the establishment in accordance with
requirements of Article VIII.
(10) Retail sales of books, magazines and newspapers (excluding adult bookstores), standard
restaurant, fast-food restaurant, drug store, on the first floor of an office building occupying
not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building’s floor area exclusive of basement,
and provided there shall be no exposed entryway serving the business on the exterior of
such building.
2000.51
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(11) Satellite dish or antenna mounted on the ground and located not less than one and a quarter
(1 1/4) times its maximum height from any side or rear lot line but not forward of the front
setback line; or mounted on the roof.
(12) Signs in conformance with Section 2000-420 of this Ordinance.
(13) Swimming pool, tennis court or similar accessory recreational facility when the principal
permitted use is a motel, bed and breakfast, public park, club, or cultural or institutional use
or when there are residential apartments on the same lot.
(14) Temporary structure incidental to the development of a lot, to be removed upon completion
of development.
(15) Other structures, uses or buildings customarily incidental to principal uses permitted in a
district including but not limited to wind turbines and solar collection panels.
(16) Accessory uses are limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area. Employees
of the accessory uses shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of
employees.
D. In all Zoning Districts, the following regulations shall apply to accessory buildings and structures.
(1) Fences.
(a) In all residential Zoning Districts, fences no greater than six and one-half (6.5) feet in
height shall be permitted in rear and side yards.
(b) In commercial and industrial districts, fences no greater than ten (10) feet in height shall
be permitted in rear and side yards.
(c) In Residential Zoning Districts, fences no greater than three and one-half (3.5) feet in
height shall be permitted in front yards. All fences shall be constructed such that the
finished side of the fence faces all adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
(d) In Residential Zoning Districts, fences which contain openings equal to at least seventyfive
percent (75%) of the area of the fence and which are not more than three (3) feet in
height shall be permitted in a lot’s front and/or side yards.
(e) In Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Zoning Districts, the maximum height of a fence shall
be six and one-half (6.5) feet unless otherwise defined for industrial uses and/or service
structures. Fences shall be permitted in a lot’s rear and/or side yard(s). Fences shall
contain openings that are at least fifty percent (50%) of the area of the fence, unless an
opaque screening fence is otherwise required by this Ordinance.
(2) Clear Sight Distance. All fences, walls, screens and bufferyards or landscaping shall be
located so as to not obstruct pedestrian access, visibility for traffic on adjacent streets or
traffic entering or leaving a lot or adjacent lots.
(3) Satellite Dish Antennas in Residential Districts.
2000.52
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(a) In all Residential Zoning Districts, the maximum diameter of any satellite dish antenna
installed on any lot, building or structure shall be twenty-four (24) inches.
(b) Only one (1) satellite dish antenna shall be permitted on a residential lot.
(c) Satellite dish antennas shall not be permitted in front yards or on front facades unless a
variance is granted by the applicable Zoning Hearing Board of the applicable community
upon presentation of evidence that such location is the only feasible method of obtaining
reception because of the physical characteristics of the lot and the location of existing
structures on the lot.
(d) A satellite dish antenna shall not project above the peak of a roof, and if said satellite dish
is roof-mounted, no point of the satellite dish shall be greater than three (3) feet from the
roof’s surface. A satellite dish antenna shall be permitted to be mounted on a flat roof so
long as the satellite dish projects less than three (3) feet from the roof surface and is
mounted in an inconspicuous location.
(4) Radio or Television Antennas. A radio or television antenna shall be permitted as an
accessory use, subject to the following requirements:
(a) A radio or television antenna structure may be installed in a rear yard area or mounted on
a roof, provided that the structure shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of any lot
line.
(b) The antenna shall be no more than twelve (12) feet higher than the structure on which it
is to be mounted and shall be designed so as to have minimal visual impact to the
building or structure, utilizing techniques such as being the same color as the building or
pole on which it is located. If placed on a roof, any antenna exceeding eight (8) feet in
overall height shall be mounted with guy wires.
(c) Any such structure shall comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission
regulations.
(d) Radio or television antenna structures located on the ground shall be screened from
adjacent lots by evergreen trees or other suitable landscaping material.
(5) Regulations are applicable to communications antennas mounted or located on existing or
newly constructed non-residential buildings, light poles/standards or on utility transmission
poles and communications equipment building/cabinets. Communications antennas mounted
or located on existing or newly constructed non-residential buildings, light poles/standards or
on utility transmission poles and communications equipment building/cabinets shall be
permitted in all Zoning Districts, subject to the following criteria:
(a) The applicant shall provide a certification from an engineer, having demonstrated
capability and competence in matters of structural integrity, that the proposed installation
will not exceed the structural capacity of the pole or building upon which the
communications antenna is proposed to be located, considering wind, ice, snow and other
loads associated with the communications antenna location.
2000.53
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(b) The applicant shall provide detailed construction drawings indicating how the
communications antenna(s) will be mounted for review by the applicable Borough
Engineer.
(c) There shall be no minimum building setback requirements for the antenna.
(d) The antenna shall be no more than twelve (12) feet higher than the structure on which it
is to be mounted and shall be designed so as to have minimal visual impact to the
building or structure, utilizing techniques such as being the same color as the building or
pole on which it is located.
(e) The applicant shall provide authorization from the legal owner of the lot to install the
communications antenna and any structure accessory to the communications antenna.
(f) The applicant shall provide agreements, easements, or rights-of-way necessary to ensure
access for the purpose of installation and maintenance.
(g) Any existing or newly constructed light pole/standard or utility transmission pole may be
constructed, reconstructed or altered for the purpose of accommodating the location
and/or installation of communications antenna, provided that the height of the light
pole/standard or utility transmission pole, once constructed, reconstructed or altered, shall
not exceed sixty-five (65) feet.
(h) All communications antennas shall be operated so that they will not cause interference
with other communications antennas.
(i) If any accessory communications equipment building/cabinets are proposed for the
operation of the communications antenna, the following regulations shall be adhered to:
(i) The communications equipment building/cabinets and associated equipment may be
located at or near the base of any existing or newly constructed light pole/standard.
If the communications equipment building/cabinets are proposed for a
communications antenna located on a non-residential building or structure other than
an existing or newly constructed light pole/standard, such communications
equipment building/cabinets may be located on the structure or building on which the
communications antenna is located.
(ii) For those communications antennas that are mounted on utility transmission poles,
the communications equipment building/cabinets shall be located within the utility
easement or right-of-way.
(iii) Any communications equipment building/cabinets where the area encompassing the
communications equipment building/cabinets is equal to or less than one hundred
(100) square feet shall be subject to the height and setback requirements of the
Zoning District for an accessory structure. Any communications equipment
building/cabinets where the area encompassing the communications equipment
building/cabinets is greater than one hundred (100) square feet shall be subject to the
height and setback requirements of the Zoning District for a principal building or
structure.
2000.54
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(6) Canopies and Similar Structures. Those canopies and similar permanent freestanding roofed
structures greater than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in lot coverage shall be permitted
to cover outdoor seasonal display and sales areas or fuel dispensing areas accessory to
authorized uses in the MU, C-NC, C-HC, C-BE, C-MW, and T districts, provided that:
(a) No portion of such structure shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from any lot line
or street right-of-way.
(b) Such structure shall not be enclosed or incorporate walls.
(c) A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the vertical supports utilized for the structure shall
be designed to incorporate the same primary exterior material of the lot’s principal
building.
(d) Any lighting associated with said structures shall be reduced to ½ normal operating
power between the hours of 11:00 pm and 6:00 am.
(e) Such structure shall be removed immediately, once the principal use or the use of the
structure is discontinued.
(7) Residential Wind Turbine.
(a) No turbine shall exceed twenty five (25) feet in height
(b) Turbines shall not be located within a front, side or rear setback
(8) Residential Solar Collector Panels.
(a) The location of solar collection panels shall be approved by the Applicable Zoning
Officer to ensure glare is minimized on adjacent lots.
(b) Panels shall not be located within a front, side or rear yard.
(9) Special Event as an Accessory Use. On any lot, a landowner and/or developer proposing to
conduct a temporary use or event using space outside of principal building structures shall be
required to submit a special event application. Special events may include, but are not
limited to, plant sales, entertainment venues or automobile/boat shows.
(a) The Special Event Application shall be:
(i) Obtained from the applicable Borough; and
(ii) Submitted to the Borough one (1) month prior to the proposed special event.
(b) The special event, at a minimum, shall:
(i) Be any event that has the potential to create greater traffic, congestion and/or noise
than is typically caused by the principal use of the lot;
(ii) Be conducted on the same lot on which the principal use occurs;
2000.55
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(iii)Be directly related to the services and/or products of the principal use, unless
approved by the Borough; and
(iv) Not compromise the minimum number of required parking spaces for the principal
use.
(c) On any lot, the cumulative number of special event days shall not exceed thirty (30) days
within any ninety (90) day period.
(10) All Other Accessory Activities. All other accessory buildings, structures, uses or events
shall not be permitted in the required front yard or required side yards and shall be located
at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. All other accessory buildings, structures, uses or
events shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any principal building, except that a
detached garage may be connected to the principal building by contiguous walls,
breezeways or similar connections.
§2000-410. Bufferyards.
A. Bufferyard requirements for side and rear yards.
(1) Any multi-family use adjoining a single-family residential lot.
(a) Five (5) foot landscaped buffer.
(b) Bufferyard shall contain two (2) rows of planting. One row shall consist of a mixture of
fifty percent (50%) deciduous and fifty percent (50%) evergreen trees at a maximum
spacing of fifteen (15) feet apart, measured from the vertical centerline of adjacent trees.
The other row may be a shrub or ornamental grass, maximum spacing of eight (8) feet,
taller than three feet at planting, and maintained at a height of three to six (3 to 6) feet.
(2) Any non-residential use in R-L or COS adjoining a single family or multi-family residential
lot
(a) Ten (10) foot landscaped buffer.
(b) Bufferyard shall contain two (2) rows of planting. Each row shall consist of a mixture of
fifty percent (50%) deciduous and fifty percent (50%) evergreen trees at a maximum
spacing of twelve (12) feet apart, measured from the vertical centerline of adjacent trees.
(3) Any non-residential use in R-M or R-H adjoining a single family or multi-family residential
lot
(a) Ten (10) foot landscaped buffer.
(b) Bufferyard shall contain two (2) rows of planting. One row shall consist of a mixture of
fifty percent (50%) deciduous and fifty percent (50%) evergreen trees at a maximum
spacing of fifteen (15) feet apart, measured from the vertical centerline of adjacent trees.
The other row may be a shrub or ornamental grass, shoulder high.
2000.56
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(4) Any non-residential use in MU or C-NC adjoining a single family or multi-family residential
lot
(a) Five (5) foot landscaped buffer.
(b) Bufferyard shall contain one (1) row of planting. The row may be a tree or shrub. If trees
are used, a maximum spacing of twelve (12) feet; if shrubs are used, a maximum spacing
of five (5) feet.
(5) Any non-residential use in C-HC or C-BE adjoining a residential lot
(a) Twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer.
(b) Bufferyard shall contain three (3) rows of planting. One row shall consist of a mixture of
fifty percent (50%) deciduous and fifty percent (50%) evergreen trees at a maximum
spacing of fifteen (15) feet apart, measured from the vertical centerline of adjacent trees.
The other row may be a shrub or ornamental grass, maximum spacing of twelve (12) feet,
taller than three feet at planting, and maintained at a height of three to six (3 – 6) feet.
(6) Any non-residential use in C-MW adjoining a single family or multi-family residential lot.
(a) Twenty (20) foot landscaped buffer.
(b) Bufferyard shall contain four (4) rows of planting. Each row shall consist of a mixture of
fifty percent (50%) deciduous and fifty percent (50%) evergreen trees at a maximum
spacing of twelve (12) feet apart, measured from the vertical centerline of adjacent trees.
§2000-411. Vegetation within Bufferyards.
A. Any existing trees within the required bufferyard that are a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter
at breast height (dbh) in accordance with American Nursery Association standards shall count as
required trees within the bufferyard. At no point, however, shall any existing trees and required
trees be separated at a distance greater than the distance specified in the required bufferyard.
B. All trees required to be planted within the bufferyard shall be a minimum of two and one-half
(2.5) inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) in accordance with American Nursery Association
standards and shall be planted in accordance with accepted landscape conservation practices. All
required trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height at the time of planting as measured
from the ground at the based of the tree to the top of the tree.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner and/or developer to assure the continued growth of
all required landscaping and/or to replace the same in the event of freezing, drought, vandalism,
disease or other reasons for the discontinued growth of the required trees, shrubs and bushes.
§2000-412. Conflict Between Bufferyard and Yard Requirements. When the width of a required
bufferyard is in conflict with the minimum yard requirements of Article III of the Chapter, the greater
distance shall apply. The landowner and/or developer shall adhere to the bufferyard planting requirement
regardless of what the yard requirement is.
2000.57
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-413. Existing Structures in Bufferyards. In instances where an existing building or structure
houses the principal use of the lot, and is located within any required bufferyard, a bufferyard of not less
than the minimum distance from the existing structure to the lot line shall be required. This reduced
bufferyard width shall apply only to the yard area upon which the existing structure encroaches. If the
existing building or structure is located within the required bufferyard on one (1) side of the building or
structure, the required bufferyard as determined by this Ordinance shall apply on all other yard areas. All
planting requirements shall be adhered to regardless of the bufferyard width.
§2000-414. Stormwater Management Facilities within Bufferyards. Stormwater management
facilities and structures may be maintained within a bufferyard, but the existence of such facilities or
structures shall not be a basis for a failure to meet the planting requirement.
§2000-415. Screening and Landscaping for Off-Street Parking and Service Structures.
A. A planting strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided between the edge of the right-of-way
and any parking area authorized in any yard which fronts on a public or private street or roadway.
Planting strips between the right-of-way and the parking area shall be suitably landscaped and
maintained with ground cover, shrubbery, trees or other landscape or decorative materials across
the entire frontage of the lot in order to prohibit vehicles access, except at approved ingress and
egress points. Landscaping of appropriate mature heights shall not obstruct visibility for traffic
entering or leaving the lot or traveling on the public street.
B. In parking areas containing more than twenty (20) spaces, at least twenty percent (20%) of the
interior parking area shall be landscaped with plantings including one (1) tree for each ten (10)
spaces.
(1) Surface parking area.
(a) Interior landscaping shall be required for new parking areas or expansion of existing
parking areas containing more than four thousand (4,000) square feet or ten (10) parking
spaces, which ever is lesser. Where a pre-existing parking area is altered or expanded to
increase the size to four thousand (4,000) or more square feet of area or ten (10) or more
parking spaces, interior landscaping for the entire parking area shall be provided and not
merely to the extent of its alteration or expansion.
(b) One (1) internal landscape island shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces.
(c) No more than ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided in an unbroken row without the
provision of interior landscape islands.
(d) At least one (1) shade tree shall be provided in each interior landscape island. The
remaining area of the required interior landscape islands and/or interior landscape area
shall be landscaped with shrubs or perennials, either of which should not exceed two (2)
feet in height, or with turf grass.
(e) All trees and shrubs required to be planted by this section shall be of the minimum
diameters and heights set forth in this Ordinance.
(f) There shall be a minimum distance of five (5) feet from the edge of paving to the center
of all shade trees.
2000.58
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(g) All landscape islands shall be enclosed by appropriate curbing or a similar device at least
six (6) inches wide and six (6) inches in height above the paving surface.
C. Landscaping for service structures. All service structures shall be fully screened. For the
purposes of this subsection, service structures shall include propane tanks, dumpsters, air
conditioning units and condensers, electrical transformers and other equipment or elements
providing service to a building or a lot.
(1) Location of screening. A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall or earthen mounding shall
enclose any service structure on all sides unless such structure must be frequently moved, in
which case screening on all but one (1) side is required. The average height of the screening
material shall be one (1) foot more than the height of the enclosed structure, but shall not be
required to exceed eight (8) feet in height unless specified otherwise by this Ordinance.
When a service structure is located next to a building wall, perimeter landscaping material
may fulfill the screening requirements for that side of the service structure if that wall or
screening material is of an average height sufficient to meet the height requirement set out in
this section. Although service structures are screened by plant material, such material may
not count towards the fulfillment of required landscaping.
(2) Protection of screening material. Whenever screening material is placed around any trash
disposal unit or waste collection unit that is emptied or removed mechanically on a regular
basis, a fixed barrier to contain the placement of the container shall be provided within the
screening material on those sides where there is such material. The barrier shall be at least
eighteen (18) inches from the material and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent possible
damage to the screening when the container is moved. The minimum front opening of the
screening material shall be twelve (12) feet to allow service vehicles access to the container.
§2000-416. Vegetation Preservation. Vegetation preservation is governed by the specifications in this
Section and the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
A. Vegetation preservation. The removal of trees, shrubbery, foliage, grass or other natural growth
shall be permitted when in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance or any other
Chapters of the Borough or Boroughs regulating land use, development and logging. The
grubbing activity shall be permitted with the expressed approval of the Applicable Zoning
Officer.
B. Cutting and clearing of vegetation; violations and penalties.
(1) Forestry activities of timber harvesting and/or logging, whether by clear-cutting, selective
cutting or other common practice, shall be permitted in any Zoning District. All forestry
activities shall comply with the applicable Borough’s ordinances.
(2) The cutting of trees and/or clearing of vegetation within the maximum bufferyard which
would be applicable to the lot as required by this Ordinance, or within the minimum building
setback as required by this Ordinance, whichever is greater, is prohibited. Grubbing activity
is permitted where the purpose is to improve the appearance of the lot.
(3) In addition to any other remedy available to the Tri-Borough communities and in the event
that the construction of structures and/or infrastructure on the lot does not commence despite
2000.59
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
an approved Development Plan the Tri-Borough Communities Subdivision Ordinance or its
designated equivalent(s) within six (6) months of the completion of the clearing operations as
determined by the Borough, a landowner and/or developer shall reforest the disturbed site in
accordance with requirements for the applicable bufferyard or, if in the area of any required
minimum setback not within a required bufferyard, in accordance with the spacing and
planting variety specified in this Ordinance. Should this six (6) month period fall during a
season not conducive to planting, the applicable Borough may permit the landowner, and/or
developer to delay this reforestation until a time more conducive to growth, but shall
commence no later than April 1. Furthermore, at the time of the Development Plan or plat
approval, the applicable Borough shall require that a performance bond be provided, in the
favor of said Borough, to guarantee this reforestation, in an amount approved by the
Applicable Borough Engineer. The lot must be reforested with a species comparable to the
predominant species on the lot prior to the commencement of the clearing operations.
§2000-417. Basement Structures. Occupancy of a basement or foundation structure prior to the
completion of the overall building or structure shall not be permitted.
§2000-418. Temporary Construction Trailers or Sheds. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall
be permitted in all Zoning Districts subject to the following conditions:
A. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be permitted only during the period that the
construction work is in progress. A permit for the temporary structure shall be obtained from the
Applicable Zoning Officer prior to the commencement of construction and shall be renewed
every six (6) months.
B. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be located on the lot on which the construction is
progressing and shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any lot line adjoining an existing
residential use.
C. Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be used only as temporary field offices and for
storage of incidental equipment and supplies and shall not be used for any dwelling use.
D. A temporary construction trailer may be permitted for use as a sales center for residential lots.
The maximum gross floor area of such a temporary sales center shall be five hundred (500)
square feet. A permit for the temporary trailer shall be obtained from the Applicable Zoning
Officer.
E. No combustible materials shall be stored in temporary construction trailers or sheds.
§2000-419. Outdoor Display and Storage.
A. Except for retail/wholesale landscape centers, building supply, auto dealers and similar
businesses which require outside storage of materials, storage and display of materials outside a
completely enclosed structure shall not be permitted. In the case of said businesses, outside
display and storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a security fence and shall be screened
by fence or hedge which is at least six (6) feet in height and is one hundred percent (100%)
opaque unless otherwise defined by this Ordinance.
B. Outside display and storage that is located with any parking lot or any other portion of the lot
shall be required to submit a Special Event Application as defined in this Ordinance.
C. Any material or equipment stored outside an enclosed building shall be incidental to the principal
use of the lot and shall be stored to the rear of the building or an alternative location which
screens the display/storage area from public view from the street or from any adjacent residential
use.
D. All organic rubbish and discarded materials shall be contained in tight, vermin-proof containers
which shall be screened from public view by an opaque fence or hedge which is at least six (6)
feet in height.




2000.64
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-421. Hospital Overlay.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Hospital Overlay District is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the community through guiding the development and use of hospital facilities
and related medical facilities and services while minimizing potential adverse impacts upon
nearby residential and other premises. These purposes are to be achieved by establishing controls
specifically for hospital and medically-related uses at locations where either such uses already
exist or they would be appropriate because of access and proximity to the existing hospital
facility.
B. Scope of Authority. The Hospital Overlay District is depicted on the Zoning Map and is
superimposed over underlying Zoning Districts. The regulations of this overlay district shall
govern new construction, reconstruction or expansion of new or existing hospital and medical
buildings and uses (enumerated in sections 1209 and 1210), regardless of whether the
requirements of this Article are more or less restrictive than those of the underlying Zoning
District at this location. Where requirements are not addressed in this Article, the provisions of
the underlying Zoning Districts shall continue to govern. The regulations in this Article shall not
apply to new or existing building and uses that are permitted and conditional under the
underlying Zoning District. These buildings and uses shall continue to meet all requirements
established for the underlying district.
§2000-421.1. Permitted Uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying Zoning District(s), the
following uses shall be allowed in the Hospital Overlay District as a matter of right:
A. Hospital
C. Office, Medical
D. Life Care Facility
E. Medical Clinic
F. Pharmacy
G. The following facilities where ancillary to and contained within a hospital
(1) Gift Shop
(2) Cafeteria
(3) Day Care Center
H. Accessory buildings and uses, such as Parking Areas or Lots
§2000-421.2. Conditional Uses.
A. Public Garage
B. Parking Lot that is not an accessory use
2000.65
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-421.3. Prohibited Uses. All uses, not specifically allowed as a permitted or conditional use in the
Hospital Overlay District or the underlying Zoning District, are prohibited within this district.
§2000-421.4. Development Uses. The following setback, lot coverage and building height requirements
shall apply in place of those of the underlying district:
A. Setbacks
(1) Minimum Front Yard Setback: Thirty (30) feet for buildings with one or two stories; forty
(40) feet for three stories.
(2) Minimum Side Yard Setback: Fifteen (15) feet.
(3) Minimum Rear Yard Setback: Thirty (30) feet for buildings with one or two stories; forty
(40) feet for three stories.
(4) Where adjacent lots are under common ownership of a hospital, the setbacks from lot lines
shared with other hospital-owned lots may be eliminated.
B. Maximum Lot Coverage: 80% (eighty percent)
C. Maximum Building Height: Not to exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, whichever is
less.
§2000-421.5. Design Standards. All new construction, reconstruction or expansion of new or existing
hospital and medical buildings and uses shall comply with the following additional requirements:
A. Building material shall be durable and complement surrounding buildings. No concrete block or
metallic building materials may be used.
B. Facades shall be recessed so that no more than fifty (50) feet shall consist of a continuous
unbroken plane.
C. Accessory parking lots or areas shall be located to the rear or side of buildings.
§2000-421.6. Landscaping and Buffers. The following landscaping and buffer yard requirements shall
apply in the Hospital Overlay District:
A. For any building of two (2) or more stories or any public garage, regardless of height, the setback
areas shall be landscaped to soften the appearance of the building. The landscaped area shall
include, at a minimum, the following plantings and/or structures for every 30 (thirty) linear feet
along the property line:
(1) Two (2) shade or evergreen trees reaching at least forty (40) feet at maturity;
(2) One (1) ornamental tree for every three (3) required shade or evergreen trees;
(3) Five (5) evergreen shrubs of at least three (3) feet in height at planting.
2000.66
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(4) Where the building or public garage abuts a residential lot, a fence or continuous evergreen
hedge shall be installed between the building and the landscaped area.
(5) All landscaped areas shall meet the standards for landscaping material set forth in Article IV.
B. Any parking lot shall meet the following buffer yard requirements:
(1) The parking lot shall install a perimeter buffer of at least fifteen (15) feet in width between
the sidewalk and the parking spaces. The buffer yard shall be landscaped to include at least
one (1) shade or evergreen tree for every twenty-five (25) feet of perimeter or fraction
thereof, and a continuous evergreen, planting or hedge measuring a minimum of three (3)
feet average height at planting.
(2) Any fence in the buffer yard shall be located between the plantings and parking spaces and
shall not include any barbed wire or chain link fencing materials.
(3) Interior landscaping and standards for landscaping materials shall meet all requirements of
Article 16.
(4) Where a hospital parking lot adjoins a lot under common ownership of the hospital, the
perimeter buffer yard requirements on sides sharing a lot line with other hospital-owned lots
may be eliminated.
§2000-422. BYOB Establishment.
A. Such establishment shall not remain open and/or transact business between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m., prevailing time of each day, and at any time on Sundays.
B. The hours of operation must be conspicuously posted at the business premises such that patrons
are sufficiently apprised of the same.
C. Broad form general liability coverage of $1,000,000 per single limit occurrence must be obtained;
proof of which shall be submitted with the conditional use application to the Borough Zoning
Officer.
D. A valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
shall be obtained prior to receiving an occupancy permit from the applicable Borough. Such
certificate shall be prominently displayed in the premises.
E. A valid amusement permit pursuant to the codified ordinances of the applicable Borough must
be obtained prior to occupancy and be prominently displayed in the premises.
2000.67
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
2000.68
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
2000.69
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE V
Supplemental Regulations
§2000-500. Reserved.
2000.70
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE VI
Uses by Special Exception
§2000-600. Procedure. See Article XI. Special Exception Uses are subject to general standards and
criteria set forth in this Ordinance as well as to the express standards and criteria set forth for specific
special exception uses in this Article.
§2000-601. Apartments, Garden. Garden Apartments shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Parking spaces shall be located no more than three hundred (300) feet from the apartment’s
primary entrance.
B. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous, brick, concrete or stone
block paving material.
C. The means of a building’s ingress and egress shall meet requirements as outlined in the applicable
Borough’s Building Code.
D. A twelve-foot (12’) wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided around the perimeter of
each building. Topography or other characteristics of the site or the development that might
affect the use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a greater separation of
structures.
E. The maximum number of units per building shall not exceed twenty-four (24).
F. All dumpsters and/or waste collection areas shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from nearest
residential unit. Dumpsters shall be located in the rear setback yard and shall be screened with an
earth berm, landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall with a minimum height of eight (8) feet and a
minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
G. The primary vehicular entrance to a garden apartment development shall, at a minimum, have
direct access to a collector road.
H. Maximum height of lighting for outdoor parking areas and roadways shall be twenty-five (25)
feet.
I. As part of all land development, the landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one (1)
foot candle.
J. Bufferyards between a garden apartment development and any other adjacent residential lot shall
be increased by ten (10) feet in addition to the required bufferyard width. Landscaping, within
this additional width, shall be provided according to spacing, quantity and type of plants specified
by the applicable Borough.
K. Slopes shall be graded at a maximum of a three-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical (3:1) ratio.
L. If the parking area for a garden apartment development is adjacent to a single-family residential
lot and demands greater than ten (10) automobiles, the following shall apply:
2000.71
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(1) An additional ten (10) foot bufferyard with one (1) of the following shall be provided along
the parking lot’s perimeter to minimize the impact of inappropriate noise, dust, light and
other disturbances on adjacent residential lots.
(a) One and one-half (1.5) times the required number of plants for screening and buffering
off-street parking and loading areas; or
(b) A mound, a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) feet in height at its peak, shall be
constructed whereas the sides do not exceed a four-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical
(4:1) change in elevation. The mound shall be landscaped in its entirety with plants that
provide four (4) seasons of interest but shall not include turf grass. The landowner and/or
developer shall coordinate site drainage so that site development and grading do not
create any adverse effects on adjacent lots.
§2000-602. Boarding House. A boarding house shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards in addition to those listed in§2000-600.
A. All off-street parking shall be provided on the lot.
B. Exterior lighting for parking areas shall be reduced to fifty percent (50%) luminosity after 11:00
P.M.
C. Off-street parking shall be screened with an earth berm, landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall
within a minimum height of four (4) feet and a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
D. Building height and setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding development.
E. All rooms available for boarding shall be located within the lot’s principal building.
F. Dumpsters shall be located in the rear setback yard and shall be screened with an earth berm,
landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall with a minimum height of eight (8) feet and a minimum
opacity of eighty percent (80%).
§2000-603. Duplex. A duplex shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following conditions
and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Bufferyards between a duplex and adjacent residential lots shall be increased by ten (10) feet in
width. Landscaping, within this additional width, shall be provided in accordance with the
spacing, quantity and type of plants recommendations made by the applicable Borough.
B. The primary vehicular entrance to the townhouse development shall, at a minimum, have direct
access to a collector road.
C. Maximum height of outdoor parking area and roadway lighting shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
D. The landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. To minimize
undesirable impacts on adjacent lots, illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a
maximum of one (1) footcandle.
2000.72
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
E. Access to the rear of any duplex lot shall not be encumbered by development.
F. Comments and restrictions shall be required for the final approval of all major land developments
that incorporate duplexes.
G. Any development shall be provided with public sewage as approved by the applicable Borough.
§2000-604. Quadplex. A quadplex shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Bufferyards between a quadplex development and adjacent residential lots shall be increased by
ten (10) feet in width. Landscaping, within this additional width, shall be provided in accordance
with the spacing, quantity and type of plants recommendations made by the individual Borough.
B. Slopes shall be graded at a maximum of a three-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical (3:1) ratio.
C. The primary vehicular entrance to the quadplex shall, at a minimum, have direct access to a
collector road.
D. Maximum height of outdoor parking area and roadway lighting shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
E. As a part of all land development, the landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. To minimize undesirable impacts on adjacent lots, illumination, when
measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one (1) footcandle.
F. Any development shall be provided with public sewage as approved by the applicable Borough.
§2000-605. Single-Family Dwelling. A single-family dwelling shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A plan illustrating lot access shall be submitted for review and approval. Access to Route 65
shall demonstrate adequate safety and distance from any intersection or other existing adjacent
driveway.
§2000-606. Townhouse. A townhouse shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Bufferyards between a townhouse development and adjacent residential lots shall be increased by
ten (10) feet in width. Landscaping, within this additional width, shall be provided in accordance
with the spacing, quantity and type of plants recommendations from the applicable Borough.
B. Maximum height of outdoor parking area and roadway lighting shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
C. The landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. To minimize
undesirable impacts on adjacent lots, illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a
maximum of one (1) footcandle.
D. Access to the rear of any townhouse and/or duplex lot shall not be encumbered by development.
2000.73
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
E. Comments and restrictions shall be required for the final approval of all major land developments
that incorporate townhouses and/or condominiums.
F. Any development shall be provided with public sewage as approved by the applicable Borough.
§2000-607. Agricultural Activities. Agricultural activities shall be a permitted special exception subject
to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Raising, breeding, and/or slaughtering of livestock shall not be permitted.
B. A commercial feed lot shall not be permitted.
C. All agriculture-related building shall not be closer to any lot line than one hundred fifty (150)
feet.
D. Surface water run-off from areas where animals are enclosed shall be diverted away from
adjacent residential properties and shall no contaminate downstream watercourses.
E. Any new operation or expansion of an existing agricultural operation shall not be approved by the
Borough until erosion and sedimentation control plan has been prepared and found satisfactory by
the County Conservation District.
F. A list of all chemicals utilized in the propagation and care of farm products shall be filed annually
with the Applicable Zoning Officer.
§2000-608. Automobile Rental. Automobile rental shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Automobile rental shall be located adjacent to an arterial road.
B. Automobile inventory shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for
fire safety can be maintained at all times.
C. All outdoor display areas adjacent to a residence shall have exterior lighting reduced to fifty
percent (50%) luminosity after 11:00 P.M.
§2000-609. Automobile Sales (car, truck, motorcycle, boat or trailer). Automobile sales shall be a
permitted special exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those
listed in §2000-600.
A. All automobile sales shall be located adjacent to an arterial road.
B. All automobile sales shall have a maximum lot area of one (1) acre.
C. Automobile inventory shall be aligned and displayed in an orderly fashion so that circulation for
fire safety can be maintained at all times.
D. All outdoor display areas adjacent to a residence shall have exterior lighting reduced to fifty
percent (50%) luminosity after 11:00 P.M.
2000.74
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-610. Automotive Services. Automobile services shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The maximum lot area for an auto repair & service station shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. An automobile repair and service station shall have direct ingress/egress to an arterial road, or
shall have a point of ingress/egress from a public or private street within the lot of a shopping
center.
C. All authorized repair and service work, car washing and lubrication shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
D. All automobile parts and accessories, dismantled vehicles and similar materials shall be stored
within a completely enclosed building.
E. All fuel, oil and other flammable substances shall be stored at least twenty-five (25) feet from any
property line.
F. Hazardous fluids shall be disposed of in accordance with regulations of appropriate regulatory
agencies.
§2000-611. Bed and Breakfast. A bed and breakfast establishment shall be a permitted special
exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The operator of the Bed and Breakfast must be the owner of the business and shall reside on the
premises.
B. Guests shall be limited to a maximum length of stay of fourteen (14) consecutive days in any
thirty (30) day period.
C. In no instance shall the total number of guests in the Bed and Breakfast exceed fourteen (14)
people.
D. The lot shall meet all area and bulk regulations of the district in which it is located.
E. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat, or glare shall not
be produced.
F. Not more than one (1) identification sign shall be permitted. The identification sign must
conform to Article IV of this Ordinance.
G. All required parking spaces shall be provided on the lot and shall not be located in the front yard.
There shall be one (1) space provided for each room and one (1) space provided for each
permanent resident.
H. The driveway entrance and all parking areas shall be constructed of well-compacted stone or
better and approved by the applicable Borough Engineer.
I. The use of a Bed and Breakfast expressly excludes alternative housing for criminal offenders,
drug or alcohol rehabilitation, halfway house and similar uses.
2000.75
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
J. Parking should be available on-lot. Where this is not practicable, on-street or alternate off-street
parking shall be made available within three hundred (300) feet of the establishment.
K. If adjacent to existing residential development, all surface outdoor space must be screened with a
minimum of fifty (50) percent opaqueness. Outside activity must end by 11:00 pm.
§2000-612. Billboard. Billboards shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Location.
(1) Billboards shall not be erected within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary line of any "R"
District or within five hundred (500) feet of any public or private school, place of worship or
cemetery, said five hundred (500) feet being measured along the radius of a circle from the
center-most point of the billboard structure extending in all directions.
(2) Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing between any existing or proposed
billboard structures of one thousand (1,000) feet. Required spacing shall be measured along
both sides of the same roadway frontage from the center-most point of the billboard structure
along a line extending from the center-most point of the billboard that is parallel to the
centerline of the roadway to which the billboard is oriented.
(3) The minimum front, side, and rear yard requirements applying to a principal structure as set
forth within the Zoning District in which the billboard is to be located shall apply to each
billboard structure.
(4) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view from the road or street, of
any existing business identification sign, residential or non-residential structure, or limit or
reduce the light and ventilation requirements under the applicable Borough’s Building Code.
(5) No billboard shall be constructed within the clear sight triangle of the public street or road on
which it is situated and shall not in any case obstruct or impede traffic safety.
(6) No sign shall be erected over any sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(7) Billboards shall not be part of a roof or wall nor shall they be mounted on the roof, wall, or
other part of a building or any other structure.
B. Size and Height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross surface area of three
hundred (300) square feet per sign face. This gross surface area shall be permitted, provided all of
the following additional requirements are met:
(1) A billboard shall have no more than two (2) sign faces per billboard structure which may be
placed back to back or in a V-shaped configuration having an interior angle of ninety degrees
(90º) or less.
(2) The dimensions of the gross surface area of the billboard’s sign face shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet in total height or twenty-five (25) feet in total length, provided the total allowable
gross surface area for the sign face is not exceeded.
2000.76
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(3) A billboard structure shall have a maximum height of forty (40) feet above the curb of the
roadway from which it is intended to be viewed.
C. Construction Methods. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance with applicable provisions
of the Uniform Construction Code and shall meet all of the following additional requirements:
(1) The entire base of the billboard structure parallel to the sign face shall be permanently
landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/or ornamental grasses of a minimum height of three
(3) feet. The shrubbery and/or ornamental grasses shall be placed in such manner as to screen
the foundation of the structure.
(2) Required landscaping, as defined in Article IV of this Ordinance, shall be maintained by the
billboard structure owner in an attractive and healthy manner in accordance with the
Borough’s accepted best management/conservation practices.
(a) No bare cuts shall be permitted on a hillside.
(b) All cuts or fills shall be permanently seeded or planted.
D. Lighting. A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so that it does not glare upon an
adjoining lot and shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) foot candle upon the adjoining lot.
(1) Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 Midnight and 5:00 A.M., prevailing local
time.
(2) No display lighting shall cause distractions, confusion, nuisance or hazard to traffic, aircraft
or other lots.
(3) The use of colored lighting shall not be permitted.
E. Appearance. No billboard structure, sign face or display lighting shall cause distractions,
confusion, nuisance or hazards to traffic, aircraft or other lots.
(1) No sign face image shall contain parts that move, scroll, flash, glitter or emit noise.
(2) A sign face that rotates to display two (2) or three (3) separate sign face images shall be
permitted providing that each image is displayed for at least thirty (30) consecutive seconds
every time it is shown.
(3) A maximum of seventy five (75) square feet of a sign face may be used to display a
changeable copy sign. Lettering and other images on the changeable copy sign shall be
displayed for at least thirty (30) consecutive seconds every time it is shown.
F. Maintenance.
(1) A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three (3) years, unless constructed of an
approved corrosive-resistant material.
2000.77
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(2) Every ten (10) years, the owner of the billboard structure shall have a structural inspection
made of the billboard by a registered engineer and shall provide to the applicable Borough a
certificate from the engineer certifying that the billboard is structurally sound.
(3) Each Borough reserves the right to perform annual inspections of the billboard to determine
compliance with this Ordinance.
(4) Billboards found to be in violation of this Ordinance shall be brought into compliance or
removed within thirty (30) days upon proper notification by the appropriate Borough.
(5) Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be maintained in such condition as
to eliminate loose or frayed material protruding or hanging from the structure. All loose
paper and other waste materials shall be removed and disposed of properly within fourteen
(14) days from when fraying begins.
G. Liability Insurance.
(1) In submitting a Sign Permit application to erect a billboard, the applicant shall provide a
Certificate of Insurance for public liability and lot damage which holds the Borough
harmless. The amount of insurance to be maintained shall be determined and adjusted from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. The insurance certificate shall contain a
clause stating that the insurance shall not be cancelled or reduced without first giving ten (10)
days notice to the Borough.
H. Permits.
(1) Prior to submission of an application for a sign permit, the applicant for a billboard shall
obtain and submit with the application, approvals from the County of Allegheny and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, when applicable.
(2) Approval of the special exception use shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of action
by the applicable Zoning Hearing Board granting the conditional use. If the applicant fails to
obtain a sign permit for the approved billboard within the six (6) month period, approval of
the special exception use shall expire automatically, without written notice to the applicant.
I. Application Fees.
(1) Said billboard application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount equal to
that set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
J. Non-conforming Billboards.
(1) Any billboard that does not conform to all the requirements of this section shall not be
enlarged or moved.
(2) Any billboard that is damaged or destroyed by more than fifty-one percent (51%) of its
replacement value at the time of damage or destruction shall be reconstructed only in
compliance with all provisions of this section.
2000.78
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-613. Car Wash. A car wash shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600:
A. The definition of a car wash does not include a one-bay washing facility in a service station
where washing facilities are purely incidental to the operation.
B. A car wash shall provide a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces per washing bay.
C. Paved off-street stacking spaces shall be arranged in an orderly fashion so as not to cause
blockage of any means of ingress or egress and to insure that the traffic flow on public rights-ofway
is not endangered in any way. A separate means of ingress shall be established and clearly
marked, as shall be a separate means of egress from the car wash. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner to avoid any congestion in the public right-of-way by directing traffic away from the
facility by posting a "Temporarily Closed" sign by other means. Traffic studies and associated
improvements may be required by the Borough as a condition of approval.
D. The car wash shall have direct access to an arterial or collector road as defined by this Ordinance
or shall have a point of ingress/egress from a public or private street within the lot of a shopping
center. The road shall have sufficient capacity to handle traffic generated by the facility.
E. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat, or glare shall not
be produced.
F. All equipment related to the operation of the car wash shall be properly screened to minimize
nuisances to adjoining lots.
G. A car wash that adjoins an existing non-residential lot shall be buffered in accordance with this
Ordinance. Grass, sod or turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for use within
landscaped bufferyards.
§2000-614. Cemetery. A cemetery shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The maximum lot area shall be fifty (50) acres.
B. A drainage plan, showing the lot’s existing and proposed runoff characteristics, shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
C. Plans for ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation on the lot shall be submitted for comments
regarding public safety to PennDOT and/or applicable Borough Engineer.
D. Parking for principal structures such as chapels or mausoleums shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
E. An additional ten (10) feet of yard setback with landscaping a minimum of six (6) feet in height
for off-street parking, loading areas, outdoor service areas and storage areas shall be provided as
defined by this Ordinance to protect the surrounding residences from in appropriate light and
other disturbances.
F. At no time shall a corpse be exposed or visible from a public right of way or adjacent lot.
2000.79
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
G. The hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled to protect the existing
neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance on
interruption as defined by this Ordinance.
H. No storage or transfer of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or explosive materials,
chemicals, liquids, gases or solids is permitted.
I. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a cemetery shall incorporate Best Managements Practices as
outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas to
minimize negative impacts of erosion, siltation and surface water and groundwater
contamination.
§2000-615. Cinema. A cinema shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following conditions
and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a manner that minimizes
detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
C. The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon projected peak hour traffic for the use
and approved by the Applicable Borough Engineer to ensure employee and visitor safety.
D. Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the
surrounding neighborhood.
E. For parking demands greater than three hundred (300) automobiles, additional setbacks,
screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading areas may be required to be provided in
order to protect the surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light and other
disturbances.
§2000-616. Community Center. A community center shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A community center shall be designed in such a way that conforms to surrounding lots and
structures.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
§2000-617. Conference Center. A conference center shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
F. A conference center’s primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a manner that
minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding
neighborhood.
2000.80
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
G. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
H. The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon projected peak hour traffic for the use
and approved by the Engineer to ensure employee and visitor safety.
I. Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the
surrounding neighborhood.
J. For parking demands greater than three hundred (300) automobiles, additional setbacks,
screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading areas may be required to be provided in
order to protect the surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light and other
disturbances.
§2000-618. Convenience Store. A convenience store shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Hours of operation shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. Building and parking setbacks shall be consistent with the existing building and parking setbacks
of adjoining lots.
C. Buffering of parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance.
D. As part of all land development, the landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one (1)
foot candle.
E. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted where the proposed development,
according to the institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards, will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadways’ peak hour volumes.
§2000-619. Country Club/Golf Course. A country club and/or golf course shall be a permitted special
exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The ground surface of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be paved with bituminous,
brick, concrete or stone block paving material to protect the surrounding neighborhood from
inappropriate dust and other disturbances.
B. An additional ten (10) feet of yard setback with a landscape screen in conformance with the
bufferyard requirements of this Ordinance. The intention of the Bufferyard shall be to protect the
surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate light and other disturbances.
C. The outer safety zone of all golf holes, as recommended by the United States Golf Association,
shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all adjacent residential lots.
2000.81
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
D. A country club or golf course’s hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect the surrounding neighborhood from detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.
E. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a country club or golf course shall be responsible for the conduct
and safety of the members, visitors or guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and
promptly quell any disturbances caused by the members, visitors and guests.
F. The site shall be served by public water and public sanitary sewer.
G. No storage or transfer of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or explosive materials,
chemicals, liquids, gases or solids is permitted with the exception of lawn chemicals and gasoline,
diesel fuel and oil for the operations and maintenance of motorized vehicles and equipment.
H. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a country club or golf course shall incorporate Best
Managements Practices as outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices
for Developing Areas to minimize negative impacts of erosion, siltation and surface water and
groundwater contamination.
§2000-620. Day Care Center (adult or child). A day care center shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The facility shall be licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Ingress and egress to the site shall be designed to assure the safe dropping off and pick up
children. All drop-off locations shall be designed so as to not interfere with the free flow of
traffic on adjacent streets.
C. Outdoor play areas shall be provided and shall be secured by a fence, at least four (4) feet in
height, with a self-latching gate.
D. Exterior open space shall be provided, being usable and accessible only for the children at a
minimum ratio of one hundred (100) square feet per child. Interior space shall be provided as per
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare. In addition, other lot and area
requirements within the Zoning District in which the day care center is proposed shall apply.
E. Depending on traffic and/or adjoining use of the premises, a fence with approved height and
strength may be required along the lot’s perimeter for the protection of those using the day care
center.
F. Outdoor play areas that adjoin residential lots shall be screened as per the screening requirements
of this document.
G. The general safety of a day care center site shall be evaluated as it relates to the needs of small
children.
H. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
§2000-621. Day Care Home (adult or child). A day care home shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
2000.82
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. Exterior open space shall be provided, being usable and accessible only for the children at a
minimum ratio of one hundred (100) square feet per child. Interior space shall be provided as per
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare. In addition, other lot and area
requirements within the Zoning District in which the day-care center is proposed shall apply.
B. Off-street parking spaces required for day care homes shall be one (1) for each three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of four (4) spaces.
C. Depending on traffic and/or adjoining use of the premises, a fence with approved height and
strength by the applicable Borough may be required along the lot’s perimeter for the protection of
those using the day care home.
D. All drop-off locations shall not interfere with the free flow of traffic on adjacent streets.
E. Any applicable licensing shall be current, available and provided for Borough reference upon
inquiry.
§2000-622. Driving Range. A driving range shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All parking areas adjacent to an existing residential lot shall provide a screen with a minimum
height of six (6) feet. Screens shall be constructed as earth berm, landscaped bufferyards, fence
or wall and should have a minimum opacity of eighty (80%) percent.
B. Range areas shall provide a minimum safety setback of fifty (50) feet between the outermost
boundary of the range and the closest property line.
C. Service areas maintenance areas/facilities and dumpster areas shall be screened from adjacent
residences with a screen with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Screens shall be constructed as
earth berm, landscaped bufferyards, fence or wall and shall have a minimum opacity of eighty
(80%) percent.
D. Exterior lighting for parking areas visible from residences adjacent to or in proximity of, as
determined by the applicable Zoning Hearing Board shall be reduced to fifty percent (50%)
luminosity after 11:00 P.M.
§2000-623. Dry Cleaning Facility. A dry cleaning facility shall be a permitted special exception subject
to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building.
B. The use shall comply with all performance standards specified in this Ordinance.
C. The storage or manufacture of hazardous or potentially hazardous materials shall not be
permitted.
§2000-624. Emergency Services. An emergency services facility shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600:
2000.83
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. An access analysis shall be conducted in order to evaluate sight distance and to identify
appropriate site access points. Special traffic signage control and lighting may need to be
provided pending the access analysis.
B. No more than one (1) sign shall be permitted; said sign shall be a ground or a wall sign.
§2000-625. Exercise/Fitness Facility. An exercise facility shall be a permitted special exception subject
to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600:
A. All pools, courts, or other comparable facilities shall be considered structures for the purpose of
this Ordinance.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the tract.
C. The facility area and lot boundaries shall be landscape as required by this Ordinance to minimize
noise projection and make the grounds aesthetically compatible to surrounding properties.
D. All structures shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet from any lot line, and no less than two
hundred (200) feet from the nearest house.
E. All facilities shall have a paved parking area in accordance with this Ordinance, and it shall not
be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any residential line.
F. All facilities shall abut a public road and have a permanent access thereto.
G. Alcoholic beverages without a state liquor control board license, amplified music, and juke boxes
shall be prohibited on the premises. Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted in the Borough of
Bellevue unless authorized as a BYOB Establishment as defined by this Ordinance.
H. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or any kind of light, shall be visible
from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level.
I. Hours of operation shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on surrounding residential
neighborhoods. The Borough maintains the authority to limit hours based on the intensity of use
and location of the facility.
J. All outside pools shall be surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet in height, the entrance to
which shall be kept locked when an attendant is not present, and shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable state requirements.
§2000-626. Farmers Market. A farmers market shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All parking areas adjacent to an existing residential lot shall provide a screen with a minimum
height of six (6) feet. Screens shall be constructed as earth berm, landscaped bufferyards, fence
or wall and should have a minimum opacity of eighty (80%) percent.
B. Service areas maintenance areas/facilities and dumpster areas shall be screened from adjacent
residences with a screen with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Screens shall be constructed as
2000.84
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
an earth berm, landscaped bufferyards, fence or wall and shall have a minimum opacity of eighty
(80%) percent.
C. A maximum of two (2) signs shall be erected per site.
D. Any temporary signage erected during hours of operation shall be removed daily
E. A farmers market shall not operate after dark.
§2000-627. Feed Store. A feed store shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Outside storage shall be screened as per the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
B. Exterior lighting for parking areas visible from adjacent residential lots shall be reduced to fifty
percent (50%) luminosity after 11:00 P.M.
C. Buffering of loading area shall be in accordance with this Ordinance.
D. Outside storage must be securely stored to eliminate wind and pest disturbance.
§2000-628. Food Packaging Facility. A food packaging facility shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All food packaging activities shall be in compliance with Allegheny County Health Department
regulations.
B. The Allegheny County Health Department and the Applicable Zoning Officer reserve the right
and shall be permitted to inspect operations and facilities without prior notice.
C. Loading areas/docks shall be screened as per the regulations in this Ordinance.
D. No outdoor storage shall be permitted on a lot associated with food packaging.
E. Approval shall be subject to periodic inspections to insure compliance with the conditions of
approval. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall notify the operator forty eight (48) hours before
such inspection shall take place.
§2000-629. Funeral Home. A funeral home shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All off-street parking must be provided on the lot.
B. Exterior lighting for parking areas shall be reduced to half power after 11:00 P.M.
C. Off-street parking shall be screened with an earth berm, landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall
within a maximum height of six (6) feet and a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
D. Building and parking setbacks shall be consistent with surrounding development.
2000.85
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
E. All rooms available for funerals and viewing shall be located within the lot’s principal building.
F. Dumpsters shall be located in the rear yard setback and shall be screened with an earth berm,
landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall with a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a minimum
opacity of eighty percent (80%).
§2000-630. Gasoline/Energy Recharge Station. A gasoline/energy recharge station shall be a
permitted special exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those
listed in §2000-600.
A. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
B. In order to ensure pedestrian safety, access and circulation for both customers and
deliveries/loading shall be posted on the lot.
C. Loading areas and docks shall be screened with either landscaping or fencing from neighboring
uses.
D. Lighting associated with any canopy constructed on the lot shall be installed as internal
illumination of the canopy only.
E. Dumpsters shall be located in the rear of a lot and shall be screened with an earth berm,
landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall with a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a minimum
opacity of eighty percent (80%).
F. Access driveways shall be a minimum of twenty-eight (28) feet wide and separated by one
hundred (100) feet from one another, if located along the same frontage as measured from edge to
edge.
G. The storage of motor vehicles (whether capable of movement or not) for more than one (1) month
is prohibited
§2000-631. Grocery Store. A grocery store shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Hours of operation shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the surrounding
neighborhoods.
B. As part of all land development, the landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one (1)
foot candle.
C. A grocery store shall have a maximum of two (2) points of ingress/egress to an arterial or
collector street as defined by this Ordinance.
§2000-632. Home Based Business, other. Home based businesses shall be a permitted special
exception use subject to the following minimum standards and criteria, in addition to those listed in
§2000-600:
2000.86
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. The home based business shall be carried on wholly within the principal or accessory structures.
B. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling and any
accessory structures used shall be devoted to the conduct of the home occupation.
C. Articles not produced on the premises shall not be sold on the premises.
D. There shall be no display of merchandise available for sale on the premises; however,
merchandise may be stored on the premise for delivery off the premises.
E. Exterior displays or signs other than those permitted in Article X of this Ordinance, exterior
storage of material and exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the principal structure shall not be permitted.
F. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat, or glare shall not
be produced. The use shall comply with the performance standards of § 900 of this Ordinance.
G. The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian traffic, which is normal for the
residences in the neighborhood.
H. The use shall not require internal or external alterations or construction features which are not
customary to a dwelling or which change the fire rating of a structure.
I. There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of similar power and type normally
used in a residential dwelling for domestic or household purposes.
J. The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewage, garbage, public safety or any
other municipal services beyond that which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.
K. The use shall not cause a negative impact on lot values in the immediate neighborhood.
L. The home based business shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for regular delivery of
materials to or from the premises, and commercial vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked on
the premises.
M. The following uses shall not be considered home based business and shall be restricted to the
Zoning Districts in which they are specifically authorized as permitted uses or uses by special
exception, including, but not limited to:
(1) Beauty shops or barber shops containing more than two (2) chairs;
(2) Clinics, hospitals or nursing homes;
(3) Funeral/Mortuary;
(4) Kennels, veterinary offices and clinics;
(5) Private instruction to more than three (3) students at a time;
2000.87
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(6) Restaurants or tearooms;
(7) Tourist or boarding homes;
(8) Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sales;
(9) Vehicle repair garages, as defined by this Ordinance.
§2000-633. Hotel/Motel. A hotel shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be such as to minimize the disturbance to
surrounding uses.
B. All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall reduce exterior lights to
half power after 9:00 P.M. and shall be screened as per this Ordinance.
C. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
§2000-634. Kennel. A kennel shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following conditions
and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Such uses shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line adjoining an
existing residential lot and at least fifty (50) feet from any other property line or public right of
way as defined by this Ordinance.
B. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres.
C. Outdoor runs and similar facilities shall be constructed for easy cleaning, shall be adequately
secured by a fence with a self-latching gate and shall be screened by a six (6) foot high compact
hedge or one hundred percent (100%) opaque fence on all sides which are visible from an
existing residential lot or a public right of way.
D. If adjacent properties are developed as residential lots, the kennels shall be soundproofed to
minimize noise impact on adjacent properties.
E. The kennel shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and compliance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Allegheny
County Health Department shall be maintained.
F. At no time shall the animals be permitted to run loose on the lot other than in a completely
enclosed area.
G. Approval shall be subject to periodic inspections to insure compliance with the conditions of
approval. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall notify the operator forty eight (48) hours before
such inspection shall take place.
2000.88
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-635. Nursery. A nursery shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be such as to minimize the disturbance of the
surrounding open space.
B. Equipment storage shall be permitted to include man-operated or mechanical equipment or other
machinery that is in operable condition. The storage of inoperable vehicles is prohibited for this
use.
C. Site grading shall be completed to ensure that surface run-off is directed away from any and all
material storage areas.
D. An eight (8) foot high screen shall be constructed around the perimeter of a storage area if
equipment and/or materials are not contained within an enclosed building/area. The screen shall
be measured from the average grade of the adjacent ground, unless otherwise defined by the
applicable Borough. The screen shall be eighty percent (80%) opaque and composed of finished
masonry, wood, or black or green vinyl-covered chain link fencing with eight foot high evergreen
plantings on the exterior side of the fence.
E. No storage or transfer of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or explosive materials,
chemicals, liquids, gases or solids shall be permitted, with the exception of gasoline, diesel, fuel
and oil for the operation and maintenance of motorized vehicles and equipment.
F. The ground surface of off-street parking shall be paved with bituminous, brick, concrete or stone
block paving material to protect the surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate dust and other
disturbances. Loading and equipment storage areas shall, at a minimum, be paved with crushed
limestone aggregate.
G. No more than one (1) identification sign shall be permitted; said sign shall be a ground or a wall
sign. The graphic area of the sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
§2000-636. Office, Medical. A medical office shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
§2000-637. Parking Surface Lot, Private. A private, surface parking lot shall be a permitted special
exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A parking lot shall not be accessed within fifty (50) feet of a roadway intersection.
B. The perimeter of a parking lot along a public right-of-way shall be landscape with a minimum of
a three (3) foot high hedge or screened with a minimum four (4) foot high masonry wall.
§2000-638. Parking Structure, Private. A private parking structure lot shall be a permitted special
exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
2000.89
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. If the parking structure is accessory to the principal use of a lot, it shall be included in all building
coverage calculations.
B. A parking structure shall be illuminated in conformance to the requirements of this Ordinance and
any applicable provisions outlined in the applicable borough’s Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
C. A parking structure shall not be located any closer to a right-of-way line or a property line than
what is permitted by the building setbacks defined in this Ordinance.
D. The perimeter of a parking structure shall be landscaped in conformance to the bufferyard and
landscaping requirements of this Ordinance.
E. Lot shall have a maximum of one (1) identification sign per ingress/egress point.
F. Ingress/Egress points must be designed so as not to impact surrounding development and traffic
patterns.
G. All lots located adjacent to existing residential development shall reduce exterior lights to half
power after 9:00 pm and shall be screened per this Ordinance.
§2000-639. Pet Cemetery. A pet cemetery shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A pet cemetery shall have a minimum lot size of five (5) acres.
B. A drainage plan, showing the lot’s existing and proposed runoff characteristics, shall be
submitted with the application for approval.
C. An additional ten (10) feet of yard setback with landscape buffering a minimum of six (6) feet in
height for off-street parking, loading areas, outdoor service areas and storage areas shall be
provided as defined by this Ordinance to protect the surrounding neighborhood from
inappropriate light and other disturbances.
D. At no time shall a carcass be exposed or visible from a public street or adjacent lot.
E. An inventory of type and quantity of all toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or explosive
materials, chemicals, liquids, gases or solids utilized, stored and/or transferred shall be filed with
the Allegheny County Health Department on an annual basis.
F. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a pet cemetery shall incorporate Best Management Practices as
outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas to
minimize negative impacts of erosion, siltation and surface water and groundwater
contamination.
G. No more than one (1) sign shall be permitted; said sign shall be a ground or a wall sign.
§2000-640. Place of Assembly. A place of assembly shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
2000.90
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. A place of assembly’s primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a manner that
minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
C. The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon projected peak hour traffic for the use
and approved by the Engineer to ensure employee and visitor safety.
D. Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the
surrounding neighborhood.
E. For parking demands greater than three hundred (300) automobiles, additional setbacks,
screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading areas may be required to be provided in
order to protect the surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light and other
disturbances.
F. The applicable Zoning Hearing Board may attach additional conditions pursuant to this section, in
order to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare. These conditions may include but are not
limited to increased setbacks.
§2000-641. Place of Worship. A place of worship shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A place of worship’s primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a manner that
minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
C. The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon projected peak hour traffic for the use
and approved by the respective Applicable Borough Engineer to ensure employee and visitor
safety.
D. Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the
surrounding neighborhood.
E. For parking demands greater than three hundred (300) automobiles, additional setbacks,
screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading areas may be required to be provided in
order to protect the surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light and other
disturbances.
F. The applicable Zoning Hearing Board may attach additional conditions pursuant to this section, in
order to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare. These conditions may include but are not
limited to increased setbacks.
2000.91
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-642. Post Office. A post office shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following
conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
B. Loading facilities shall be located in the rear of the building and shall be screened as per this
Ordinance.
C. Dedicated access to loading facilities shall be provided so as to minimize interruptions to
vehicular and/or pedestrian access to the primary post office facilities.
§2000-643. Public Facility. A public facility shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be such as to minimize the disturbance of the
surrounding open space.
B. All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall reduce exterior lights to
half power after 9:00 P.M. and shall be screened as per this Ordinance.
§2000-644. Public Safety Building. A public safety building shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Lot dimensions and bulk requirements/restrictions shall conform to the district regulations in
which the building is located.
B. All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall reduce exterior lights to
half power after 9:00 P.M. and shall be screened as per this Ordinance.
§2000-645. Public Works Facility. A public works facility shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following minimum standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600:
A. The location, orientation and lot circulation shall be such as to minimize the disturbance of the
surrounding open space.
B. If the parking area for a public works facility is adjacent to a single-family residential lot, the
following shall apply:
(1) An additional twenty (20) foot setback with one and one-half (1.5) times the required number
of plants for screening and buffering activities that occur on the premises.
(2) Maximum height of lighting for any outdoor parking area and/or roadway shall be twenty
(20) feet.
(3) As part of all development, the landowner and/or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of
twenty-five-hundredths (0.25) foot-candles.
2000.92
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
C. The applicable Zoning Hearing Board may attach additional conditions pursuant to this section, in
order to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare. These conditions may include but are not
limited to increased setbacks.
D. All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall reduce exterior lights to
half power after 9:00 pm and shall be screened per this Ordinance.
E. No storage or transfer of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or explosive materials,
chemicals, liquids, gases or solids shall be permitted with the exception of gasoline, diesel, fuel
and oil for the operation and maintenance of motorized vehicles and equipment.
F. Facility shall have a maximum of one (1) identification sign.
§2000-646. Railroad Facility. A railroad facility shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Lines adjacent to the existing development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot
deep, eight (8) foot high lot with a minimum opaqueness of eight (80) percent.
§2000-647. Recreation, Indoor (Bowling, Paintball, Billiards, Arcades, etc.). An indoor recreation
facility shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in
addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All indoor recreation facilities shall be located along an arterial or collector road as defined by
this Ordinance.
B. All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall reduce exterior lights to
half power after 11:00 P.M. and shall be screened as per this Ordinance.
C. Grass, sod or turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for use within landscaped
bufferyards.
D. All off-street parking shall be located on the lot.
E. All lots used for indoor recreation facilities shall have a minimum of two (2) points of ingress and
egress.
F. All dumpsters, not incorporated into the principle building, shall be located in the rear yard
setback and shall be screened with masonry or vegetation. All screens shall be a minimum of
eight (8) feet high and shall have a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
G. All indoor recreation facilities shall have a maximum gross floor area of forty thousand (40,000)
square feet.
§2000-648. Recreation, Outdoor (Athletic Fields, Go-Carts, etc.). Outdoor recreation shall be a
permitted special exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those
listed in §2000-600:
A. A minimum site of one (1) acre shall be required.
2000.93
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
B. All principal structures shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any property lot.
C. Parking shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance.
D. Screening as defined by this Ordinance shall be provided along all lot lines adjoining residential
use or Zoning District classification.
E. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent streets and properties.
F. The use shall comply with the performance standards of this Ordinance.
G. Any facility located within two hundred (200) feet of a property line adjoining a residential use or
zoning classification shall cease operations at 12:00 Midnight.
§2000-649. Research Facility. A research facility shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Any outdoor storage conducted on the lot shall comply with the regulations for outdoor storage as
defined in this Ordinance.
B. A research, testing and development facility shall have one (1) point of ingress and egress to an
arterial road as defined by this Ordinance.
C. Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled to protect the operation of the
surrounding neighborhood from detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance
or interruption.
D. All interior driveways and parking areas shall be paved with a material to reduce dust.
E. An inventory of toxic, corrosive, flammable, carcinogenic or explosive materials, chemicals,
liquids, gases or solids shall be updated annually and filed with the local fire department and the
Allegheny County 911 service.
§2000-650. Roadside Stand. A roadside stand shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All facilities shall be located on a private parcel and not in a public right-of-way.
B. A roadside stand shall possess a valid permit issued by the applicable Borough’s __________.
C. Parking areas shall be provided such that no part of any vehicle is located in a public right-of-way
while parked.
D. No more than one (1) identification sign associated with advertising the roadside stand shall be
permitted. The permitted sign shall be a ground or wall sign and shall have a maximum graphic
area of forty (40) square feet.
E. Approval shall be subject to periodic inspections to insure compliance with the conditions of
approval. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall notify the operator forty eight (48) hours before
such inspection shall take place.
2000.94
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-651. School, Academic. An academic school shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. An academic school’s primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a manner that
minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
§2000-652. School, Commercial. A commercial school shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
§2000-653. School, Kindergarten, Pre-, Nursery, etc. A kindergarten, pre-school, or nursery school
shall be a permitted special exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to
those listed in §2000-600.
A. A primary or nursery school’s primary drop-off and pick-up area shall be located in a manner that
minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
§2000-654. Storage Facility, Self-Service. A self-service storage facility shall be a permitted special
exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. All access routes to self-service storage facilities shall be provided with ten (10) foot wide
adjacent parking lanes. One-way access routes shall have one travel land not less than fifteen
(15) feet in width in addition to the ten (10) foot parking lane. All two-way access routes serving
self-service storage facilities shall have two twelve (12) foot-wide travel lanes, each of which
shall be provided with an adjacent ten (10) foot wide parking lane.
B. The storage of hazardous materials such as toxic or explosive substances shall be prohibited.
C. Wholesale or retail sales, garage sales, flea markets, or outside storage is prohibited.
D. All structures shall be oriented in such a way that individual storage units are not accessed from
the front of the building.
E. The maximum size of the individual storage units shall be five hundred (500) square feet.
2000.95
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-655. Storage, Outside. Outside storage shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. The storage of hazardous materials such as toxic or explosive materials shall be prohibited.
B. Loading areas and docks shall be screened as per the regulations of this Ordinance.
C. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent streets and properties.
§2000-656. Swimming Pool, Public. A public swimming pool shall be a permitted special exception
subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A public swimming pool’s hours of operation and activities shall be appropriately scheduled to
protect the existing neighborhood from detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.
B. A registered lifeguard shall be on duty at all times when the swimming pool is being used.
C. A plan for ingress and egress shall be presented inclusive of anticipated peak hour rates and
vehicular directional movements.
§2000-657. Tattoo/Piercing Establishment. A tattoo/piercing establishment shall be a permitted
special exception subject to the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in
§2000-600.
A. Dumpsters shall be enclosed and sealed in a manner as to ensure inaccessibility to the general
public.
§2000-658. Terminal, Freight. A freight terminal shall be a permitted special exception subject to the
following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A circulation plan shall be submitted detailing the proposed siting of all vehicular safety signage.
B. To the greatest extent practicable, at-grade vehicular crossings of rail lines shall be avoided.
§2000-659. Terminal, Passenger. A passenger terminal shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. A circulation plan shall be submitted detailing the proposed siting of all vehicular safety signage.
B. To the greatest extent practicable, at-grade vehicular crossings of rail lines shall be avoided.
§2000-660. Wholesale Business. A wholesale business shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Building shall be substantially similar in design and appearance to a retail sales operation.
B. The business shall not generate an unusually large volume of truck traffic.
C. No manufacturing or major assembly of products shall occur on the premises.
2000.96
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
D. Areas associated with loading shall be screened with landscaping or fencing from neighboring
use(s).
2000.97
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE VII
Conditional Uses
§2000-700. Procedure. See Article XI. Conditional uses are subject to general standards and criteria set
forth in this Ordinance as well as to the express standards and criteria set forth for specific conditional
uses in this Article.
§2000-701. Apartments, High-Rise. High-rise apartments shall be a permitted conditional use subject
to the following conditions and/or standards.
A. Parking spaces shall be located no more than three hundred (300) feet from the high-rise
apartment’s primary entrance.
B. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous, brick, concrete or stone
block paving material.
C. The means of a building’s ingress and egress shall meet requirements as outlined in the applicable
Borough’s Building Code.
D. A twelve (12’) wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided around the perimeter of each
building. Topography or other characteristics of the site or the development that might affect the
use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a greater separation of structures.
E. All dumpsters and/or waste collection areas shall be located on the interior of the high-rise
apartment structure.
F. The primary vehicular entrance to a high-rise apartment development shall, at a minimum, have
direct access to a collector road.
G. Maximum height of lighting for outdoor parking areas and roadways shall be twenty-five (25)
feet.
H. As a part of all land development, the landowner and /or developer shall provide a plan for
photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one (1)
foot candle.
I. Bufferyards between apartment development and any other adjacent residential lot shall be
increased by ten (10) feet in addition to the required bufferyard width. Landscaping, within this
additional width, shall be provided according to spacing, quantity and type of plants specified by
the applicable Borough.
J. Slopes shall be graded at a maximum of a three-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical (3:1) ratio.
K. If the parking area for a high-rise apartment development is adjacent to a single family residential
lot and demands greater than ten (10) automobiles, the following shall apply:
(1) An additional ten (10) foot bufferyard with one (1) of the following shall be provided along
the parking lot’s perimeter to minimize the impact of inappropriate noise, dust, light and
other disturbances on adjacent residential lots.
2000.98
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(a) One and one-half (1.5) times the required number of plants for screening and buffering
off-street parking and loading areas; or
(b) A mound, a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) feet in height at its peak, shall be
constructed whereas the sides do not exceed a four-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical
(4:1) change in elevation. The mound shall be landscaped in its entirety with plants that
provide four (4) seasons of interest not including turf grass. The landowner and/or
developer shall coordinate site drainage so that site development and grading do not
create any adverse effects on adjacent lots.
§2000-702. Group Care Facility. A group care facility shall be a permitted conditional use subject to
the following conditions and/or standards.
A. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided at the ratio of one (1) space for every one (1) fulltime
staff member and an additional space for every two (2) non-staff residents who are eligible
and are permitted by the sponsor to operate a vehicle.
B. A maximum of five (5) residents shall occupy said facility.
C. Whenever a party or parties seeks to occupy a dwelling or other building as a group residence, the
party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Tri-Borough Communities
describing the proposed use of the dwelling or building. Such statement shall detail the proposed
number and nature of the anticipated occupants. A license or certification shall also be obtained
from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the respective Borough prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit. If an appropriate licensing or certifying agency does not exist, the applicant
shall demonstrate to the applicable Zoning Hearing Board that the proposal satisfies a
demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to
surrounding properties.
D. A group residence shall be initially licensed, where it has met the requirements set forth by the
Tri-borough Communities and the Borough in which it is located, through December 31 of the
year in which the license is issued. For each year thereafter if the group residence intends to
continue its business, it must renew its license. The application for renewal is due in the
respective Borough office no later than the annual date set by each respective Borough for the
year proceeding the year in which the license renewal is sought. The lack of a license or the
failure to seek license renewal on a timely basis shall be a proper basis for the Borough to deny or
revoke an occupancy permit for the group residence.
E. Dumpsters, if located on the lot, shall be located in the rear setback yard and shall be screened
with an earth berm, landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall within a minimum height of eight (8)
feet and a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
2000.99
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-703. Halfway House. A halfway house shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the
following conditions and/or standards.
A. Whenever a party or parties seeks to occupy a dwelling or other building as an adult halfway
house, the party or parties shall file a detailed statement of intent with the Borough office
describing the proposed use of the dwelling or building; such statement shall detail the proposed
number and nature of the anticipated occupants. The part or parties shall obtain a license or
certification from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or Allegheny County prior to issuance of
an occupancy permit. If an appropriate licensing or certifying agency does not exist, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the applicable Zoning Hearing Board that the proposal satisfies a
demonstrative need and shall be conducted in a responsible manner without detriment to
surrounding properties.
B. An adult halfway house shall be initially licensed, where it has met the requirements set forth by
Allegheny County, through December 31 of the year in which the license is issued. For each year
thereafter if the adult halfway house intends to continue its business, it must renew its license.
The application for renewal is due to Allegheny County no later than November 1 of the year
proceeding the year in which the license renewal is sought. The lack of a license or the failure to
seek license renewal on a timely basis shall be a proper basis for the County to deny or revoke an
occupancy permit for the adult halfway house.
C. Dumpsters, if located on the lot, shall be located in the rear setback yard and shall be screened
with an earth berm, landscaped bufferyard, fence or wall with a minimum height of eight (8) feet
and a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
§2000-704. Mobile Home Park. A mobile home park shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the
following conditions and/or standards.
A. Gross Lot Requirements.
(1) Gross Lot. Ten (10) acres or four hundred and thirty-five thousand-six hundred (435,600)
square feet minimum.
(2) Gross lot width (at existing street line).
(a) One hundred (100) feet for portions used for general vehicular entrances and exits;
(b) Two hundred (200) feet for portions containing mobile home berths.
(3) Access point on existing street. As specified in Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
(4) Buffer Area. Each mobile home park shall be surrounded by a buffer area at least fifty (50)
feet wide along the inside of the lot lines.
(5) Side and rear yards of gross lot. Fifty (50) feet minimum from any mobile home berth to any
lot line.
(6) Minimum setback of all mobile homes and accessory structures. Seventy-five (75) feet from
any right-of-way road and adjacent to the mobile home lot.
2000.100
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
B. Net Lot Requirements.
(1) Berth size.
(a) Five thousand (5,000) square feet area and forty (40) feet wide as a minimum for a ten
(10) to twelve (12) foot wide mobile home;
(b) Ten thousand (10,000) square feet area and eighty (80) feet wide for any mobile home
with enclosed projections or a double mobile home.
(2) Open space. Four hundred (400) square feet per berth, not to be located in any required lot
setback, buffer area, or yard (berth) areas.
(3) Buffer areas and lot setbacks. As specified above.
(4) Distance between mobile homes. A total of twenty-eight (28) feet in both side yards, with a
minimum of ten (10) feet per side.
C. The applicant shall comply with any additional standards, as defined by the applicable Zoning
Hearing Board that are needed to protect public health, safety and welfare or to address unique
characteristics of a particular lot.
§2000-705. Nursing Home. A nursing home or life care facility shall be a permitted conditional use
subject to the following conditions and/or standards.
A. The minimum site area required for nursing/convalescent care shall be one (1) acre.
B. The site shall be served by public water and public sewers.
C. All nursing/convalescent care facilities shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection and shall be referred to the
applicable local fire company for review and comment.
E. Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure access by emergency
vehicles. A twelve (12) foot wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided around the
perimeter of each building. Topography or other characteristics of the lot or the development that
might affect the use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a greater separation
of structures. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to local fire companies for
comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.
F. Nursing/convalescent care facilities shall have a bed capacity of at least twenty (20) beds but no
more than two hundred (200) beds.
G. All property lines adjoining an existing residential use or residential district zoning classification
shall, at a minimum, be screened per regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
H. Any development shall be provided with public sewage as approved by the applicable Borough.
2000.101
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-706. Personal Care Home. A personal care home shall be a permitted conditional use subject to
the following conditions and/or standards.
A. The site shall be served by public water and public sewers.
B. All personal care homes shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection and shall be referred to the
applicable local Fire Company for review and comment.
D. Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure access by emergency
vehicles. A twelve (12) foot wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided around the
perimeter of each building. Topography or other characteristics of the lot or the development
that might affect the use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a greater
separation of structures. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to local fire
companies for comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.
E. All property lines adjoining an existing residential use or residential district zoning classification
shall, at a minimum, be screened by a ten (10) foot Bufferyard as defined by this Ordinance.
F. Any development shall be provided with public sewage as approved by the applicable Borough.
§2000-707. Check Cashing Services. A check cashing service shall be a permitted conditional use
subject to the following conditions and/or standards:
A. A check cashing service shall not be located within one thousand (1000) feet of any tavern or bar.
B. A check cashing service shall operate between the hours of 9:00 AM and 7:00 PM.
C. No more than one (1) identification sign shall be permitted; said sign shall be a ground or a wall
sign. The graphic area of the sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
§2000-708. Cinema. A cinema shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following conditions
and/or standards:
A. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted where the proposed cinema which
according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred
(100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
B. An additional ten (10) feet of yard setback with a landscape screen in conformance with the
bufferyard requirements of this Ordinance. The intention of the Bufferyard shall be to protect the
surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate light and other disturbances.
C. All parking areas adjacent to an existing residential lot shall provide a screen with a minimum
height of six (6) feet. Screens shall be constructed as earth berm, landscaped bufferyards, fence
or wall and should have a minimum opacity of eighty (80%) percent.
D. Service areas maintenance areas/facilities and dumpster areas shall be screened from adjacent
residences with a screen with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Screens shall be constructed as
2000.102
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
earth berm, landscaped bufferyards, fence or wall and shall have a minimum opacity of eighty
(80%) percent.
E. Exterior lighting for parking areas visible from adjacent residences shall be reduced to fifty
percent (50%) luminosity after 11:00 P.M.
§2000-709. Communications Tower. Communication towers shall be a permitted conditional use
subject to the following conditions and/or standards:
A. Use Regulations.
(1) A telecommunication tower with antenna that is attached to an existing communications
tower, smoke stack, water tower, or other tall structure, is permitted as a conditional use in
designated Zoning Districts. The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of the
existing structure by more than ten (10) feet. If the antenna is to be mounted on an existing
structure, a full site plan shall not be required.
(2) A telecommunication tower that is not mounted on an existing structure or that is more than
ten (10) feet higher than the structure in which it is mounted, is only permitted as a
conditional use in designated Zoning Districts.
(3) All other uses ancillary to the communication tower and associated equipment (including a
business office, maintenance depot, vehicle storage, etc.) are prohibited from the
communication tower unless otherwise permitted in the Zoning District in which the
communication tower is located.
B. Standards of Approval.
(1) The owner of the communication tower is required to demonstrate, using technological
evidence that this tower must go where it is proposed, in order to satisfy its function in the
company's grid system.
(2) If the communication tower owner proposes to erect a new tower (as opposed to mounting the
antenna on an existing structure), it is required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of
tall structures within a one-quarter (1/4) mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission
to install the antenna on those structures and was denied for reasons other than economic
ones. This would include smoke stacks, water towers, tall buildings, antenna support
structures of other communication phone companies, other communications (fire, police,
etc.), and other tall structures. The Borough may deny the application to construct a new
tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing
structure.
(3) Tower Height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower is the minimum height
required to function satisfactorily. No communication tower that is taller than this minimum
height shall be approved.
(4) Set backs from the base of the communication tower support structure. If a new
communication tower support structure is constructed (as opposed to mounting the antenna
on an existing structure), the minimum distance between the base of the support structure and
2000.103
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
any lot line, road or highway shall be one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the tower’s
height with the minimum setback equal to twenty-five (25) feet.
(5) The communication tower must be erected to comply with manufacturer requirements and
accepted engineering standards.
(6) The communication tower shall be securely anchored in a fixed location on the ground, and
the applicant shall provide qualified documentary evidence that the proposed structure will
withstand wind, snow, ice and other natural forces. The applicant shall also demonstrate that
the proposed tower and support structure are safe and the surrounding areas will not be
negatively affected by support structure failure, radio frequency, falling ice or other debris.
The communication tower shall meet radio emission standards adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
(7) The communication tower, or the yard area containing the communication tower, shall be
protected and secured to guarantee the safety of the general public. Fencing shall consist of
galvanized chain link, eight (8) feet in height, and installation of anti-climbing safety devises
will be required at a minimum to demonstrate compliance with this Subsection. Associated
supports and guide wires shall not be located within the required setbacks.
(8) The applicant shall submit to the Joint Planning Commission a site plan or survey of the lot
certified by an Engineer or Architect. The applicant must also submit a fencing and
landscaping plan with the application for conditional use.
(9) Only one (1) communication tower shall be permitted per lot.
(10) The communication tower in its operation will not endanger the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
(11) The applicant will provide, at the Tri-Borough Communities’ request, copies of FCC
licenses for all users of the facility. Conditional use approval is contingent upon the
maintenance of FCC licenses for all users of the communications facility. Any grant of
conditional use hereunder will automatically expire if said license ever expires.
(12) Communication tower owners shall be responsible for removing all communication towers
whose licenses have expired. Removal of the tower shall occur within one (1) calendar year
following the expiration date of the license.
(13) All lighting, other than that required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) shall be
shielded and reflected away from adjoining lot.
(14) Landscaping. Outside of the required fencing, a landscaping screen of evergreen trees
planted ten (10) feet on center and a minimum six (6) feet in height shall be required.
(15) In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the community in the
future, the proposed support structure shall be required to accommodate other users,
including other cellular phone companies, and police, fire and ambulance companies.
(16) Communication tower and support structures fewer than two hundred (200) feet in height
should be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order to reduce the visual
2000.104
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
impact. Where a communication tower and support structure are located within existing
woodland, the communication tower and support structure shall be painted dark green.
Support structures two hundred (200) feet in height or taller, or those near airports, shall
meet all FAA regulations and shall be painted as per FAA recommendations. No
communication tower support structure may be artificially lighted except when required by
the FAA.
C. Additional Standards. In addition to the foregoing, the following standards shall also apply to
communication towers and the applications for conditional use:
(1) All conditional uses approved under this section will automatically lapse if not used for six
(6) continuous months. The party responsible for erecting such tower will be responsible for
all the costs associated with the removal. The applicant must also provide proof of purchase
of a demolition bond, to be used in the event of abandonment and to be renewed annually,
equal to seventy-five percent (75%) of construction cost.
(2) Inspection. The Borough Council may require periodic inspections of communication towers
to insure structural integrity. Such inspections may be required by owners as follows:
(a) Monopole Towers - at least once every three (3) years;
(b) Self-Support Towers - at least once every three (3) years;
(c) Guyed Towers - at least once every three (3) years.
(3) Inspections shall be conducted by an Engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The result of such inspections shall be provided to the Borough. Based upon
results of an inspection, the Borough or Tri-Borough Communities may require repair or
removal of a communication tower.
(4) Equipment in a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to
reduce traffic and congestion. The applicant shall describe anticipated maintenance needs,
including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs and traffic, noise, or safety
impact of such maintenance. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street,
access for maintenance vehicle shall be exclusively the means of the collector street. A
surfaced and maintained driveway with parking inside the fence boundaries must also be
constructed.
(5) When lighting is required and permitted by the FAA or other federal or state authority, it shall
be oriented inward so as not to project onto a surrounding lot.
(6) Prior to the site plan certification, the applicant shall provide documentation that the proposed
communication tower has been reviewed and is not determined to be a hazard by the FAA or
the Allegheny County Department of Aviation (ACDA). The ACDA shall review the
communication tower application to determine if it is a hazard to any FAA flight paths.
(7) Applicants will be required to execute a Developers Agreement with the applicable Borough
Council.
2000.105
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-710. Consignment Store. A consignment store shall be a permitted special exception subject to
the following conditions and/or standards, in addition to those listed in §2000-600.
A. Hours of operation shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the surrounding
neighborhood.
B. Building and parking setbacks shall be consistent with the existing building and parking setbacks
of adjoining lots.
C. Outside storage of materials shall be prohibited.
D. All dumpsters shall be screened with a minimum eight (8) foot high fence or hedge with a
minimum eight percent (80%) opacity.
E. Buffering of parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance.
§2000-711. Correctional Facility. A correctional facility shall be a permitted conditional use subject to
the following conditions and/or standards.
A. The number of occupants and/or residents shall not exceed that which permitted by local and
County building/fire codes.
B. Access for emergency response shall be clearly distinguished and provided so as no parking or
circulation of visitor or employee traffic blocks such access.
C. No correctional facility shall be closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from another licensed
correctional facility or from any property designated on official zoning map as residential.
D. Appropriate transition to neighboring property shall be provided by landscaping and site design
consistent with the bufferyard requirements of this Ordinance.
E. To the greatest extent possible, all outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and on to the site.
A lighting plan identifying the location, direction, wattage in lumens and potential impacts of any
lighting required to extend beyond the boundaries of the lot line shall be submitted.
§2000-712. Crematorium. A crematorium shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following
conditions and/or standards.
A. A. Any an all odors and smoke generated as part of a crematorium operation shall be in
conformance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
B. Loading areas/docks shall be screened with either landscaping or fencing from neighborhood
uses.
C. No outdoor storage shall be permitted on a lot associated with a crematorium.
2000.106
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-713. Drive-In Theater. A drive-in theater shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the
following conditions and/or standards.
A. The lot shall have direct access to a State highway.
B. The location of entrances shall be clear and well marked, and circulation within the parking area
shall be obvious.
C. Maximum unobstructed sight distances shall be available for motorists entering as well as leaving
the premises.
D. Lighting of parking areas shall adhere to lighting requirements in this Ordinance, required
provisions pertaining to lighting and glare for all districts.
E. Parking and truck loading areas shall be screened from view from the adjacent residential
properties.
F. In the case of drive-in theaters, the screen shall be oriented away from the highway, and the ticket
building shall be located so that at least two rows of ten (10) cars each may line up on the
premises approaching the building.
§2000-714. Food Processing Facility. A food processing facility shall be a permitted conditional use
subject to the following conditions and/or standards.
A. Any and all odors and smoke generated as part of food processing shall be in conformance with
the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
B. All food processing activities shall be in compliance with Allegheny County Health Department
regulations.
C. The Allegheny County Health Department and the Applicable Zoning Officer reserve the right
and shall be permitted to inspect operations and facilities without prior notice.
D. Loading areas/docks shall be screened as per the regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
E. No outdoor storage shall be permitted on a lot associated with food processing.
§2000-715. Junkyard. A junkyard shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following
conditions and/or standards.
A. The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
B. The premises shall be maintained so as to not constitute a nuisance or a menace to public health
and safety.
C. No garbage, organic waste, petroleum products or hazardous waste shall be stored, buried or
disposed of on the premises.
2000.107
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
D. The manner of storage of junk shall be arranged in such a fashion that aisles of a minimum width
of twenty-five (25) feet between rows of junk are maintained in order to facilitate access for fire
fighting and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
E. Junkyards shall comply with the performance standards of this Ordinance.
F. No junk shall be stored or accumulated and no structure shall be constructed within one hundred
(100) feet of any existing residential lot or within forty (40) feet of any property line or public
right-of-way.
G. The premises shall be enclosed by a metal chain link fence not less than eight (8) feet in height
supported on steel posts with a self-latching gate. The fence shall be located within the interior of
the bufferyard a twenty five (25) foot wide landscaped bufferyard. All other property lines shall
provide a fifteen (15) foot wide landscaped bufferyard. Bufferyards shall be planted with a
combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses and groundcovers.
H. Grass, sod, lawn or turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for use within landscaped
bufferyards.
I. The fence shall be supplemented with screening material which creates a visual barrier that is one
hundred percent (100%) opaque.
J. The Applicable Zoning Officer may inspect the property at any time. The Applicable Zoning
Officer shall notify the operator forty-eight (48) hours before such inspection shall take place.
K. The manner of storage of junk shall be arranged in such a fashion that it shall not be higher than
the adjacent fence.
L. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a junkyard shall incorporate Best Managements Practices as
outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing Areas to
minimize negative impacts of erosion, siltation and surface water and groundwater
contamination.
M. The Joint Planning Commission may attach additional conditions pursuant to this section, in
order to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare. These conditions may include but are not
limited to increased setbacks.
§2000-716. Medical Clinic.
A medical clinic shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following conditions and/or
standards:
A. Facilities and equipment to support overnight boarding shall not be permitted.
B. Access for emergency response shall be clearly distinguished and provided so that no
parking or circulation of visitor or employee traffic blocks such access.
2000.108
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-717. Mobile Home Park. A mobile home park shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the
following conditions and/or standards.
A. Gross site area shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres.
B. Proposed mobile home parks shall comply with all applicable provisions of state laws regulating
mobile home parks and all applicable standards and regulations set forth in this Ordinance.
C. Guest parking shall be provided in a common off-street parking area at the ratio of one (1)
parking space for every three (3) mobile home lots.
D. All lots shall be serviced by public and/or private sewer and water.
E. All dumpster areas shall be screened from all lots and public right-of-ways. All screens shall be a
minimum of eight (8) feet high and shall have a minimum opacity of eighty percent (80%).
F. All mobile home parks shall provide sidewalks on both sides of a street (both public and private
right-of-ways).
G. The ground surface in all parts of each mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain
all surface water in a safe and efficient manner. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of each
mobile home park shall be treated in a manner approved by the Joint Planning Commission which
will effectively prevent soil erosion and prevent the emanation of dust during dry weather.
H. Mobile home park lot requirements.
(1) Gross density. The maximum number of mobile home lots within each mobile home park
shall be not more than eight (8) lots per acre of the total area of the mobile home park.
(2) Minimum lot size.
(a) The minimum mobile home lot size shall be not less than five thousand (5,000) square
feet of area. The minimum width of any mobile home lot shall be not less than fifty (50)
feet. The minimum length of each mobile home lot shall not be less than one hundred
(100) feet.
(b) Where on-lot sewage disposal is proposed, the minimum lot size shall be increased to a
size sufficient to accommodate the proposed system or as required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and other distances required herein.
(3) All mobile homes shall abut a street of the mobile home park’s internal street system.
I. Setbacks, buffer strips and screening requirements.
(1) All mobile homes, auxiliary park buildings and other park structures shall be located at least
thirty-five (35) feet from the mobile home park boundary lines. The minimum buffer strip
may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet if a suitable perimeter screening of plantings or
fencing is provided and approved by the applicable Borough Council.
2000.109
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(2) Mobile homes shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any auxiliary park buildings and
any repair, maintenance or storage areas of buildings. The minimum distance between
mobile homes shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
(3) Minimum building setback lines shall be not less than thirty (30) feet from the edge of the
street right-of-way. Where applicable, side and rear building setbacks lines of at least ten
(10) feet shall be established.
J. Recreation and open space requirements.
(1) A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the mobile home park shall be provided
for recreational space. This recreational space shall be suitable for varied outdoor
recreational uses. The Applicant will present assurances related to the responsibilities for
land ownership, the construction and/or purchase of facilities or other features, and the
perpetual maintenance of the above.
2000.110
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
K. Parking space requirements.
(1) A minimum of one and one-half (1.5) off-street parking spaces per each mobile home lot
within the development shall be provided within two hundred (200) feet of the mobile home
lot to be served.
L. Mobile home park internal street system requirements.
(1) The street system within a Mobile Home Park shall be designed and constructed according to
required standards of local sheets defined by the applicable borough’s Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
M. Mobile home lot improvements.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a permanent frost-free foundation and each lot
will have available adequate provisions, such as anchor bolts and tie-down straps, to assure
that each mobile home has available to it a means of securing the home to its site.
(2) Water and sewer systems. Water supply and sewage disposal system connections shall be
provided to each Mobile Home lot within a Mobile Home Park. In addition, the mobile home
park shall meet all requirements of the applicable borough’s Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance with regard to said water and sewer systems.
N. No mobile home subdivision or land development shall be approved until it has satisfied all
applicable ordinances or regulations of the Municipality in which it is located.
§2000-718. Oil/Gas Well. An oil or gas well shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the
following conditions and/or standards
A. An oil or gas well shall not be located closer than two-hundred (200) feet from a residential
dwelling or fifty-(50) feet from any property line or right-of-way.
B. An oil or gas well shall provide fencing and shrubbery around the perimeter of the pump head
and support frame.
§2000-719. Rifle Range. A rifle range shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following
conditions and/or standards.
A. A shooting schedule shall be filed with the Applicable Zoning Officer. The shooting schedule
shall describe hours of operation, schedule of events or meets, a description of where all required
safety information is to be posted on the site.
B. All outdoor rifle ranges shall provide a minimum setback of five hundred (500) feet from all
adjoining property lines or public right of ways as defined by this Ordinance.
C. A landscaped bufferyard of forty (40) feet in width shall be provided along all property lines that
adjoin an existing residence or residential Zoning District. The bufferyard shall be landscaped
with a combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses and
groundcovers.
2000.111
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
D. Grass, sod, lawn or turf shall not be considered an acceptable plant for use within landscaped
bufferyards.
§2000-720. Sexually Oriented Business. A sexually oriented business shall be permitted conditional
use subject to the following express standards and criteria:
A. Permit Required.
(1) No person may operate or be employed at a sexually oriented business without the
appropriate license issued by the Borough pursuant to the Tri-Borough Communities’ Adult
Business Licensing Ordinance.
B. Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
(1) A person is guilty of a violation of this Ordinance if he operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business outside of the district in which a sexually oriented business is a
permitted use. No sexually oriented businesses shall be located outside a district in which a
sexually oriented business is a permitted use.
(2) A person is guilty of a violation of this Ordinance if he operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of:
(a) A church.
(b) A public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary school.
(c) A public library.
(d) A child care facility or nursery school.
(e) A public park adjacent to any residential district.
(3) A person is guilty of a violation of this Ordinance if he causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually
oriented business within five thousand (5,000) feet of another sexually oriented business.
(4) A person is guilty of a violation of this Ordinance if he causes or permits the operation,
establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same
building, structure or portion thereof; or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.
(5) For the purpose of this Part, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest lot line
of the premises of a church, public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary
school, public library, child care facility or nursery school; or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park.
2000.112
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(6) The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
(7) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of enactment of this Section
that is in violation of this Section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such
nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use
may be changed to a conforming use. In the event that two (2) or more sexually oriented
businesses are within five thousand (5,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible
location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating
at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
(8) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a
nonconforming used by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually
oriented business permit, of a church, public or private pre-elementary, elementary or
secondary school, public library, child care facility, nursery school or public park within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid permit, and does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted
after a permit has expired or has been revoked.
§2000-721. Tavern/Bar. A tavern/bar shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following
conditions and/or standards.
A. The tavern/bar shall not be located in the Borough of Bellevue.
B. A tavern/bar shall be located in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board.
C. A tavern/bar’s hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled to protect the
existing neighborhood from detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.
D. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a tavern/bar shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the
patrons.
E. No more than one (1) identification sign shall be permitted; said sign shall be a ground or a wall
sign. The graphic area of the sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
§2000-722. Tower, Non-Communications. A non-communications tower shall be a permitted
conditional use subject to the following conditions and/or standards
A. The minimum lot size for a non-communications tower shall be two (2) acres.
B. The minimum setback of a non-communications tower from any lot line shall be equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the non-communication tower’s height.
C. The landowner and/or developer shall complete a viewshed impact analysis as part of all potential
non-communications tower development.
2000.113
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
D. The landowner and/or developer shall complete a biological resource survey to identify and
determine what conflicts are likely to occur with birds or other sensitive biologic resources.
E. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a non-communications tower shall incorporate Best
Managements Practices as outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices
to minimize negative impacts of erosion, siltation and surface water and groundwater
contamination.
F. All structures more than two hundred (200) feet in height shall have aircraft warning lights and
comply with United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements.
§2000-723. Water Storage. Water storage shall be a permitted conditional use subject to the following
conditions and/or standards.
A. No water storage tower shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in height.
B. Water storage/towers shall be setback from adjacent property lines and/or right-of-ways a
distance equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the water storage/tower’s height.
C. The height of a water storage/tower shall be measured from the top of the foundation to the upper
most point of the tower including any lights and/or antennae.
D. Lighting shall be required for the water storage/tower as a safety measure for low-flying aircraft
in accordance with all United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations and
approvals.
E. Access driveways to water storage shall be paved with a minimum of two (2) inches of slag or
stone.
§2000-724. Wind Turbine, Commercial. A wind turbine shall be a permitted conditional use subject to
the following conditions and/or standards.
A. The minimum lot size for a commercial wind turbine shall be two (2) acres.
B. A wind turbine for residential use on a residential lot shall be considered an accessory use.
C. The top of a commercial wind turbine shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet not including
the blades. The top of a wind turbine located on a residential lot shall not exceed seventy five
(75) feet in height including the blades.
D. The minimum setback of a wind turbine from any lot line shall be equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the wind turbine’s height.
E. Noise from any wind turbine shall not exceed seventy (70) decibels when measured from a
property line.
F. The landowner and/or developer shall complete a view shed impact analysis as part of all
potential commercial wind turbine development.
2000.114
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
G. The landowner and/or developer shall complete a biological resource survey to identify and
determine what conflicts are likely to occur with birds or other sensitive biologic resources.
H. The owner(s) and operator(s) of a wind turbine shall incorporate Best Managements Practices as
outlined in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices to minimize negative
impacts of erosion, siltation and surface water and groundwater contamination.
I. All structures more than two hundred (200) feet in height shall have aircraft warning lights and
comply with United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements.
§2000-725. All Other Uses. A use not expressly authorized in Table I as a permitted use, conditional use
or special exception may be permitted as a conditional use upon the applicant’s demonstration that if the
proposed use:
A. Impacts the environment and adjacent streets and properties equal to or less than any use
specifically listed in the Zoning District. In making such determination, the following
characteristics shall be considered:
(1) The number of employees.
(2) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to the proposed use.
(3) The type of products, materials, equipment and/or processes involved in the proposed use.
(4) The magnitude of walk-in trade.
(5) The traffic and environmental impacts and the ability of the proposed use to comply with the
performance standards of this Ordinance.
B. Will not endanger the public health and safety if located where proposed and that the use will not
deteriorate the environment or generate nuisance conditions such as traffic congestion, noise,
dust, smoke, glare or vibration.
C. Is generally consistent with the Tri-Borough Comprehensive Plan and harmony with the area in
which it is proposed.
D. Complies with any applicable standards and criteria specified in this Article for the most nearly
comparable conditional uses or use by special exception specifically listed in the Zoning District
in which it is proposed.
E. Is in compliance with all other standards of this Ordinance and all other applicable Ordinances.
2000.115
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE VIII
Parking and Loading
§2000-800. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
A. General Requirements for Parking.
(1) Minimum Dimensions.
(a) Each parking space in a parking lot shall be at least nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18)
feet long. Each handicapped parking space shall be thirteen (13) feet wide by eighteen
(18) feet long. The dimensions of van accessible spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act or equivalent provisions.
(b) The minimum dimension, including access lane, across a double loaded parking bay
with parking spaces at right angles to the access lane shall be sixty-two (62) feet and for
a single loaded bay forty-four (44) feet. Where parking spaces form a forty-five (45)
degree angle with the access lane, the dimension across a double loaded bay shall be at
least fifty (50) feet and across a single loaded bay thirty-one (31) feet. Where parking
spaces form a sixty (60) degree angle with the access lane, the dimension across a
double loaded bay shall be at least fifty-six (56) feet and across a single loaded bay
thirty-six (36) feet.
(c) A parking bay, for purposes of this Ordinance, shall include the area within a parking lot
containing an access lane and the parking spaces to which the lane provides access. A
double loaded parking bay denotes parking spaces on both sides of an access lane.
B. Maximum Distances of Parking from Use.
(1) Parking to serve any multiple-family residential building shall be located so that no required
space is more than two hundred (200) feet from the building such space is designed to serve.
(2) Parking to serve any non-residential use shall be located so that no required space is more
than four hundred (400) feet from the building or use such space is designed to serve.
(3) Enlargement or Change of Structure or Use.
(a) Whenever a structure or use is enlarged or changed, whereby twenty-five percent (25%)
or more additional parking area is required to serve such enlargement or change, all
parking areas shall be in accordance with this Part.
(b) Any change from a residential to commercial or industrial use shall comply in full with
the requirements of this Part.
(4) Where a structure or lot is of mixed uses, the total parking requirements for the various uses
shall be added together to determine the total parking required on the lot.
(5) On a single-family lot or townhouse lot a garage and the access drive to it may count as
required parking areas. Where dwelling units and/or commercial uses share parking and/or
garage space, parking designated for one dwelling or commercial use shall not block that
2000.116
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
designated for other dwellings or commercial uses. No required parking space shall occur
wholly or partly in a public right-of-way or be utilized for other than vehicle parking.
Driveway entrances shall be located to create maximum sight distances in both directions at
the street, and embankments, vegetation or other physical obstructions shall be cut back or
removed to enhance the driver’s view of the street.
(6) Design of Parking Lots.
(a) All parking areas serving any commercial, industrial, public or semi-public use or any
residential development where more than two (2) dwelling units share the same parking
area shall be surfaced with a mud-free material.
(b) Parking areas within the C-HC District are encouraged to be located along the side or rear
of any building located within the district.
(c) Parking lot surfaces shall be constructed in accordance with applicable Borough
construction, Subdivision/Land Development and stormwater management standards and
approved by the respective Applicable Borough Engineer.
(d) Where interconnections between parking lots of two independent developments are
provided, a landowner and/or developer may be entitled to one of the following
incentives upon approval by the applicable Borough Council :
(i) A ten percent (10%) reduction in required parking lot landscaping.
(ii) A five (5) foot decreased side or front yard setback requirement.
C. Handicapped-Accessible Parking Space Requirements. The number of handicap-accessible
parking spaces shall be in accordance with the following table unless otherwise defined by the
Americans with Disabilities Act or equivalent provisions. The percentage of van accessible
spaces shall also be provided in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or
equivalent provisions.
D. Requirements for Off-Street Loading
(1) For retail and service commercial uses and apartment buildings that do not accommodate
large trucks (registered maximum gross vehicle weight of 40,000 pounds or more) each
loading space shall be at least twelve (12) feet by thirty-five (35) feet in dimension with a
Total Number of
Spaces Number of Handicap Spaces
<100 4 percent
>100 but <200 4 plus 2 percent of the
number over 100
>200 but <500 6 plus 1 percent of the
number over 200
>500 but <1,000 2 percent
>1,000 20 plus 1 percent over 1,000
2000.117
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
clear height of fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches. For all industrial uses, large product
commercial uses (car sales, major appliance and furniture, etc.) planned non-residential
development, and office buildings that accommodate trucks with a registered maximum gross
vehicle weight of 40,000 pounds or more, each loading space shall be at least fourteen (14)
feet by sixty (60) feet in dimension with a clear height of fifteen (15) feet. All other uses with
loading should provide a ten (10) foot by twenty-five (25) foot loading space with a clear
height of eight (8) feet.
(2) Maneuvering space shall be provided adjacent to the loading area, if necessary, so that
vehicles may change direction and leave as well as enter the loading area moving in a
forward direction. Public roads adjacent to a loading area shall not be used for maneuvering.
Areas established for off-street parking shall not be utilized for off-street loading or vehicle
repair work.
(3) Where there are multiple uses within a development, shared loading areas shall be used
among as many uses as practical. Loading areas shall be adjacent to the use or building
served except that in a group of buildings in the same use on the same lot, one building may
be designated to receive and dispatch goods, provided the total applicable floor area in all
buildings on the lot is aggregated in determining the total required loading spaces.
(4) Whenever a use is enlarged or changed, the additional loading required to serve such
enlargement or change shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(5) Loading areas and adjacent maneuvering space shall be surfaced with a permanent allweather
material placed over at least 6 (six) inches of well compacted base course, capable of
bearing the weight of vehicles ordinarily traveling over or parking upon the surface, and shall
be sloped to assure positive drainage to an approved stormwater management facility.
(6) Loading areas may be lighted but such lighting shall not create glare conditions on adjacent
residential properties or streets.
(a) Access to the loading area on any lot shall be via a road or lane at least twelve (12) feet in
width for one-way traffic or twenty-two (22) feet wide for two-way use, with a clearance
of at least fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches its entire length.
(b) When a loading area is to occur on a lot that abuts a residential Zoning District, the edges
of such loading area between the residential zone and the loading area uninterrupted by
buildings or screening topography shall be planted in accordance with the Bufferyards
defined by this Ordinance. A solid fence or wall at least six and one-half (6 ½) feet in
height may be constructed in lieu of hedging as required by the Bufferyard requirements
provided such fence or wall is maintained in good condition.
(c) Nothing in this Section shall compel uses existing prior to passage of this Ordinance to
comply with these loading requirements except that any additions or intensifications of
use upon the same lot shall be provided with loading areas in accordance with these
requirements.
2000.118
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
E. Parking and Loading Requirements Table.
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Minimum
Loading Requirements
Accessory Dwelling 1 per unit N/A
Apartment, Garden 2 per dwelling unit N/A
Apartment, High-Rise 2 per dwelling unit N/A
Boarding House 1 for each 2 full-time staff,
plus 1 for every 2 beds.
N/A
Duplex 2 per unit N/A
Group Care Facility/
Halfway House
1 for every 4 residents, plus 1 for each
employee on peak shift
N/A
Mobile Home N/A N/A
Mobile Home Park 2 per dwelling unit N/A
Nursing Home/Life Care Facility 1 for every 4 residents, plus 1 for each
employee on peak shift
N/A
Personal Care Home N/A N/A
Quadplex 2 per dwelling unit N/A
Single- Family Dwelling 2 per dwelling unit N/A
Townhouse 2 per dwelling unit N/A
Automobile Rental Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Automobile Sales (car, Truck,
motorcycle, boat or trailer)
Parking Demand Analysis Required 1 for every 5,000 s.f.
of g.f.a. showroom
Automotive services 2 per service bay N/A
Bakery 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
N/A
Bed and Breakfast 1 Space for each guest room N/A
Business Services 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
0 - 19,999 s.f. = 1 berth
20,000-60,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Car Wash 1 for every 200 square feet of office
plus 4 stacking spaces for automatic
wash; 2 stacking spaces for self-service
N/A
Catering Service 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
N/A
Cemetery 2, plus 1 for each 2 employees N/A
Check Cashing Establishment 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
N/A
Cinema 1 per 3 seats N/A
Community Center 1 per 500 square feet N/A
Conference/Convention Center 1 for every 500 square feet
of net floor area
0 - 4,999 s.f. = 1 berth
5,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional. space 20,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Consignment Store 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
N/A
2000.119
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Minimum
Loading Requirements
Contractor's Storage Yard 1 for every 2000 square feet of net lot
area
N/A
Convenience Store 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
0 - 9,999 s.f. = 1 berth
10,000 - 19,999 s.f = 2 berths
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 additional
berth
Correctional Facility 1 for each 400 square feet
of gross floor area
0 - 4,999 s.f. = 1 berth
5,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 20,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Country Club/ Golf Course 1 for every 4 members, plus the number
of spaces required for a low turnover
restaurant is included
0 - 4,999 s.f. = 1 berth
5,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berth
each additional space 20,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Crematorium 1 per 1000 square feet N/A
Day Care Center (adult or child) 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area with a minimum of 4 spaces
N/A
Day Care Home (adult or child) 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area with a minimum of 4 spaces
N/A
Drive-In Theater Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Driving Range 1 for every 2 tee stands N/A
Dry Cleaning Facility 1 for every 2 employees N/A
Dry Cleaning, Customer Services 1 for every 1,000 square feet,
above first 2,000 square feet
N/A
Emergency Services 1 for every 750 square feet
of net floor area
N/A
Essential Services 1 for every 750 square feet
of net floor area
N/A
Exercise/Fitness Facility 1 for each 400 square feet
of gross floor area N/A
Farmers Market Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Feed Store 1 for every 300 square feet of
gross floor area N/A
Financial Institution Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Flea Market 2 for every 1000 square feet N/A
Flex Space 1 for every 300 square feet
of gross floor area
N/A
Food Processing Facility 1 for every 750 square feet
of net floor area
0 - 4,999 s.f. = 1 berth
5,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 20,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
2000.120
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Minimum
Loading Requirements
Funeral Home 25 for the first parlor, plus 10 for
each additional parlor
1 for every 4 viewing rooms
Gasoline/Energy Recharge Station 1 for each employee and employer N/A
Greenhouse 1 for every 200 square feet
of gross floor area N/A
Grocery Store 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Hardware Store 1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Heliport 2 per helipad, plus 1 per employee N/A
Home Improvement Center
1 per 200 square feet
of gross floor area N/A
Home Occupation, No Impact 1 per employee N/A
Home Occupation, Other 1 per employee N/A
Hospital
Parking Demand Analysis Required 0 - 19,999 s.f. = 1 berth
20,000 - 60,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Hotel/Motel
Parking Demand Analysis Required 0 - 19,999 s.f. = 1 berth
20,000 - 60,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth/
0 - 59,999 s.f. = 1 berth
60,000 - 99,000 s.f. = 2 berths
100,000-160,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Industrial, Heavy (manufacturing, etc.) Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Industrial, Light ( warehousing,
distribution,etc.)
Parking Demand Analysis Required
N/A
Junkyard
1 for each peak shift employee, plus 2
for patrons
N/A
Kennel
1 for each peak shift employee, plus
1 for each 1,000 square feet
N/A
Landfill
1 for each peak shift employee, plus 5
for patrons N/A
Laundromat N/A N/A
Library 1 per 600 square feet
0 - 20,000 s.f. = 1 berth
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 berth
Marina
Parking Demand Analysis Required 0 - 20,000 s.f. = 1 berth
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 berth
2000.121
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Minimum
Loading Requirements
Massage Therapy Establishment 1 for each table, plus 1 per 2 employees
N/A
Medical Clinic
1 for every 3 seats in waiting room
and 1 space for every employee N/A
Museum
1 for every 400 square feet of public
space, plus 1 for each employee N/A
Nursery 1 per 1,000 square feet of net lot area N/A
Office, Medical
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
0 - 59,999 s.f. = 1 berth
each additional 30,000 s.f.
Office, Professional/Administrative
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Park Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Performance Studio or Gallery
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Personal and Professional Service
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
0 - 29,999 s.f = 1 berth
30,000 - 59,999 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional 30,000 s.f. = 1 additional
berth
Pet Cemetery 3 N/A
Pharmacy
1 per 300 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
0 - 20,000 s.f. = 1 berth
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 berth
Place of Worship or Assembly
1 for every 8 seats in the largest
meeting room
1 berth/500 seats
Post Office
1 space per peak shift employee plus
one space per 800 square feet of gross
floor area
0 - 9,999 s.f = 1 berth
10,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 additional
berth
Printing And Publishing Facility
1 for every 500 square feet
of gross floor area N/A
Public Borough/Safety Building
1 space per peak shift employee and one
space per 800 square feet of gross floor
area N/A
Public Works Facility
1 space per employee on shift of
maximum employment and one
space per 800 square feet of gross
floor area N/A
2000.122
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Minimum
Loading Requirements
Railroad Facility 1 per 2 employees N/A
Recreation, Indoor (bowling, paintball
billiards)
2 for every 1000 square feet
N/A
Recreation, Outdoor ( athletic fields,
go-carts, etc.)
Parking Demand Analysis Required
N/A
Recycling, Retail
1 for every 200 square feet of net
flooring N/A
Repair Shop (electrical and
household, appliances, etc.)
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Research Facility Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Restaraunt, without Drive-Thru
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet
0 - 59,999 s.f. = 1 berth
60,000 - 99,999 s.f. = 2 berths
100,000 - 160,000 s.f. = 3 berths
each additional berth 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Resturant, with Drive-Thru
Parking Demand Analysis Required 0 - 59,999 s.f. = 1 berth
60,000 - 99,999 s.f. = 2 berths
100,000 - 160,000 s.f. = 3 berths
each additional berth 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Retail Business/ Sales
1 for every 200 square feet of net
flooring
0 - 9,999 s.f = 1 berth
10,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 additional
berth
Rifle Range 1 for every 100 square feet N/A
School, Academic Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
School, Commercial
1 space per employee, plus 1 space
per 5 students
0 - 59,999 s.f. = 1 berth
60,000 - 99,000 s.f. = 2 berths
100,000-160,000 s.f. = 3 berths
each additional space 60,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
School, Kindergarten, Pre-, Nursery
1 space per employee, plus 1 space
per 10 students N/A
Sexually-Oriented Business
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
2000.123
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Minimum
Loading Requirements
Social Club, Private
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Storage Facility, Self-Service N/A
1: each exterior door
1: five interior doors
Tattoo/Body Piercing Establishment
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Tavern/Bar
1 per 500 square feet above first 2,000
square feet N/A
Terminal, Freight Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Terminal, Passenger
Parking Demand Analysis Required 0 - 9,999 s.f = 1 berth
10,000 - 20,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional 20,000 s.f. = 1 additional
berth
Theater Parking Demand Analysis Required N/A
Veterniary Office (no boarding)
1 per employee and 2 per exam table for
offices greater than 2,000 square feet
0 - 19,999 s.f. = 1 berth
20,000 - 50,000 s.f. = 2 berths
each additional space 50,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Water Storage/Tower 1 per tower N/A
Wholesale Business
Parking Demand Analysis Required 0 - 19,999 s.f. = 1 berth
20,000 - 39,999 s.f. = 2 berths
40,000 - 65,000 s.f. = 3 berths
each additional berth 25,000 s.f. = 1
additional berth
Wind Turbine, Commercial 1 per turbine 1
All Other Uses Parking Demand Analysis Required Analysis Required
2000.124
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE IX
Performance Standards
§2000-900. Compliance Required.
A. All uses shall comply with the requirements of this section. Compliance shall be determined by
the Applicable Zoning Officer with respect to permitted uses by the applicable Zoning Hearing
Board with respect to special exceptions and by the applicable Borough Council with respect to
conditional uses. In order to determine whether a proposed use will conform to the requirements
of this Ordinance, the applicable Borough may obtain a qualified consultant's report, whose cost
for services shall be borne by the applicant.
B. All projects that require the additional use of new facilities or essential services, such as sewers,
storm drains, fire hydrants, potable water, public streets, street lighting and similar services, shall
obtain such approval as required by the agency providing such service prior to project approval.
Non availability of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for denying permits for
additional development until such services are available. The jurisdiction is not obligated to
extend or supply essential services if capacity is not available. If capacity is available, the
extension of services shall be by and at the cost of the developer, unless the jurisdiction agrees
otherwise. All service extensions shall be designed and installed in full conformance with the
jurisdiction’s standards for such service, and shall be subject to review, permit and inspection as
required by other policies or ordinances of the jurisdiction.
§2000-901. Fire Protection. Fire protection and fire-fighting equipment acceptable to the National Fire
Protection Association shall be readily available where there is any activity involving the handling or
storage of flammable or explosive material.
§2000-902. Radioactivity; Electrical Disturbances. No activity shall emit radioactivity at any point or
cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of radio or other equipment in the vicinity.
§2000-903. Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of volume, frequency or beat
shall be muffled or otherwise controlled, except that fire sirens and related apparatus used solely for
public purposes shall be exempt from this requirement. Noise in excess of ninety (90) decibels as
measured on a decibel or sound level meter of standard quality and design operated on the A-weighted
scale at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from any property line of the property on which the noise
source is located shall not be permitted.
§2000-904. Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring property in any
district shall be prohibited, except that temporary vibration as a result of construction activity shall be
permitted.
§2000-905. Odors. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is discernible on any
adjoining lot or property.
§2000-906. Smoke. The maximum amount of smoke emission permitted shall be determined by the use
of the Standard Ringelmann Chart issued by the United States Bureau of Mines. No smoke of a shade
darker than No. 2 shall be permitted.
2000.125
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
§2000-907. Air Pollution. No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, vapors or other substance shall be
permitted which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling of
property.
§2000-908. Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining
properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
§2000-909. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will carry objectionable
substances onto neighboring properties.
§2000-910. Water Pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat
Commission.
§2000-911. Excavation, Filling and Grading.
A. All finished cut and fill slopes shall have a grade of not more than two (2) feet horizontal for
every one (1) foot vertical. All cut and fill slopes greater than twenty (20) feet in elevation or
depression must be designed by a certified soils engineer or a certified geologist. The soils
engineer or geologist who designs the slope must certify that it is stable upon completion. The
Borough Engineer may require that a fence or other barrier be placed in a location which will
prevent anyone from nearby properties access to a cut or fill slope.
B. All lands, regardless of their slope, from which structures or natural cover has been removed or
otherwise destroyed shall be appropriately graded and seeded within a reasonable time of such
clearance activity. The phrase "a reasonable time" shall be interpreted to be within two weeks
after construction activities are completed, unless those activities are completed between a time
period of November 1 and April 1. In such case, the required sodding or seeding shall occur
within two weeks of April 1. This shall be rigidly applied to construction activities in order to
accomplish the intent of keeping erosion to an absolute minimum. During non-growing seasons,
appropriate measures shall be taken, such as but not limited to siltation dams, to prevent erosion
by wind or water. In addition to the measures stated above, the developer/property owner shall
provide assurances that all requirements will be complied with at the beginning of the next
growing season.
§2000-912. Floodway Development. No development, cutting or filling of land or natural vegetation is
permissible within a floodway, except as permitted by action of the applicable Borough Zoning Hearing
Board and/or federal, state, county or municipal agencies having jurisdiction over such matters.
§2000-913. Disturbance Near Water Courses. No cutting, fill or other disturbing of land or natural
vegetation is permissible within fifty (50) feet of the edge of perennial and intermittent streams, except as
permitted by action of the applicable Zoning Hearing Board and/or federal, state, county or municipal
agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. In cases where the applicable Zoning Hearing Board
determines that a hardship running with the land exists as a result of this requirement, a variance may be
granted, provided that special precautions can be and are ordered to be taken to ensure against continuing
erosion or other circumstances which may be harmful to the immediate watercourse or in any way pollute
the stream.
2000.126
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
§2000-1000. Procedure.
Subject to the provisions of this Article, a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure or nonconforming
use may be continued even though it does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance for the district
in which it is located. The Zoning Officer may keep and maintain a list of all nonconforming lots,
structures or uses existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, its predecessors or amendments
thereto.
§2000-1001. Non-Conforming Uses. The following provisions shall apply to all non-conforming uses.
A. Continuation and change. A non-conforming use may be sold or otherwise transferred to other
owners and may be continued, but shall not be changed in use unless to a conforming use.
B. Enlargement or expansion.
(1) Where a non-conforming use is conducted inside a building or structure, the floor area of the
structure and the non-conforming use within it may be enlarged when permitted by the Joint
Planning Commission in accordance with Article VI of this Ordinance.
(2) Any non-conforming use may be extended by twenty-five percent (25%) throughout any part
of a structure which was designed for such use at the time the use became non-conforming;
however, a non-conforming use shall not be extended to occupy any structure or portion of a
lot, except on a lot or portion of a lot owned at the time the use became non-conforming.
This shall be approved by the Joint Planning Commission according to this Ordinance.
(3) This Subsection shall not apply to signs.
C. Damage and reconstruction. Any structure which accommodates or supports an officially
recognized non-conforming use which is damaged by fire, flood, explosion or other casualty may
be reconstructed and used as before if such reconstruction is initiated and diligently pursued
within twelve (12) months of such casualty and if the restored structure has no greater lot
coverage and contains no greater volume than before such casualty.
D. Abandonment. In the event that any non-conforming use conducted in a structure or on a lot is
abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or longer, such non-conforming use
shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not be resumed. Once the non- conforming use is
abandoned, the building, structure and/or lot shall not be used except in conformance with the
regulations of the Zoning District in which it is located.
§2000-1002. Non-Conforming Structures. The following provisions shall apply to all legally existing
non-conforming structures, as defined by this Ordinance, in all Zoning Districts.
A. Structural alteration. No such structure may be enlarged or structurally altered in a way that
increases its non-conformity, except when the applicable Zoning Hearing Board, after a public
hearing, may determine undue hardship and may authorize a reasonable modification of such
structure.
2000.127
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
B. Damage or destruction. Any non-conforming structure which has been partially or completely
damaged or destroyed by fire or other means may be rebuilt or repaired on its existing foundation
even though such foundation may violate the setback requirements for the Zoning District in
which the structure is located, provided that the repair or reconstruction and re-occupancy of the
structure occurs within twelve (12) months of the date that the original structure was damaged or
destroyed.
C. Moving. Should a non-conforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance, it shall
thereafter conform to the requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located.
D. Legally recognized signs.
(1) Non-conforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed, provided that no structural
alterations are made which increase the gross surface area of the sign; however, nonconforming
signs which are damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than seventy-five
percent (75%) of their replacement cost at the time of destruction shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Non-conforming signs may not be enlarged, added to or replaced by another non-conforming
sign, use or structure, except that the interchange of poster panels shall be permitted.
E. Repair or maintenance. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any
official charged with protecting public safety.
§2000-1003. Non-Conforming Lots. The following regulations shall apply to all non-conforming lots,
as defined by this Ordinance, in any Zoning District.
A. Any legally recorded lot or subdivision existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be
developed in accordance with the requirements of Article IV.
B. No division of any lot shall be made which does not comply with the requirements of this
Ordinance. Any change in lot lines necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this
Ordinance shall constitute a revision to the recorded plan and shall meet all applicable Borough
requirements.
C. Any legally recorded lot or subdivision existing at the effective date of this Ordinance and held in
separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots may be developed in
accordance with the requirements of Article IV. Where two or more adjacent lots of record with
continuous frontage have less than the required area and width and are held by one owner, the
lot shall be considered to be an undivided lot for the purpose of complying with this
Ordinance.
D. When the side and/or rear yards of any developed legally existing non-conforming lot(s) are less
than the minimum allowable dimensions, any adjacent undeveloped non-conforming lot shall
have the average depth of the non-conforming side and/or rear yards.
2000.128
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XI
Application and Review Process
§2000-1100. Requests for Reasonable Accommodation.
A. Persons with a claim for reasonable accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act or
the Americans with Disabilities Act shall submit the request in writing to the Applicable Zoning
Officer on an application form which shall require that the following information may be
reasonably needed to process the request, be provided:
(1) Specific citation of the Zoning Ordinance provision from which reasonable accommodation is
requested.
(2) The name and address of the applicant.
(3) The specific description of the reasonable accommodation sought and the particulars,
including exact admonitions of any proposed structural of locational accommodation.
(4) The condition of the applicants for which reasonable accommodation is sought.
(5) A description of the hardship, if any, that the applicants will incur absent provision of the
reasonable accommodation requested.
(6) A description of any alternative methods of relieving the claimed hardship that have been
considered and the reason, if any, why applicants have rejected such alternatives.
(7) A statement describing why the requested accommodation is necessary to afford the
applicants an opportunity equal to a non-handicapped or non-disabled person to use and enjoy
the dwelling in question.
(8) A description of the manner in which the accommodation, if granted, will be terminated or
removed if no longer required to afford equal housing opportunity to handicapped or disabled
persons.
(9) A statement of any facts indicating whether or not non-handicapped or non-disabled persons
would be permitted to utilize the property in question in a manner similar sought by
applicants.
B. The Applicable Zoning Officer may hold any meetings and/or hearing necessary in his discretion
to elicit information or argument pertinent to the request for accommodation.
C. The Applicable Zoning Officer’s decision shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the
decision.
D. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall issue his written decision to the applicants and the applicable
Borough within thirty (30) days of filing of the request for accommodation.
E. A request for reasonable accommodation should be directed in the first instance to the Applicable
Zoning Officer. In considering a request for reasonable accommodation, the Applicable Zoning
2000.129
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
Officer shall, with the advice of the counsel of the applicable Borough Solicitor, apply the
following criteria.
(1) Whether the applicants are handicapped or disabled within the meaning of the Federal Fair
Housing Act Amendments or the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(2) The degree to which the accommodation sought is related to the handicap or disability of the
applicant.
(3) A description of hardship, if any, that the applicants will incur absent provisions of the
reasonable accommodation requested.
(4) The extent to which the requested accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant(s) an
opportunities equal to a non-handicapped or non-disabled person to use and enjoy the
dwelling in question.
(5) The extent to which the proposed accommodation may impact other property owners in
immediate vicinity.
(6) The extent to which the proposed accommodation may be consistent with or contrary to the
zoning purposes promoted by the Zoning Ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and the
community development objectives set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
(7) The extent to which the requested accommodation would impose financial and administrative
burdens upon the applicable Borough.
(8) The extent to which the requested accommodation would impose an undue hardship upon the
applicable Borough.
(9) The extent to which the accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature
of the Borough’s regulatory policies, objectives and regulations.
(10) The extent to which the requested accommodation would result in a subsidy, privilege, or
benefit not available to non-handicapped or disabled persons.
(11) The permanency of the requested accommodation and the conditions under which such
accommodation will be removed, terminated or discontinued which no longer needed to
provide handicapped or disabled persons with equal opportunity to use and enjoy the
dwelling in question.
(12) The extent to which the requested accommodation will increase the value of the property
during and after its occupancy by applicants.
§2000-1101. Special Exception Procedures of Approval.
A. Approval of Uses by Special Exception. The applicable Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide requests for uses by special exception. The applicable Zoning Hearing Board shall not
evaluate an application for a use by special exception unless and until:
2000.130
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(1) A written application for approval of a use by special exception is submitted to the
Applicable Zoning Officer. The application shall indicate the section of this Ordinance under
which approval of the use by special exception is sought and shall state the grounds upon
which it is requested. The application shall include the following:
(a) A Development Plan, as defined by the Tri-Borough Communities Subdivision
Ordinance or its designated equivalent(s);
(b) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable express standards and
criteria of this Article for the proposed use.
(c) A map showing and identifying all lots within two hundred (200) feet of the property for
which use by special exception approval is requested and a list of the names and
addresses of the owners of these lots from the most recent records of the Allegheny
County Tax Assessors Office.
(d) A traffic impact analysis, if required by the Tri-Borough Communities Subdivision
Ordinance or its designated equivalent(s).
(e) The application fee required by Article XVII of this Ordinance.
(2) A hearing pursuant to public notice per MPC §908 (1) is held by the applicable Zoning
Hearing Board. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified
provisions of MPC §908 (1.2) and .(MPC §908 (2) through (8)).
(3) Decision and approval procedures for the Zoning Hearing Board shall be as those defined as
part of MPC §908(9).
(4) The delivery of decision for the Zoning Hearing Board shall be as those defined as part of
MPC §908(10).
(5) In considering an application for approval of a use by special exception, the applicable
Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. A violation of such conditions and safeguards,
when made part of the terms and conditions under which approval of a use by special
exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
B. Expiration of Approval of Use By Special Exception. An approved special exception use shall be
complete within eighteen (18) months following the date of approval, unless the applicable
Zoning Hearing Board has established a different completion date at the time of approval. Also,
the applicable Zoning Hearing Board may grant an extension of time for any completion date if
the applicant or his agent requests such an extension and if good cause for the extension is shown.
There are no other exceptions to this rule. If, at the end of the eighteen (18) month period or
extended completion period, the special exception use is not completed, and if no extension has
been granted, the approval of the special exception use shall be null and void.
C. Expiration of Approval of Use by Special Exception Granted Prior to Effective Date of this
Ordinance. Approval of a use by special exception granted prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance shall expire automatically without written notice to the applicant if no application for a
grading permit, building permit or zoning certificate to undertake the construction or authorize
2000.131
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
the occupancy described in the application for approval of the use by special exception is
submitted within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this Ordinance or as specified in the
approval, unless the applicable Zoning Hearing Board, in their sole discretion, extends approval
of the use by special exception upon written request of the applicant received prior to its
expiration. The maximum extension permitted shall be one (1) twelve- (12) month extension.
§2000-1102. Conditional Uses Procedure for Approval.
A. Approval of Conditional Uses.
(1) The applicable Borough Council shall hear and decide requests for conditional uses within
forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the governing body. Where the application is
contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions
based thereon, together with any reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of
this Ordinance or any other Ordinance contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(2) Where the applicable Borough Council fails to render the decision within the period required
by this subsection or fail to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as provided
in § 908 (1.2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, within sixty (60) days from the date
of the applicant’s request for a hearing or fails to complete the hearing no later than one
hundred (100) days after the completion of the applicant’s case-in-chief, unless extended for
good cause upon application to the Allegheny County Court of Common Pleas, the decision
shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been
rendered in favor of the applicant because of failure of the governing body to meet or render a
decision as hereinabove provided, the Borough Council shall give public notice of the
decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the
same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this act. If the applicable
Borough Council shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to
appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or,
where no decision is called for, the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or
mailed to him no later than the day following its date.
(4) Given the requirements of subsections 1 through 3, the applicable Borough Council shall not
evaluate a conditional use application unless and until:
(a) A written application for conditional use approval is submitted to the Applicable Zoning
Officer no less than ten (10) working days prior to the regular meeting of the Joint
Planning Commission for review. Review procedures by the Joint Planning Commission
shall be conducted in conforomance with those defined in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
(b) The application shall indicate the section of this Ordinance under which conditional use
approval is sought and shall state the grounds upon which it is requested. The Applicable
Zoning Officer shall determine the completeness of the application and either accept the
applications complete and properly filed or return the application to the applicant for
resubmission if the application is incomplete and improperly filed. If the application is
2000.132
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
returned as incomplete, a written notice, which cites the specific requirements of this
Ordinance, which have not been met, shall be sent to the applicant. The application shall
include the following:
(i) A Development Plan the Tri-Borough Communities Subdivision Ordinance or its
designated equivalent(s)
(ii) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable express standards and
criteria of this Article for the proposed use.
(iii)A map showing and identifying all lots within two hundred (200) feet of the lot for
which conditional use approval is requested and a list of the names and addresses of
the owners of these lots from the most recent records of the Allegheny County Tax
Assessors Office.
(iv) A traffic impact analysis, if required or by the requirements of this Article.
(v) The application fee required by Article XVII of this Ordinance.
(c) A written recommendation is received from the Joint Planning Commission or thirty (30)
days has passed from the date of the Joint Planning Commission meeting at which the
application is first considered for approval.
(d) A hearing pursuant to public notice per MPC §908 (1) is held by the applicable Borough
Council. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified
provisions of MPC §908 (1.2).
(e) Decision and approval procedures for the Council shall be as those defined as part of
.MPC §913.2 (b)(1).
(f) The delivery of decision for the Council shall be as those defined as part of MPC §913.2
(b)(3).
(g) In granting a conditional use, the applicable Borough Council may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as it may
seem necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this
Ordinance.
B. Expiration of Conditional Use Approval. An approved conditional use shall be complete within
eighteen (18) months following the date of approval, unless the applicable Council has
established a different completion date at the time of approval. Also, the applicable Council may
grant an extension of time for any completion date if the applicant or his agent requests such an
extension and if good cause for the extension is shown. There are no other exceptions to this rule.
If, at the end of the eighteen (18) month period or extended completion period, the conditional
use is not completed, and if no extension has been granted, the approval of the conditional use
shall be null and void.
C. Expiration of Conditional Use Approval Granted Prior to Effective Date of this Ordinance.
Conditional use approval granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall expire
automatically without written notice to the applicant if no application for a grading permit,
2000.133
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
building permit or zoning certificate to undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy
described in the application for conditional use approval is submitted within twelve (12) months
of the effective date of this Ordinance or as specified in the approval, unless the Borough
Council, in their sole discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written request of the
applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum extension permitted shall be one (1)
twelve- (12) month extension.
§2000-1103. Use of Flood-Prone Land. Areas of lot designated as being floodprone should be
encouraged for parking, outdoor storage of non-flammables, non-liquid, non-buoyant materials, or
planted buffer area. Such areas may be used for all other permitted uses within the Zoning District where
located when such use is in strict compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
A. Identification.
(1) Flood-prone areas (floodplain areas) shall be any areas of the applicable Borough which are
identified as Zone A (area of special flood hazard) on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) as issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) dated October 4,
1995, and any revision thereto.
(2) Determination of the Regulatory Flood Elevation. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the
regulatory flood elevation, i.e., the 100 year flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of
1 1/2 feet shall be used. When available, information from other Federal, State and other
acceptable sources shall be used to determine the 100 year flood elevation, as well as a
floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the 100 year flood
elevation shall be determined by using a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site in question. In helping to make this necessary
elevation determination, other sources of data, where available, shall be used such as: [
(a) Corps of Engineers - Floodplain Information Reports.
(b) U.S. Geological Survey - Flood Prone Quadrangles.
(c) U.S.D.A., Natural Resource Conservation Service - County Soil Surveys (Alluvial Soils).
(d) Known highwater marks from past floods.
(e) In lieu of the above, the applicable Borough may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review.
(3) Changes in Designation of Area(s). The delineation of any of the identified floodprone
area(s) may be revised by the applicable Borough Council where natural or man-made
changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or
individual documents the notification for such changes. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
2000.134
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(4) Boundary Disputes. Should a dispute concerning any district boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Joint Borough Planning Commission and any party
aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the applicable Zoning Hearing Board. The burden
of proof shall be on the appellant.
B. Application Procedures. All applications for building permits, proposed subdivisions, or other
development located within or adjacent to any identified floodplain areas, shall, in addition to all
other required information, provide the specific information described herein.
(1) A plan which accurately delineates the area which is subject to flooding, the location of the
proposed construction, the location of any other floodprone development or structures, and
the location of any existing or proposed stream improvements of protective works. The plan
shall show:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located,
elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(d) Existing and proposed contours; information concerning 100 year flood elevations, and
other applicable information such as uplift forces, associated with the 100 year flood; size
of structures, location and elevation of streets, water supply and sanitary sewage
facilities; soil types; and floodproofing measures.
(e) Adequate information demonstrating the flood carrying capacity of any affected water
course whether or not it is to be altered.
(f) Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream or any watercourse, etc.
within the applicable Borough, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Resources, Dams and Encroachment Division, as specified in the Water
Obstruction Act of 1913, as amended.
(g) Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the
capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other
drainage facility or system.
(h) Further, notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities.
Copies of such notifications shall be forwarded to both the Federal Insurance
Administration and the Department of Community Affairs.
(2) Applications for a building permit shall show the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) based upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
(3) A document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the proposed
construction has been adequately designed against flood damage and that the plans for
development of the site adhere to the restrictions cited in this Ordinance. Such statement shall
include a description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design, and the level to which any structures have been floodproofed.
2000.135
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
C. Specific Design Requirements.
(1) Structures.
(a) All buildings and structures and substantial improvements thereto shall be designed,
located and constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and
shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the height of flood waters.
(b) All buildings and structures and substantial improvements thereto shall be firmly
anchored in accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
(c) Within any identified flood-prone area, the elevation of the Lowest floor (including
basement) of residential structures shall be at or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(d) Within any identified flood-prone area, the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of non-residential structures shall be at or above the regulatory flood elevation
or be flood-proofed up to that height.
(e) Any structure, or part thereof, which is not elevated to the regulatory flood elevation,
shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in accordance with the
W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled ‘‘Flood-
Proofing Regulations’’ published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the referenced standards.
(f) Fully or partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited
(g) Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
(i) Wood flooring at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without causing structural damage to the building.
(ii) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a ‘‘marine’’ or
‘‘water resistant’’ variety.
(iii) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are ‘‘water resistant’’ and will withstand inundation.
(iv) Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be made of metal or other ‘‘water resistant’’ material.
(h) Paints and Adhesives.
2000.136
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(i) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
‘‘marine’’ or ‘‘water-resistant’’ quality.
(ii) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a ‘‘marine’’ or
‘‘water resistant’’ variety.
(iii) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with a
‘‘marine’’ or ‘‘water-resistant’’ paint or other finishing material.
(2) Utilities.
(a) All new or replacement sanitary sewage systems, water, gas, and oil supply systems shall
be designed to prevent infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the
system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these
systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.
(b) All stationary mechanical equipment such as water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating systems shall be located above the regulatory flood elevation.
(c) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least 3 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
(d) No part of any on site sewage disposal system shall be located within any identified flood
prone area.
(3) No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in time of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, shall be stored below the regulatory flood elevation.
(4) The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no less than the regulatory flood
elevation.
D. Existing Structures in Identified Floodprone Areas. Structures existing in any identified
floodprone area prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, but which are not in compliance with
these provisions, may continue to remain subject to the following:
(1) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated
and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(3) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any floodway
area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the 100 year flood.
E. Prohibited Activities Within a Floodplain Area. Within any identified floodplain area the
following shall be prohibited:
2000.137
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(1) The construction, development or operation of any hospital, nursing home or related care
facility; jail or prison, mobile homes and/or mobile home parks.
(2) Any other construction or development which may endanger human life.
(3) Any construction or development which would include in its use or operation the production,
use of or storage of any dangerous material or substance such as listed below but not limited
thereto:
(a) Acetone
(b) Ammonia
(c) Benzene
(d) Calcium carbide
(e) Carbon disulfide
(f) Celluloid
(g) Chlorine acid
(h) Hydrochloric acid
(i) Hydrocyanic acid
(j) Magnesium
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
(m) Phosphorus
(n) Potassium
(o) Sodium
(p) Sulfur and sulfur products
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides)
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
F. Variances. If compliance with any of the requirements of this Ordinance would result in an
exceptional hardship to a landowner or developer, the applicable Borough may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements. Requests for variances shall be
considered in accordance with the procedures contained in the MPC and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted to allow any of the prohibited activities or for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development which may endanger human life.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use or activity within any
floodway area that would cause any increase in the 100 year flood elevation.
(3) In reviewing any request for a variance, the applicable Borough shall consider, at a minimum,
the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will (i) neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited
increase in flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense; (ii) nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public, or conflict with
any other applicable State or local ordinances and regulations.
2000.138
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(d) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and
constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the 100 year flood.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, the applicable Borough shall notify the applicant in writing
that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and lot.
(5) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
applicable Borough. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2000.139
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XII
Rezoning Applications
§2000-1200. Purpose of Rezoning Applications.
A. The purpose of rezoning is to protect the safety, capacity and efficiency of the Tri-Borough
communities’ existing infrastructure systems; to maintain fiscal responsibility; and to uphold the
objectives of the Tri-Borough Comprehensive Plan,
B. All rezoning applications shall be reviewed within the context and principals of joint municipal
planning; rezoning recommendations shall be based on the projected beneficial and/or detrimental
effects on the Tri-Borough Communities as a whole rather than each independent Borough.
§2000-1201. Rezoning Application Forms.
A. All rezoning applications shall be completed on the official forms provided by the Applicable
Zoning Officer.
B. All rezoning applications shall be required to prepare a series of plans, analyses and reports to
demonstrate the compatibility of a rezoning proposal.
§2000-1202. Review of Rezoning Applications.
A. Upon receipt of a rezoning application, the Applicable Zoning Officer will review the package for
completeness. If the Applicable Zoning Officer finds the application to be incomplete or
insufficient, the rezoning application will be returned to the applicant. When the rezoning
application is found to be complete by the Applicable Zoning Officer, one (1) copy shall be
forwarded to each member of the Joint Planning Commission and each member of each Borough
Council. As part of the rezoning approval process, the Joint Planning Commission and each
Borough Council shall consider the motivation and implications of each plan, analysis and report.
B. The Joint Planning Commission shall review the application in compliance with the following
procedural guidelines:
C. The Joint Planning Commission shall decide if the proposed rezoning is or is not generally
consistent with the Joint Comprehensive Plan.
D. If the rezoning proposal is found to be generally consistent with the Joint Comprehensive Plan,
the Joint Planning Commission shall consider any projected beneficial and/or detrimental effects
on the Tri-Borough Communities.
E. Based on these analyses, each Joint Planning Commission member shall submit a
recommendation either in favor or not in favor of the rezoning proposal.
F. The final recommendation of each Joint Planning Commission member shall be forwarded to
each of the Tri-Borough Communities Borough Councils. The respective name and Borough
association of each Joint Planning Commission member shall be attached to each
recommendation.
2000.140
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
G. Upon receipt of the Joint Planning Commission’s final recommendations, each Tri-Borough
Community Borough Council shall render a decision in favor or not in favor of the rezoning
proposal. Each Borough Council shall compose a brief summary explanation of its decision and
forward the decision and explanation to the Applicable Zoning Officer.
H. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall receive one decision from each Tri-Borough Community.
Two or more out of three decisions in favor of rezoning shall be enough to proceed with the
property rezoning as the applicant has requested.
§2000-1203. Application Criteria. There are two categories of rezoning applications: minor and major.
Minor and major rezoning applications are differentiated based on the size of the area to be rezoned and
the anticipated fiscal, physical, environmental and social impacts on the municipality(s).
A. Minor Applications. Minor rezoning applications are expected to have a lesser impact on the
traffic, fiscal resources and existing physical and environmental character of the community(s).
The following situations constitute eligibility for the minor application:
(1) The rezoning of a non-residential parcel, or contiguous parcel(s), that totals one (1) acre or
less and is located in the MU or C-NC district.
(2) The rezoning of an existing residential parcel, or contiguous parcel(s), that totals three (3)
acres or less in either the Zoning District R-L or R-M classification.
B. Major Applications. Any rezoning project that does not meet either of the criteria in §2000-
1203(A) is a major application.
C. Application Requirements. The following Section outlines the plans, analyses and reports that a
landowner and/or developer shall submit as part of minor or major rezoning applications.
§2000-1204. Rezoning Applications Plans, Analyses and Reports.
The plans, analyses and reports to be submitted as part of a minor application shall include §2000-1204
A-B; a major application shall include §2000-1204 A-I.
A. A Preliminary Plat.
B. Topographic Survey. Contours shall be illustrated at intervals of elevation of not more than five
(5) feet where the slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and at intervals of not more than two
(2) feet where the slope is ten percent (10%) or less.
C. Site Conditions Report. The applicant shall describe the following existing characteristics about
the site proposed for development.
(1) Total site acreage.
(2) Existing Zoning District(s), land use(s) and covenants.
(3) Existing land characteristics including general topographic form, site accessibility, length of
public road frontage, pattern and density of vegetative cover, significant adjacent and longrange
views to and from the site, hydrological patterns.
2000.141
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(4) Relationship of proposed subdivision to adjoining, existing and proposed community
facilities which serve or influence the site; available utilities; number of lots and acreage;
business areas; playgrounds; main traffic arteries; elementary and high schools; and street
improvements.
(5) Reservations, if any, by the landowner and/or developer of any area designed for use as
public grounds shall be suitable size and location for designated uses.
(6) Land which is subject to flooding, subsidence or underground fires either shall be made safe
for the purpose for which such land is proposed to be used, or that such land shall be set aside
for use which shall not endanger life or lot, or further aggravate or increase existing menace.
(7) A copy of the option agreement or certificate of title shall be submitted as evidence of the
applicant’s interest in the lot.
D. Infrastructure Demand Statement.
(1) The infrastructure demand statement shall be submitted to the Tri-Borough Communities,
containing the following information:
(a) Pre-development data for overall demand.
(b) Estimated gallons of sanitary sewage created per average day.
(c) Estimated gallons of potable water consumed/utilized per average day.
(d) Estimated number of school age children.
(e) Estimated total residents and/or employees.
(2) Post-development data for overall demand.
(a) Estimated gallons of sanitary sewage created per average day.
(b) Estimated gallons of potable water consumed/utilized per average day.
(c) Estimated number of school age children.
(d) Estimated total residents and/or employees.
E. Conceptual Development Plan the Tri-Borough Communities Subdivision Ordinance or its
designated equivalent(s).
F. Fiscal Impact Analysis.
(1) An evaluation providing the following information shall be completed:
(a) Potential municipal and school district tax generation of the proposed development
2000.142
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(b) Population projections including the number of school-aged children at build-out of the
proposed development.
(c) Length of road to be dedicated to the Borough.
(d) Length of sewer and water lines to be dedicated to the Borough.
(e) The Borough will evaluate the proposed development of the proposed zoning in
relationship to the potential development in the existing zoning.
G. Slope Stability Investigation.
H. Phase One Environmental Assessment.
I. Traffic Report.
§1200-1205. Additional Information.
The Joint Planning Commission and each individual Borough Council reserve the right to request
additional information as part of the review and approval process.
2000.143
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XIII
Building and Occupancy Permits
§2000-1300. Administration and Enforcement.
A. Appointment and Powers of Applicable Zoning Officer.
(1) For the administration of this Ordinance, an Applicable Zoning Officer, who shall not hold
any elective office in any local government, shall be appointed by the Borough for which it
serves.
(2) The Applicable Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the Joint Planning
Commission and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Joint Planning
Commission a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
(3) The Applicable Zoning Officer shall administer this Ordinance in accordance with its literal
terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use
which does not conform to this Ordinance.
(4) The Applicable Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of his employment.
B. If the Applicable Zoning Officer shall find that any provisions of this Ordinance are being
violated he shall forward an enfocrcement notice to the owner of the lot upon which such
violation is occurring. See §2000-1500.
C. Enforcement notices regarding violations shall indicate the nature of the violation by specific
paragraph relied on and shall order the action necessary to correct it.
D. Enforcement notices shall order the discontinuance of illegal uses of land or structures, or the
removal or moving of illegal structures or additions or alterations thereto, as well as any other
action necessary to assure compliance with or prevent violation of this Ordinance and shall
indicate the owner’s alternative actions under the terms of this Ordinance. See §2000-1500.
E. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall allow the owner of a lot upon which a violation of this
Ordinance has been noted a period of up to thirty (30) days, at the option of the Applicable
Zoning Officer, to carry out the required action. At the conclusion of the period within which the
owner is obliged to correct the violation he shall be subject to penalty as required by Section
XVII of this Ordinance, with each day that the violation remains uncorrected being a separate
penalty. Provided that the zoning officer may require action to come into compliance to be taken
within a period shorter than thirty (30) days if the zoning officer finds that the ongoing activity
that results in the violation presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
The Applicable Zoning Officer’s notice shall indicate specifically the date on which the owner
shall first be subject to penalty.
F. All questions of interpretation of this Ordinance shall be first presented to the Applicable Zoning
Officer, and such questions shall be considered by the applicable Zoning Hearing Board only on
appeal from the decision of the Applicable Zoning Officer.
2000.144
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
G. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall keep records of all applications either approved or
disapproved, including one copy of each permit issued, shall maintain a journal of his/her
activities, and shall submit a report annually to each Borough Council.
H. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall receive and process all requests for reasonable
accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the American Disabilities Act as
applicable. Criteria and procedures for the handling of such requests shall be in accordance with
this Ordinance.
§2000-1301. Building Permits.
A. No building or structure shall be erected, moved, expanded or structurally altered without a
permit for such action having been issued by the Applicable Zoning Officer. Building permits
shall be required for construction of fences, exterior walls and patios, but not for the installation
or paving of walkways or residential driveways when no earth moving is involved or for erection
of small auxiliary structures less than one hundred (100) square feet in floor area and not on a
permanent foundation. Building permits shall be required for the installation or paving of
walkways or residential driveways when earth moving is involved or for those surfaces that cross
public sidewalks. All surfaces shall be subject to inspection for compliance with applicable
Borough concrete standards.
B. Applications for building permits shall be made to the Applicable Zoning Officer for the project
to be covered by the permit, using forms supplied by the Applicable Zoning Officer. The permit
shall bear the signatures of both the general contractor and the owner of the project.
(1) No building permit shall be issued until all other required permits have been obtained from
any other office or agency (local, regional, State, County, and Federal).
(2) No building permit shall be issued until the Applicable Zoning Officer determines whether a
stormwater management plan is necessary for the project to be covered by the permit, and if
so, finds that an approved plan meeting the requirements of the applicable Borough’s
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, or its equivalent, has been submitted.
C. Building Permit Applications Shall Include the Following, in Triplicate.
(1) A site plan of the lot upon which the proposed construction is to occur, drawn to scale and
dimensioned, showing the following where applicable:
(a) The boundaries of the lot, indicating dimensions and total area and names of record of
owners of abutting properties.
(b) Public streets abutting the lot indicating right-of-way and pavement width.
(c) Public utilities in the streets abutting the lot and/or in easements running across the lot
identified by type and line size.
(d) Existing buildings on the lot and approximate location of walls of buildings or structures
within twenty-five (25) feet of the lot boundaries on adjacent properties.
2000.145
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(e) The proposed building or structure, indicating height, and dimensions between building
or structure and all lot boundaries.
(f) The location of proposed parking and loading areas and drives, indicating the number of
parking spaces.
(g) The location of proposed signs.
(h) Topographical information for the area to be developed at no greater than five foot (5’)
contour intervals, showing proposed grade changes and means of collecting and
disposing of storm water.
(i) The seal of approval of the State Department of Labor and Industry, if applicable, or in
lieu of such seal, the M.A. number and file number of the project as carried by the
department.
(2) A narrative statement indicating:
(a) The proposed use of the structure to which the permit applies and the use of other
buildings or structures on the lot, if any.
(b) The number of dwelling units, whether for sale or rent, or commercial retail or service
units if applicable, that the building is designed to accommodate.
(c) If the building or structure is part of a larger complex of buildings or structures to be
erected over time on the same lot, an indication of location and scheduling of future
construction.
(d) If the building or structure is for commercial, industrial or multi-family residential use,
the area of the lot to be occupied on the ground by the building or structure.
(e) A statement giving the developer permission to build if the developer and owner of the
land are not the same person or corporation.
(3) The Applicable Zoning Officer may waive portions of these requirements where interior
work or construction not affecting the outside dimensions of an existing building is involved
or no site work is included.
(4) The Applicable Zoning Officer may, to satisfy requirements of other development ordinances
adopted by any of the Tri-Borough Communities, expand the application form to secure
additional information necessary to assure conformance with such other development
ordinances.
(5) Building plans and specifications as required by the applicable Borough’s Building Code.
D. If the application is satisfactory, the Applicable Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises where
the construction is proposed to occur and shall be satisfied that the structure will be located as
specified on the application and that construction can take place on the site without violating this
Ordinance or any other Borough or Tri-Borough ordinance. Upon completing his inspection and
finding the application and premises compatible conforming to this Chapter, the Zoning Officer
2000.146
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
shall approve the application and return one copy of the documents together with a signed
building permit authorizing the applicant to proceed.
E. If the application is not satisfactory, the Applicable Zoning Officer shall return all but one set of
the application documents together with a letter indicating the specific reasons why the
application cannot be approved and the changes needed to make it acceptable.
F. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall visit the lot whereon the approved construction is taking
place in order to ensure that the work is proceeding in accordance with the application
documents. If new construction is proposed to occupy a previously open area, the Applicable
Zoning Officer may order the owner to have stakes positioned by a registered surveyor to
indicate the lot line and outline of the new construction. Subsequently the Applicable Zoning
Officer, depending on the type of construction proposed, shall visit the site after pouring of
foundation footers, at the conclusion of erection of structural members and rough-in carpentry,
and upon completion of the structure. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall not be denied access
to the lot in order to inspect the construction in progress and may order the work halted pending
appeal to the applicable Zoning Hearing Board or corrected to conform to the approved
application documents.
G. If an applicant wishes to amend the use, arrangement or construction of the structure from that
shown on the application documents after such documents are approved, he shall file with the
Applicable Zoning Officer an application for a building permit to cover the proposed
amendment. All work shall conform to the approved application documents for which the permit
has been issued and any approved amendments thereto.
H. A building permit shall become void, if after six (6) months from the date of issue, construction
for which the permit was issued has not commenced and been vigorously pursued. The life of a
building permit shall be one (1) year from the date of issue. Permits may be extended for not
more than one (1) additional year on large projects for which the value of the permit is in excess
of $100,000 dollars, upon request of the permit holder when the permit is originally issued. To
continue uncompleted construction after the expiration of a building permit, the permit holder
shall apply for a new permit, for which a fee representing the value of the work to be completed
shall be collected. Failure to renew a permit after expiration shall be a violation of this Ordinance
and subject to penalty under Article 17 of this Ordinance.
§2000-1302. Occupancy Permits.
A. For new use or expansion of existing uses:
(1) Upon completion of the entire building or structure for which a building permit has been
issued, the contractor or builder for such building or structure shall apply to the Applicable
Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit.
(2) The Applicable Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises and, if satisfied that all conditions
of the building permit have been met, shall issue an occupancy permit certifying that the
premises comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and may be used for the purposes set
forth on the building permit.
(3) If the Applicable Zoning Officer upon inspection finds the premises to have been developed
in violation of any of the conditions of the building permit, he shall order the violations
2000.147
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
corrected to conform to the building permit and shall not issue an occupancy permit until
satisfied these corrections have been made. The contractor shall be responsible for requesting
a re-inspection after violations have been corrected and the Applicable Zoning Officer shall
not issue an occupancy permit until all violations have been corrected.
(4) It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a new structure to be occupied without an
occupancy permit first having been issued.
B.
B. For Changing Existing Uses.
(1) To preserve the character of the Borough’s single family neighborhoods, in any R-L or R-M
zoning district, no single-family dwelling unit building shall be converted to a multi-family
dwelling unit building after the date of this Ordinance unless evidence of said building is
existing as a legally operating multi-family dwelling for twelve (12) consecutive months from
the date of the application and said evidence is provided by the landowner and/or developer
to the respective Borough in a form acceptable to said Borough. The creation of a multifamily
dwelling unit shall only be permitted in a building, new in its entirety, and where said
building is identified as the principal building on the lot.
(2) If a lot owner wishes to change the use of any building or structure on the lot (or properties)
he owns, or if a new owner seeks to occupy a lot that is used for commercial or industrial
purposes, he shall apply to the Applicable Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit. The
Applicable Zoning Officer shall first determine that no building permit is needed to effect the
proposed change. Changes for which an occupancy permit shall be required include addition
of a dwelling unit or units in the structure, introduction of a home occupation, conversion of a
use, or continuation of the use of a commercial or industrial lot by a new owner.
(3) If the Applicable Zoning Officer is satisfied that such change is in conformance with all
requirements of this Ordinance and of other applicable development ordinances of the
Boroughs of Avalon, Bellevue, Ben Avon, and/or the Tri-Borough communities, he shall
issue an occupancy permit.
(4) Applications for occupancy permits for a change of use that are denied by the Applicable
Zoning Officer may be appealed to the applicable Zoning Hearing Board. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of a lot to determine that any persons leasing or subleasing the
premises will use them only for activities permitted by this Ordinance, and if a use is
contemplated or undertaken by a lessee or sublessee which is not permitted, or is permitted
only as a special exception, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to either secure
permission from the applicable Borough for the use or to remove the use from the premises.
§2000-1303. Certificate of Zoning Compliance
A. Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building,
structure, land or premises, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or
enlarged in its use and structure unless a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by
the Applicable Zoning Officer stating that the proposed use of the building structure or land
conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance.
2000.148
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(2) Every application for an occupancy permit shall be deemed to be an application for a
certificate of zoning compliance.
(3) No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued until the erection, construction or
alteration has been completed, or the use established and inspected and approved by the
Applicable Zoning Officer providing that the certificate shall be issued or written notice shall
be given to the applicant stating why a certificate cannot be issued no later than five (5) days
after the Applicable Zoning Officer is notified in writing that the building or premises is
ready for occupancy.
(4) A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the Applicable Zoning
Officer for a period not to exceed six (6) months during alteration or partial occupancy of a
building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may require such
conditions and safeguards, such as but not limited to a performance security/guarantee, to
protect the safety of the occupant and the public.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any owner to sell any building, structure, land or premises, or part
thereof, or interest therein, situated in the Tri-Borough Communities, unless the owner first
delivers to the purchaser at or prior to the time for settlement a certificate of zoning
compliance indicating the legality of the existing use of the lot to be sold.
(6) A certificate of zoning compliance may be revoked or suspended by the Applicable Zoning
Officer if he finds that the holder of the certificate has failed to comply with conditions
attached to the issuance of the certificate, or if he finds that the building or use does not
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(7) In all cases under this Ordinance a fee shall be charged for a certificate of zoning compliance.
Such fees shall be established by resolution of the applicable Borough Council.
2000.149
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XIV
Amendments
§2000-1400. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments.
A. Any Borough Council may introduce and consider amendments to this Ordinance and/or to the
Official Zoning Map as proposed by a Borough Council, by the Joint Planning Commission or by
a petition of a landowner within one of the Tri-Borough communities:
(1) Petitions for amendment shall be filed with the Joint Planning Commission, and the
petitioner, upon such filing, shall pay an advertising deposit and a filing fee in accordance
with a schedule affixed from time to time by Resolution of the Borough Councils.
(2) Referral to Joint Planning Commission. Any proposed amendment introduced by a Council
shall be referred to the Joint Planning Commission for review.
(3) Development by Joint Planning Commission. Upon direction from a Borough Council, the
Joint Planning Commission shall develop a draft amendment to the Ordinance.
B. The Joint Planning Commission shall send copies of the draft Ordinance amendments, together
with any recommendations, to each of the Borough Councils for review. Each Borough Council
shall review and provide feedback. The governing bodies of the other participating
municipalities shall submit their comments, including a specific recommendation to adopt or not
to adopt the proposed amendment, to the governing body of the municipality within which the
amendment is proposed. Failure to provide comments shall be construed as a recommendation to
adopt the proposed amendments. Upon receipt of the feedback, the Joint Planning Commission
shall hold a public meeting and prepare revisions to the amendment as deemed appropriate. See
also MPC §809-A and MPC §303.
C. The Joint Planning Commission shall forward the revised amendment to the Sponsor Council.
The Sponsor Council shall submit a copy of the revised amendment to the County and each
Borough Council for review prior to holding the public hearing. The governing bodies of the
other participating municipalities shall submit their comments, including a specific
recommendation to adopt or not to adopt the proposed amendment, to the governing body of the
municipality within which the amendment is proposed no later than the date of the public
hearing. Failure to provide comments shall be construed as a recommendation to adopt the
proposed amendments. See also MPC §809-A and MPC §303.
D. The Sponsor Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, pursuant to public
notice and posting of such notice in the Municipal Building of each Tri-Borough municipality. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of said public hearing
shall be conspicuously posted by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality
along the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected lot or area shall be posted at
least one (1) week prior to the date of the hearing
(1) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted, where the proposed amendment involves
a zoning map change, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the Sponsor Borough at
least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to
which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within five hundred (500) feet
2000.150
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
of lot boundary of the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the possession
of the municipalities. The notice shall include the location, date and time of the public
hearing. A good faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the requirements of this
subsection.
(2) This clause shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
E. No amendments to the joint municipal zoning ordinance shall be effective unless all of the
participating Borough Councils approve the amendment.
F. The process of completing Amendments shall comply with MPC§813-A Publication,
Advertisement and Availability of Ordinances.
§2000-1401. Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments.
A. Curative amendments, along with the applicable application fee, shall be filed in the
municipality within which the landowner’s property is located. Provided, however, that the
applicable Council before which the curative amendment is brought shall not have the power to
adopt any amendment to the Joint Zoning Ordinance without the approval of each Tri-
Borough community. The challenge shall be directed to the validity of the Joint Zoning
Ordinance as it applies to the entire area of its jurisdiction. Application for said amendment
shall include all information as identified on the application form as available in the applicable
Borough Municipal Office.
B. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of the Joint Zoning
Ordinance or Zoning Map or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the
applicable Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard
and decided.
C. The applicable Council shall commence a hearing thereon within sixty (60) days of the request
as provided by the MPC. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the Joint
Planning Agency and each Borough Council and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as
provided in according to the MPC.
D. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 908 of the MPC and all references
therein to the zoning hearing board shall, for purposes of this section be references to the
governing body: provided, however, that the provisions of sections 908 (1.2) and (9) of the
MPC shall not apply and the provisions of section 916.1 of the MPC shall control. If a
municipality does not accept a landowner’s curative amendment brought in accordance with
this subsection and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court’s decision
shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire zoning ordinance and map, but only
for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner’s curative amendment and
challenge.
E. The Council of a municipality which has determined that a validity challenge has merit may
accept a landowner’s curative amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an
alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Council shall consider the
curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall
also consider:
2000.151
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(1) the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and other
public service facilities;
(2) if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing
needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the
challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
(3) the suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site’s soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
(4) the impact of the proposed use on the site’s soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
plains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental
impacts; and
(5) the impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are
essential to public health and welfare.
§2000-1402. Procedure for Joint Municipal Curative Amendments.
A. Procedure upon Municipal Curative Amendment
(1) A Borough Council, by formal action, may declare the Joint Zoning Ordinance or portions
thereof substantially invalid and propose that the Tri-Borough communities prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. The formal action shall make specific
findings setting forth the declared invalidity of the Joint Zoning Ordinance which may
include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted, or not permitted in
sufficient quantity,
(b) References to a class of use or uses which require revision, or
(c) Reference to the entire Ordinance which requires revisions.
(2) The Councils of each Tri-Borough community shall vote, within thirty (30) days following
such declaration by the initiating governing body, by formal action whether or not to
declare the Joint Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof substantially invalid.
(d) In the event of the failure of all of the Borough Councils to declare the Joint
Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof substantially invalid within the thirty (30)
days following such declaration, the declaration by the initiating Council shall be
deemed null and void.
(e) In the event that each of the Tri-Borough Councils vote, by formal action, not to
declare the Joint Zoning Ordinance invalid in accordance with this Section. The
declaration of the initiating Council shall be deemed null and void.
(f) The declaration shall be binding upon all the Tri-Borough communities from the
moment the initiating Council declares the Joint Zoning Ordinance invalid,
2000.152
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(g) In the event that all of the Borough Councils take formal action to declare the
Joint Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof substantially invalid within thirty
(30) days.
(3) Upon the declaration that the Joint Zoning Ordinance is invalid by one or more of the Tri-
Borough Councils, the Tri-Borough communities shall begin to prepare and consider a
curative amendment to the Joint Zoning Ordinance to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within nine (9) months from when all three of the participating municipalities have taken
formal action to declare the Joint Zoning Ordinance or part thereof invalid, the Tri-Borough
communities shall enact a curative amendment to or reaffirm the validity of this Ordinance
pursuant to the provisions required by this Ordinance to cure the declared invalidity of this
ordinance.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures by the initiating Council as set forth in Section A.1, no
Council shall be required to entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment as
provided for by the MPC. Upon completion of the procedures as set forth in Sections A and
B, no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of the MPC, shall, from the date of the
declaration and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of
this Ordinance for which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this Section.
D. The Tri-Borough communities having jointly utilized the procedures as set forth in
Subsections A and B may not again utilize said procedures for a thirty-six (36) month period
following the date of the enactment of a curative amendment or reaffirmation of the validity
of this ordinance pursuant to Subsection B; provided, however, if after the date of declaration
and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the Council by
virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Tri-
Borough communities may utilize the provisions of this Section to prepare a curative
amendment to the Joint Zoning Ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation; provided,
however, that the Tri-Borough communities shall not be deemed to have utilized the
procedures set forth in Subsections A and B either if the Tri-Borough communities take
formal action to not declare the Joint Zoning Ordinance invalid in accordance with Subsection
A.2 or if they fail to act in accordance with Subsection A.2 above.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.153
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XV
Enforcement
§2000-1500. Enforcement
A. Enforcement Notice. The Enforcement Notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends
to take action.
(2) The location of the lot in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing
in each instance the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
which the steps must be completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the applicable Borough Zoning
Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in
this Ordinance.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to
the applicable Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Enforcement Remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation
of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the applicable Borough, pay a judgment of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500) plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor appeals the judgment in a timely manner, the Borough may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice,
determining that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one (1) such violation until the fifth (5th) day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs
and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this Ordinance shall be paid over to
the applicable Borough.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.154
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(3) Nothing contained in this Subsection shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person
or entity other than the applicable Borough the right to commence any action for enforcement
pursuant to this Subsection.
C. Other Remedies. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this
Ordinance, the applicable Borough Council, or with the approval of the applicable Borough
Council, an officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows
that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such building, structure, landscaping, or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any
act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a
landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the municipality at least thirty (30)
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Council of the
municipality. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.155
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XVI
Administrative Roles and Duties
§2000-1600. Joint Planning Commission.
A. The Joint Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, made up of three
representatives from each Tri-Borough community.
B. Upon request of each of the Borough Councils which comprise the Tri-Borough’s communities,
the Joint Planning Commission shall prepare and update periodically the Joint Comprehensive
Plan.
C. The Joint Planning Commission shall receive, review and make recommendations to the
applicable Borough Council on conditional use requests.
D. The Joint Planning Commission shall maintain a file of records of its actions, such file being the
property of each Borough Council.
E. The Joint Planning Commission may prepare, hold hearings upon, and recommend for adoption a
zoning ordinance for the Tri-Borough communities and subsequently may prepare and
recommend amendments thereto.
F. The Joint Planning Commission may prepare and recommend for adoption a subdivision and land
development ordinance and/or planned residential development ordinance for the Tri-Borough
communities, as well as amendments thereto.
G. The Joint Planning Commission shall receive, review and make recommendations to the Borough
Councils on commercial or industrial development proposals, planned residential developments
and subdivision plans.
H. The Joint Planning Commission shall receive, review and make recommendations to the
applicable Zoning Hearing Board on special exception requests.
I. The Joint Planning Commission may call and hold public hearings on matters relating to
development in the Boroughs including amendments to the zoning and subdivision ordinances.
J. The Joint Planning Commission may, at the request of the Borough Councils, prepare and
recommend an annual capital improvements program, a building code, housing code,
environmental study or similar reports or plans necessary to manage land development in the
Boroughs.
K. The Joint Planning Commission may promote public interest in and understanding of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan and ordinances designed to implement the plan.
L. The Joint Planning Commission shall hold regularly scheduled advertised meetings that are open
to the public.
§2000-1601. Borough Councils.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.156
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
A. Borough Councils of the Tri-Borough communities are ultimately responsible for the adoption,
amendment and enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community shall appoint three (3) representatives to
the Joint Planning Commission. Alternates may be appointed as necessary.
C. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board and
Zoning Officer.
D. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community shall receive the recommendations of the
Joint Planning Commission on matters the Commission reviews pursuant to this ordinance, but
are not obligated to act in accordance with the recommendations.
E. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community shall follow the procedures established by
this Ordinance for the adoption and/or amendment of any zoning ordinance.
F. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community may remove its representatives to the
Joint Planning Commission. The procedure for removal shall be in accordance the provisions
defined in PA MPC §206.
G. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community may remove its zoning officers from their
jobs, or members of its Zoning Hearing Board, as appropriate. The procedure for removal of
Zoning Hearing Board members shall be in accordance the provisions defined in PA MPC §905.
H. The Borough Council of each Tri-Borough community shall be permitted to establish fees,
individual or in cooperation with the other Tri-Borough Community Councils to administer the
Joint Zoning Ordinance.
I. The applicable Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments under Article VII of
the MPC pursuant to the provisions of §702 of the MPC, 53 P. S. §10702.
(2) All applications pursuant to §508 of the MPC, 53 P. S. §10508, for approval of
subdivisions or land developments under Article V of the MPC, 53 P. S. §10501 et seq.
(3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this Ordinance.
(4) Applications for curative amendment to this Ordinance or pursuant to §609.1 and
916.1(a) of the MPC, 53 P. S. §10609.1, 10916.1(a).
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to the procedures set forth
in §609 of the MPC, 53 P. S. §10609.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Applicable Zoning Officer or the Applicable
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar
as the same relate to applications for land development under Articles V and VII of the
MPC, 53 P. S. §\§10501 et seq., 10701 et seq.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.157
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(7) Where such determination relates only to development not involving a MPC Article V or
VII application, the appeal from such determination of the Applicable Zoning Officer or
the Applicable Borough Engineer shall be to the applicable Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to this §2000-1602.
(8) Where the applicable land use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the Joint Planning Commission, all
appeals from determinations under this subsection shall be to the Planning Commission
and all appeals from the decision of the Joint Planning Commission shall be to court.
J. Conditional Uses. Where the applicable Borough Council, in this Ordinance, has stated
conditional uses to be granted or denied by the applicable Borough Council pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the applicable Borough Council shall hold hearings on and decide requests
for such conditional uses in accordance with such standards and criteria. In granting a conditional
use, the applicable Borough Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. §10101
et seq.
§2000-1602. Zoning Hearing Boards.
A. Each Tri-Borough community shall establish and maintain an independent Zoning Hearing Board
(Board) consisting of members appointed by each respective Borough Council.
B. A Zoning Hearing Board shall receive recommendations on special exceptions from the Joint
Planning Commission and shall act thereon.
C. There is hereby created for each Borough a Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. §10901 et
seq.
(1) The membership of each Board shall consist of three residents of the applicable Borough
appointed by resolution by the Borough Council. The terms of office shall be for three (3)
years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The
applicable Board shall promptly notify the applicable Borough Council of any vacancies
which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term. Members of the applicable Board shall hold no other office in the Borough.
(2) Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office
or for other just cause by a majority vote of the applicable Borough Council which appointed
the member, taken after the member has received fifteen (15) days advance notice of the
intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member
shall request it in writing.
(3) Each Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as
such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any
action a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the
Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in this Ordinance.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.158
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(4) Each Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with
ordinances of the Borough and laws of the Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public
records of its business, which records shall be the property of the Borough and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council as requested by the Borough Council.
(5) Within the limits of funds appropriated by the applicable Borough Council, the Board may
employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and
clerical services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance of
their duties, as may be fixed by the applicable Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed
the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the applicable Borough
Council.
D. Hearings. The applicable Zoning Hearing Board will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code. A copy of the Municipalities Planning Code
is available for review in the applicable Borough Building. The applicable Borough Council shall
establish, by resolution, fees with respect to hearings before the applicable Zoning Hearing
Board.
E. Jurisdiction.
(1) Each Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters within the physical boundaries of its Borough:
(a) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought
before the applicable Borough Council pursuant to §609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter ‘‘MPC’’), 53 P. S. §10609.1,
10916.1.
(b) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged
defects in the process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance.
(c) Appeals from the determination of the Applicable Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application
therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to
register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
(d) Appeals from a determination by the Applicable Borough Engineer or the Applicable
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
(e) Applications for variances from the terms of this Ordinance and flood hazard ordinance
or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to §910.2 of the MPC, 53 P. S.
§10910.2.
(f) Applications for special exception under this Ordinance or floodplain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to §912.1 of the
MPC, 53 P. S. §10912.1.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.159
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
(g) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration
of any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this
Ordinance.
(h) Appeals from the Applicable Zoning Officer’s determination under §916.2 of the MPC,
53 P. S. §10916.2.
(i) Appeals from the determination of the Applicable Zoning Officer or Applicable Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with
reference to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as
the same relate to development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
MPC, 53 P. S. §10501 et seq., 10701 et seq.
F. Variances.
(1) The applicable Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged
that the provisions of this Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The
Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary
application to the Applicable Zoning Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided
that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular lot and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the lot is
located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that
the lot can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the lot.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or district in which the lot is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent lot, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. §10101 seq.
G. Special exception. Where the applicable Borough Council, in this Ordinance, has stated special
exception to be granted or denied by the applicable Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the applicable Board shall hear and decide requests for such special
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.160
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
exception in accordance with such standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the
applicable Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this Ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. §10101 et seq.
H. Parties Appellant before the Board. Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use
ordinance (except those to be brought before the applicable Borough Council pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code), procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance; or from the determination of the Applicable
Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act
on the application therefore, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or
refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; from a determination by the
Applicable Borough Engineer or the Applicable Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance; from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration of any
transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this Ordinance; from the
determination of the Applicable Zoning Officer or Applicable Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and
erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development not
involving subdivision and land development or planned residential development may be filed
with the applicable Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the applicable Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for
special exception may be filed with the applicable Board by any landowner or any tenant with the
permission of such landowner.
I. Time Limitations.
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the applicable Zoning Hearing Board
later than thirty (30) days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
approved by the applicable Borough if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to
limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves that he has no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person has
succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal an adverse
decision on a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the Applicable Zoning Officer on
a challenge to the validity of this Ordinance or an amendment hereto or map or an
amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case where
the final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative approval.
(2) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed by the landowner
within 30 days after notice of the determination is issued.
J. Stay of Proceedings.
(1) Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the applicable Zoning Hearing Board and during
its pendency before the applicable Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged
ordinance, order or approval of the Applicable Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and
all official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless the Applicable Zoning Officer or any
other appropriate agency or body certifies to the applicable Board facts indicating that such
stay would cause imminent peril to life or lot, in which case the development or official
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.161
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
applicable Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after
notice to the Applicable Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings
designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the applicable Board by persons other
than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals
to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the
applicable Board.
(2) After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the
appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It
shall be the burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the appeal is frivolous, it
shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the appellants to
post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an
appeal is taken from a final decision of the court.
(3) The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the amount of the bond shall
be within the sound discretion of the court. An order denying a petition for bond shall be
interlocutory. An order directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
(4) If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an order of the court
dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellate court sustains the
order of the court below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon
motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals,
shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
K. Accommodations under the Fair Housing Amendments Act and/or the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
(1) The applicable Board shall hear and determine appeals from decisions of the Applicable
Zoning Officer with respect to requests for reasonable accommodation under the Fair
Housing Amendments Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act. In hearing such an
appeal, the applicable Board shall apply the criteria set for in this Ordinance. In granting a
request for reasonable accommodation, the applicable Board may attach such reasonable
safeguards and/or limitations as it may deem necessary to properly implement this Ordinance
and protect the public health, safety and welfare in a manner consistent with the requirements
of the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the Americans with Disabilities Act. In handling a
request for reasonable accommodation, the applicable Board shall be governed by the criteria
set forth in this Ordinance to the fullest extent as may be consistent with the Fair Housing
Amendments Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
§2000-1603. Applicable Zoning Officer.
A. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall receive applications for building permits and occupancy
permits.
B. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall review such applications after site visits before deciding to
issue a permit or refer the proposal to the Joint Planning Commission or applicable Zoning
Hearing Board.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.162
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
C. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall testify at meetings of each Borough’s Zoning Hearing Board
on any contested decision he has made.
D. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall halt construction where it is not proceeding in accordance
with permit, or permit has expired, or never existed.
E. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall visit approved construction in progress to verify continued
compliance with permit.
F. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall investigate alleged violations of performance standards or
other requirements of this Ordinance and, if allegations are correct, demand compliance with this
Ordinance.
G. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall interpret this Ordinance literally.
H. The Applicable Zoning Officer shall keep a current record of nonconforming uses throughout all
Boroughs.
I. The Applicable Zoning Officer may be delegated the job of preparing advertisements for public
hearings, preparing lists of lot owners to be notified by mail of hearings and posting notices and
reason of hearings.
THE TRI-BOROUGH COMMUNITIES
JOINT ZONING ORDINANCE
2000.163
DRAFT
Draft Date: 4/2009
ARTICLE XVII
Schedule of Fees and Financing Responsibilities
§2000-1700. Fees.
A Schedule of Fees applicable to Zoning Ordinance-related applications and processes shall be kept on
file and available at the respective Borough Municipal Administration Office in which said application is
to be filed or process conducted.
§2000-1701. Financing Responsibilities.
The manner and extent of financing the costs for administration and enforcement, including the financial
responsibilities for defending legal challenges to this Zoning Ordinance, is available on file as part of the
communities’ respective intergovernmental cooperation agreement(s).