ADOPTED by the Council of the City of Arnold, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, this
day of 10th day of February, 1998.
ATTEST:
osC~fs:bo~utt, ii·ivrk
BY: CITY OF ARNOLD, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PA
CITY COUNCIL
William Oemao, Mayor ... : ,
100
j 1
I
l
I ".
I l.
I
L
l
J
ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 1 of 1998
CITY OF ARNOLD, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
l
!ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
'
1
1.100
1.200
1.300
1
1.400
1.500
1.600
. )
I
j
SHORT TITLE
APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE
JURISDICTION
PURPOSE OF THE ORDINANCE
STATEMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
1.601 Interpretation
1 .602 Validity
1. 700 EFFECTIVE DATE
JARTICLE 2. DEFINITIONS
~2. 100 APPLICABLE DEFINITIONS
l 2.101 - 2.210 Definitions (alphabetically listed)
18RTICLE 3. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
J
3.100 NAMES OF ZONING DISTRICTS
~.200 ZONING MAP
-8.300 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
16.RTICLE 4. BASIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PAGE NO.
1
. 1
1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
5
5
23
23
23
23
24
4.100 BASIC REGULATIONS 24
4.101 Regulations Governing the Use of Land 24
4.102 Regulations Governing the Size of Lots, Yards and Buildings 24
SCHEDULE I - REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF LAND 25
SCHEDULE II - REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SIZE OF LOTS, YARDS
AND BUILDINGS FOR PERMITTED USES ONLY 26
4.200 PERFORMANCE, ENVIRONMENTAL AND TRAFFIC REQUIREMENTS 27
l
i
...J
4.201 Performance and Environmental Impacts 27
4.202 Traffic Impact Requirements 27
SCHEDULE Ill - TRIP GENERATION RATES -
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) 31
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 4. BASIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS (Continued)
4. 203 Environmentally Sensitive Areas
a. Areas Subject To Flooding
b. Other Environmental Conditions
c. Actions Required
4.300 USE CLASSES IN ZONING DISTRICTS
4.301 PERMIITED USES
USE CLASS 1 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION USES
USE CLASS 2 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
USE CLASS 3 TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
USE CLASS 4 GENERAL COMMERCIAL
USE CLASS 5 BOULEVARD COMMERCIAL
USE CLASS 6 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
USE CLASS 7 CUSTOMARY ACCESSORY USES
4.302 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
PAGE NO.
32
32
32
32
33
33
33
34
34
34
35
36
36
37
USE CLASS 8 MUL Tl FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, FAMILY CARE
FACILITIES AND CONVERSIONS 38
USE CLASS 9 GROUP CARE AND RELATED RESIDENTIAL USES 41
USE CLASS 10 TRANSITIONAL USES 42
USE CLASS 11 ELDERLY/HANDICAPPED CARE FACILITIES 43
USE CLASS 12 SPECIAL COMMERCIAL 44
USE CLASS 13 SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL 45
USE CLASS 14 APPROPRIATE PUBLIC USES AND
ESSENTIAL SERVICES 46
4.303 CONDITIONAL USES
USE CLASS 1 5 RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT
USE CLASS 16 ADULT-ORIENTED USES
USE CLASS 17 SPECIALIZED MEDICAL FACILITIES
USE C-LA·S-S- 18 COMMERCIAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL -~ ................ , ....... ,....,,. ·-1 -·. -
ii
47
48
·49
50
53-A - 53-F
.-
,
J
TABLE OF CONTENTS ~ 1
l
PAGE NO.
ARTICLE 5. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
1 5.100 PERMITTED VARIATIONS FROM REQUIRED AREAS
1
.11 I
ls.200
J
5.300
j
]
f .400
l
5.500
l
J
j
5.101 Existing Nonconforming Lots
SCHEDULE IV - PERMITTED VARIATIONS FOR EXISTING NONCONFORMING
LOTS IN VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS
Height Limitations
Front Yard Exceptions
Projections Into Yards
5.102
5.103
5.104
5.105 Changes to Conforming Uses and Buildings
UNIQUE LOTS AND BUILDING LOCATIONS
5.201 Two or More Buildings on a lot
5.202 Through lots
5.203 Lots Fronting On An Alley
5.204 Side Yard of a Corner Lot
5.205 Obstruction to Vision
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
5. 301 Accessory Structures
5.302 Home Occupations
5.303 Home Gardening, Nurseries and Greenhouses
5.304 Private Outdoor Swimming Pools
5.305 Fences, Walls and Planting Materials
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
5.401 Enlargement
5 .402 Restoration
5.403 Discontinuance
5.404 Change of Use
5.405 Termination
5 .406 Off-Street Parking
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5. 501 Off-Street Parking
5.502 Parking For Home Occupations
5.503
5.504
5.505
SCHEDULE V - REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACES
Off-Street Loading
Development of Parking and Loading Spaces
Off-Street Parking in Residential Areas
iii
54
54
54
55
56
56
56
56
57
57
57
57
57
57
57
57
58
60
60
62
65
65
65
65
65
66
67
67
67
67
68
69
69
72
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 5. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS (Contin1:1ed)
5.600 SIGNS
5.601
5.602
5 .603
5.604
5 .605
5.606
5.607
Scope and Applicability
General Sign Regulations
Location, Height and Projection of Signs
Types of Signs Permitted in Zoning Districts
Design of Signs
Prohibited Signs
Temporary Signs
5 . 700 TEMPORARY USES
5. 701 Special Events or Activities
5. 702 Excavations and Fill Material
5.800 SITE PLAN REVIEW
5. 801 Purpose and Procedure
5 .802 Optional Site Plan Review Procedure
5 .803 Site Plan Requirements
5.804 Site Design Guidelines
5.900 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
5.901 Screening Requirements
5.902 Slope of Yards
5.903 Design of Highway (Non-Residential) Development
5.904 Animals and Fowls
5.905 Size of Dwellings
5.906 Public Water and Sewer Facilities
5. 907 Prohibited Uses
ARTICLE 6. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6.100 GENERAL PROCEDURE
6.101 General Sequence of Steps
6.1 02 Zoning Permit Types
6 .200 ZONING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
6.201 Applications to Zoning Officer
6.202 Applications to Zoning Hearing Board
6.203 Zoning Permits
6.204 Occupancy Permits
6.205 Certificate of Nonconforming Use
iv
PAGE NO.
72
72
73
73
74
76
76
77
77
77
78
79
79
79
80
82
84
84
84
84
85
85
86
86
87
87
87
87
88
88
88
88
89
90
n
n
II
ll
D
n
n
J
]
~ l
. l.l
[
TABLE OF CONTENTS
~ ARTICLE 6. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Continued)
6.300
1
1 6.400
l
)s. 100
J
16.800
}6.900
ZONING OFFICER
6 .301 Appointment of Zoning Officer
6.302 Duties and Powers
ZONING HEARING BOARD
6.401 Board Is Hereby Created
6.402 Organization of Board
6.403 Board Functions
6.404 Notice of Hearings
6.405 Referral to Planning Commission
VARIANCES
6.501 Board May Authorize Variances
CITY COUNCIL
6.601 Function of City Council
6.602 Notice of Hearings
6.603 Referral to Planning Commission
HEARINGS
6. 701 Public Notice
6. 702 Date of Hearing
6 . 703 Conduct of Hearing
AMENDMENTS
6 .801 Procedure
APPEALS, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
6.901 Appeals
6.902 Violations
6.903 Enforcement Notice
6.904 Causes of Action
6.905 Enforcement Remedies
k .1000 FILING FEES
~ PPENDIX A - Zoning Review Fees
ZONING MAP
)
1
l
v
PAGE NO.
90
90
90
91
91
91
91
92
92
93
93
94
94
94
94
95
95
95
95
96
96
97
97
97
98
98
99
99
101
Following Page 1 02
l
'l
1
ORDINANCE NO. 1 of 1998
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF ARNOLD, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PA.
n An Ordinance for the City of Arnold, enacted on February 10, 1998.
l.
This Ordinance permits, prohibits, regulates and determines the uses of land, watercourses
n and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; areas and dimensions of land
and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards
and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures; and the
density of population and intensity of use; and further the Ordinance contains provisions for
special exceptions and variances to be administered by a Zoning Hearing Board; provision for
J Conditional Uses to be decided by the City Council of the City of Arnold, provisions for
administration and enforcement and such other provisions as may be necessary to implement
the requirements of the Ordinance.
D Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of
n1 968, P.L. 805, No. 247 as reenacted and amended, the City Council of the City of Arnold hereby enact and ordain as follows:
0 ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
.J 1.100 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "1 998 Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Arnold, Westmoreland County, PA."
. l 1.200 APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE
]
]
I
l
1
No building, sign or other structure or land shall be used or occupied and no building
or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this
Ordinance. However, this Ordinance shall not require any change to any building,
structure or use legally existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, or any
amendment thereto; or to any building, structure or use planned and construction
started in compliance with existing laws prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
or any amendment thereto, and completed within a one-year period after the effective
date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, except as otherwise provided
herein.
1
1.300 JURISDICTION
The regulations and provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to and affect the entire
geographic area of the City of Arnold, Westmoreland County, PA, as shown on the
zoning map included herein.
1 .400 PURPOSE OF THE ORDINANCE
This Ordinance is enacted to implement the Statement of Community Development
Objectives for the City of Arnold in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 as
reenacted and amended, for the following purposes: To promote, protect and
facilitate the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
development of the City, the proper density of population, the provision of adequate
light and air, protection of persons and property, the maintenance and improvement
of the aesthetic qualities of the City, vehicle parking and loading space,
transportation, water, sewage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements
and the protection of the environment.
The Ordinance is also designed to prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger
and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire,
flood, panic or other dangers; and to give consideration to the character of the City,
its various parts, and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and
structures.
1.500 STATEMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
The City of Arnold Zoning Ordinance and Map is intended to promote the Community
Development Objectives which are set forth below:
1.501 To provide for the coordinated development of the City which recognizes
that the City is part of a larger urbanized area.
1.502 To provide appropriate locations and opportunities for development of
various types of land uses including Residential, Commercial and Industrial
uses and public and semi-public use areas including recreation areas, public
buildings, churches and institutional uses and opportunities for the City to
better utilize its riverfront areas.
1.503 To establish appropriate densities of development for residential and other
uses, satisfying the needs of various age groups, income levels, family sizes
and individual preferences.
1.504 To provide space for adequate preservation and improvement of the City's
community facilities to enable these facilities to serve the present and future
needs of the population, including sewer and water facilities, drainage,
recreation, cultural, institutional and other facilities.
2
f 1
:1
. I
I~ ] ,_
iJ
u
D
'J
f
I
L
...
I l
J
11
. I
1.505 To provide for appropriate industrial and commercial growth and
opportunities for development and for improvement of the City's tax base
and economy.
1.506 To protect residential areas and neighborhoods from adverse influences and
to improve the quality and livability of residential neighborhoods.
1.507 To preserve opportunities for the development of occupations which promote
small businesses without adversely affecting the character of residential
neighborhoods.
1.508 To encourage neighborhood conservation and rehabilitation and preservation
of the older areas of the City and historic structures .
1.509 To prevent the degradation of the environment including prevention of
groundwater contamination and pollution of the Allegheny River and its
tributaries and through other means.
1.510 To provide a street and road system capable of circulating people and goods
within and through the entire City safely and efficiently.
1.511 To reduce traffic congestion in the City and to provide adequate parking
space to serve all uses in the City.
1.512 To eliminate undesirable, uneconomical and unattractive mixtures of land
uses.
1.513 To promote sound standards of development, maximize stability of property
values and encourage desirable economic activities . u 1.600 INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
l~
L
u
u
LI
u
u
1.601
1.602
lnteroretation - In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of
this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements ·for the
promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not
intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or
ordinances provided that where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions
upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height or bulk of a
building, or requires larger open spaces, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall prevail.
Validity - If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable, or
invalid, such decision shall not affect its remaining portions. The City
Council of the City of Arnold hereby declare that it would have passed this
Ordinance and each section and subsection thereof irrespective of the fact
that any one or more of its sections, subsections, clauses, or phrases may
be found by court to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
3
No provision contained in this Ordinance is intended to discriminate against
persons protected under Federal or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania laws
pertaining to equal opportunity, civil rights, the elderly or persons with
disabilities.
1. 700 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately subsequent to adoption.
4
I J
[
I
l.
L
0
ll
l.1
u
IJ
u
u
u
u
u
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS
2.100 APPLICABLE DEFINITIONS
Except where specified in the following definitions, all words used in this Ordinance
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense shall include
the future tense; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure"; and the word
"occupied" or "used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used"; and the word ''shall" is intended
to be mandatory and the word "may" is permissive; the word "abut" shall include the
words "directly across from" and the word "lot" includes "parcel", "tract" or "plot".
2. 101 Accessory Use or Structure - A use or structure subordinate to and located
on the same lot as the principal use or building and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal use or building.
Where any part of the wall of an accessory building is part of the wall of a
main building, or where the accessory building is attached to the main
building by a roof, including carports however covered, such accessory
building shall be deemed part of the main building.
2.102 Adult Oriented Uses or Activities - Adult oriented uses or activities shall
include the exhibition, or the dissemination by sale, loan, the conduct of live
activities or uses, or otherwise of explicit sexual materials or activities,
and/or uses or activities of an obscene nature; if such uses or activities
comprise more than 20 percent of the stock in trade of the premises or
constitute, from time to time, the primary or major attraction to the
premises.
a. Explicit Sexual Materials, as used herein, means:
1.
2.
Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film,
or other similar visual representation of image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct,
or sadomasochistic abuse; or
Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, video tape,
computer disk or other device, however reproduced, or sound
recording which contains any matter enumerated in subparagraph
1. above, or explicit and detailed verbal excitement,
sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse, or sex related
violence.
5
b. Obscene Nature, as used herein, means that:
1. The average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the subject matter taken as a whole
appeals to the prurient interest;
2. The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive
way materials of the type described hereinabove; and
3. The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary
artistic, political, educational, or scientific value.
c. Words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings given to them
under Title 18 PA. C.P.S.A. Section 5903 and any amendments, from
time to time, thereto.
2.103 Adult Book. Video or Computer Store or Establishment - An establishment
having a portion of its stock in trade, including but not limited to books,
magazines, photographs, slides, graphic displays or other information,
including such information stored or displayed by video or computer
equipment or other electronic means or other materials which are
distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"explicit sexual materials and/or obscene materials" as defined herein.
2.104 Adult Picture Theater - An enclosed building or outdoor theater used for
presenting motion pictures, slides, video tapes, computer graphic displays, or
other reproduced images by any means, or for live activities or uses,
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "explicit sexual materials and/or obscene materials"
as defined herein.
2.105 Alley - A public or private way affording only secondary means of access to
abutting property, or a public thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of
less than 24 feet. Alleys may also be known as courts, places or lanes.
2.106 Alterations, Structural - As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts of a structure including the walls,
columns, beams, girders, floors, roof or ceiling; or an enlargement whether
by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the moving from one
location or position to another; but not including normal maintenance or
minor repairs or improvements.
2.107 Automotive Junkyard - A place where two or more motor driven vehicles
which do not bear a current state inspection sticker and/or license plate
and/or their related parts are stored or disassembled.
6
'I
f .
I
l :
( .
I_ ..
I •
r I
~
I!
l 1
l.
Ll
u
l }
{ 1
u
u
2. 108 Auto. Trailer. or Boat Sales Area - An open area, other than a street, used
for the display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles, trailers, or
boats in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
2. 109 Auto Service Station - A building or place of business where gasoline and
automobile accessories are dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade, and
where automotive repair services may be rendered.
2. 11 O Auto Wrecking - The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled,
obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
2.111 Basement - A floor level partly or completely below grade. A basement shall
be considered to be a "story" if more than one-third of the perimeter walls
are five feet or more above the finished grade level of the ground
immediately adjacent to the walls.
2. 112 Bed and Breakfast Homestead or Inn - An owner-occupied single family
detached residence which contains six or fewer bedrooms used for providing
overnight accommodations to the public and in which breakfast is included in
the charge for the room.
2.113 Board - See Zoning Hearing Board.
2.114 Boarding House - See "Rooming House".
2.115 Building - Any structure having a roof supported by columns, poles, piers,
cables or walls, used for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or property, including tents or structures on wheels or porches as
defined herein. Structures divided by unpierced ,masonry division walls
extending from the ground to the roof shall be deemed to be separate
buildings.
2.116 Building Coverage - Maximum - The maximum ratio obtained by dividing the
ground floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot (including
covered porches, carports and breeze-ways, but excluding open patios,
parking areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other structures which are
open to the sky) by the total area of the lot upon which the buildings are
located. Said ground floor area shall be computed by using the maximum
outside building dimensions, including cantilevered areas measured on a
horizontal plane.
2.117 Building Height - The vertical distance derived from the average of ·the
finished grade at the foundation corners of the building or structure to the
highest point of the building or structure, excluding a chimney or other
similar structure as listed in Section 5.102.
2.118 Building, Principal - A building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which it is situated.
2. 119 Building Restriction or Setback Line - A line which designates the minimum
distance betwee_n any building and/or use and the adjacent road right-of-way
or property line. Such line shall be measured at right angles from the front,
side, or rear street right-of-way or property lines which abut the property
upon which said building and/or use is or is to be located and parallel to said
right-of-way or property line.
2. 120 Bulk - The size and shape of building uses and the exterior relationship of
their exterior walls, or their location, to lot lines and other buildings or other
walls of the same building; and all open spaces required in connection with a
building. Bulk regulations include, but are not limited to, regulations dealing
with lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width and depth, building height,
required yards, building coverage, courts, usable open space, floor area ratio,
spacing between buildings on a single lot and the length of buildings in a
row.
2.121 Cellar - The portion of a building, other than a basement, that is located
below ground level.
2.122 City - See Municipality.
2.123 Club House or Lodge - A building to house a non-profit club or social
organization and which is not adjunct to or operated by or in connection with
a public tavern, cafe, or other public place.
2. 124 Commission - See Planning Commission.
2.125
2.126
Commercial Vehicle - Any motor vehicle which is required by law to bear
any license plate other than that issued for passenger car use, except for a
pick-up truck not exceeding a total of 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle
weight. Any motor vehicle including passenger cars and pick-up trucks of
any size, which by reason of a characteristic coloring or marking exceeding
one square foot in area is identified or commonly associated with any
business, industry, or public agency shall be considered a commercial vehicle
within the terms of this Ordinance. Unmarked passenger cars used in
business by a resident shall not be considered to be a commercial vehicle.
Competent Authority - A Competent Authority is a person, corporation or an
established and recognized agency which because of education and/or
experience or special legal jurisdiction or enforcement responsibility or
because of other special qualification is considered to be an authority in a
specific subject matter or activity and is therefore deemed competent by City
Council tO' provide expert advice to the City. Such a Competent Authority
may include professional engineers or architects, planners, attorneys or other
experts, or County, State or Federal agencies such as PA DEP, PennDOT, PA
8
l ~'
I
l .
j
I
i -
i"
I
"'
DCED, Westmoreland County Conservation District, Westmoreland County
Planning Commission, County or State Health Departments, Federal
Environmental Protection Agency and other applicable agencies or
professional persons.
2.127 Comorehensive Plan - The official Comprehensive or Land Use Plan of the
City of Arnold as it may be adopted by the City Council.
2.128 Conditional Use - A use which by virtue of its own particular characteristics
may be permitted in particular areas only after review and recommendation
by the Planning Commission and after a public hearing and approval by the
City Council pursuant to express standards and criteria set forth in this
Ordinance.
2.129 Convalescent Home - See Nursing Home.
2.130 Council or City Council - City Council of the City of Arnold.
2. 131 Curative Amendment
1 . Landowner Curative Amendment - A proposed amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance prepared by a landowner who desires to challenge,
on substantive grounds, the validity of the Zoning Ordinance or Map, or
any provision thereof.
2. City Curative Amendment - A proposed amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance which may be prepared by the City, as an alternate
amendment to a proposed curative amendment prepared by the
landowner.
All curative amendments shall conform with the requirements of Section
609.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
2.132 Deck - See definitions of "Patio" and "Porch".
2.133 Density, Gross Project - The gross project density of a residential
subdivision, land development, planned residential development or residential
cluster development, measured in residential dwelling units per acre, shall be
h equal to the total number of residential dwelling units in the project divided
by the permanent gross total project area of the development, including
private drives, parking areas, recreation and common open space and other
related uses permitted in the development.
2.134 Density. Net Project - The net project density of a residential subdivision,
la_nd-development, planned residential development or residential cluster
development, measured in residential units per acre, shall be equal to the
total number of residential dwelling units divided by the total net residential
9
land in acres. The total net residential land is equal to the total project area
minus the land in the project which is not used for residential purposes or
related residential yard areas, parking areas to serve residents, or permitted
accessory uses (such as public or private street rights-of-way, recreation and
common open space, and other related residential uses) .
2.135 Detention Center - An interment or treatment facility for persons charged
with, or convicted of, criminal offenses {including juvenile delinquents},
and/or other persons involuntarily committed under applicable mental health
or other statutes.
2. 136 District or Zone - A portion of the territory of the Municipality within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof
apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. 137 Dump - A site used primarily for the disposal by abandonment, dumping,
burial, burning or other means and for whatever purpose or waste material
which is operated in an environmentally safe manner, in accordance with
applicable Federal, State or local requirements and/or permits.
2. 138 Dwelling - Any building, vehicle or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons and as
defined further below. The term dwelling shall not be deemed to include
automobile court, rooming house, tourist home, hotel, motel, hospital,
nursing home, dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house or family care or group
care facility or a seasonal dwelling as defined herein.
;. .
a. Dwelling Unit - One or more rooms, including a kitchen (or kitchenette)
and sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure designed as a unit for
occupancy by not more than one family (as defined herein) for living
and sleeping purposes, and having a separate and independent
entrance.
b. Dwelling. Single-Familv. Detached · A detached buildiflQ on a
permanent foundation, designed for or occupied exclusively as a
residence by one family, except for an "Accessory Dwelling Unit" as
defined below, including a "Mobile Home Dwelling" as defined below,
except that such mobile home must be located on a permanent
foundation.
c. Dwelling, Single Family. Semi-Detached - A building on a permanent
foundation, designed for use as a single dwelling unit to be occupied
exclusively as a residence by one family, which has only one side yard
and one party wall in common with another building.
d . . Dwelling, Two Family. Detached · A detached building on a permanent
foundation in which not more than two individual family or dwelling
10
J
n
u
[J
0
I.
L
L
L
L:
units are entirely separated by vertical walls and/or horizontal floors,
and where each dwelling unit has a completely separate entry and exit.
e. Dwelling Structures. Multi-Family ~ Multi-family dwelling structures are
structures which contain three or more dwelling units, including
dwelling units commonly referred to as townhouses, row houses,
garden apartments, or quadruplex units, or high rise units for the
elderly, or other designations.
Each dwelling unit in such a structure shall be designed for occupancy
of f amities living independently of each other.
f. Dwelling, Mobile Home - A transportable single family dwelling
structure constructed on a permanent foundation, intended for
permanent occupancy for use by one family, contained in one unit or in
two or more units designed to be joined into on~ integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations; except for a travel trailer as
defined herein; and excluding such mobile home dwellings or
prefabricated homes or sections thereof which when assembled or
combined into a single unit are more than 1 9 feet in width and no
longer readily capable of being separated for repeated towing.
g. Dwelling Unit. Accessory - A separate second dwelling unit which may
be located within a structure in which the principal use is for a singlefamily
dwelling provided that such accessory dwelling shall be
permitted only if it conforms with the following conditions:
Shall not exceed three rooms or 800 square feet in total livable
area or 40 percent of the total residential floor area {excluding
basement and attic floor space), whichever is less.
Is not intended for occupancy by more than two persons.
The entire dwelling structure, including both the principal and the
accessory dwelling unit shall remain in the same ownership at all
times, and the principal unit shall be occupied by the owner of
the structure at all times. In the event that this condition ceases
to exist then the use of the accessory dwelling unit shall be
terminated in the ~structure.
h. Dwelling. Efficiency - A configuration for a dwelling unit within a multifamily
or apartment building where a separate bedroom is not' provided
and the sleeping quarters are located in the same room as the living
· quarters.
1 ,
i. Dwelling, Seasonal - A cabin, lodge, summer house or other structure
designed and intended for temporary occupancy by one family for less
than 1 50 days of the year. Said seasonal dwelling shall not be larger
than 800 square feet in floor area as defined herein.
2.139 Dormitory - A residence hall or building which provides sleeping rooms to be
used primarily by students of a school or college or by members of a club,
fraternity or sorority or other institution.
2.140 Essential Services - The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, communication, water transmission or
distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith;
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such .public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health
or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings, except telephone
booths, fire houses, pump stations, treatment plants, and similar facilities
which shall also be considered as essential service facilities hereunder.
2. 141 Family - Any individual, or two or more persons, all of whom are related by
blood, marriage, legal adoption or foster placement living together as a single
housekeeping unit. A group of two or more persons, all or some of whom
are not related as defined above, living together in a single, non-profit
dwelling unit and maintaining a common household with a single cooking
facility shall also be considered to be a family.
The term "Family" does not include the residents of a "Family Care" or
"Group Care" facility as defined herein, and shall not include the occupants
of a boarding house, rooming or lodging house, club, fraternity/sorority or
dormitory or a family care or group care facility as defined herein.
Any single housekeeping unit in which a "family" resides as defined above
shall be subject to the applicable housing occupancy requirements of the
City of Arnold set forth in the City's BOCA Property Maintenance or Housing
Code or other applicable housing occupancy code adopted by the City.
2.142 Family Care Facility - A facility which provides resident service in a private
residence to six or fewer individuals who are not related to the resident
household. These individuals shall include persons in need of continuing
medical and/or adult supervision and/or treatment and are provided service
and supervision by members of the residential household in accordance with
their individual needs. This category includes foster or boarding houses for
children or adults, but does not include "Detention Centers" as defined
herein.
12
l •
[I
Li
l1
LI
lJ
(]
{]
lJ
u
u
L
u
.0
2.143 Fence - Any outdoor barrier of either natural living vegetation or composed
of fabricated materials, as defined below, which is placed or arranged as a
line of demarcation between lots, or to enclose a lot or a part of a lot. For
the purpose of this Ordinance, a fence is a boundary line fence when the
average center line of the fence is established on the lot within two feet of a
property and/or lot line. The height of any fence shall be the distance
measured from the existing grade of the natural surface to the top of the
fence.
a. Natural Living Fence - A barrier of natural living vegetation, including
shrubs, hedges, trees or other plant materials, shall only be considered
to be a fence if 50% or more of the horizontal length of such materials
or growth within six feet of the ground surface provides a visual screen
or obstruction to vision.
b. Fabricated Materials Fence - Any structure or wall, regardless of
composition of material, except for a natural living fence, which is
constructed and installed to act as a visual or physical outdoor barrier.
2.144 Forestry - Woodlands, timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, the
gathering of forest products and the provision of forest services including the
operation of a saw-mill, but excluding other wood manufacturing businesses.
2. 145 Flood Prone Area - A Flood Prone Area is an area subject to flooding as
defined in any Flood Plain Management Ordinance adopted by the
Municipality and as it may be amended thereafter.
2 .146 Floor Area - The sum of the gross areas of the floors of every story of a
building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center
lines of common or party walls separating two buildings.
2 .147 Floor Area Ratio - The total floor area of a building divided by the area of the
lot on which it is located. Regardless of the internal arrangements of a
building, it shall be deemed to have at least one story for each twenty feet
of height or fraction thereof.
2.148 Garage, Private - An accessory building or part of a principal building used
only for the storage of private motor vehicles and other personal effects of
the occupant of the principle structure.
2.149 Garage, Service - A building or part thereof used for the repair of motor
vehicles for renumeration and not used for dismantling or scrapping of motor
vehicles.
2 .150 Garage. Community - A building or group of buildings, used exclusively for
the storage and parking of automobiles and not used for making repairs
thereto.
13
2. 151 Group Care Facility - A facility which provides resident services to seven or
more individuals of whom one or more are unrelated, who are being cared
for by a part or full-time resident supervisory staff. These individuals shall
include persons in need of medical and/or adult supervision and treatment
and are undergoing rehabilitation for physical or mental disabilities or other
problems, and are provided services to meet their individual needs. This
category includes uses licensed or supervised by any Federal, State or
County health/welfare agency, such as halfway houses, resident schools,
resident and personal care facilities and foster or boarding homes, but does
not include "Residential Care Facilities" for the elderly and "Nursing Homes"
or "Detention Centers" as defined herein.
2. 152 Heliport - An area that is used for the landing and take-off of helicopters and
including some or all of the auxiliary facilities useful to the helicopters'
operation such as helicopter parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance
equipment.
2.153 Home Occuoations - Activities undertaken on a residential property, by a
resident of the property and by other persons as may be permitted by this
Ordinance, which are carried out with the intent of earning an income. Such
a use shall be considered an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit
which is permitted under the terms of this Ordinance. Such uses are
restricted in size and scope, as required herein, to safeguard the residential
area in which they are located.
2.154 Hospital - A building or part thereof used for the medical, psychiatric,
obstetrical, surgical or dental care, on a 24-hour basis, of four or more inpatients.
Hospital shall include general hospitals, mental hospitals,
tuberculosis hospitals, children's hospitals, and any such facilities providing
medical in-patient care, including Specialized Medical Facilities, as defined
herein.
2. 155 Hotel - A building or group of buildings designed to serve the public, with
one or more outside entrances which contains six or more permanent
bedrooms and which is designed, arranged and used for the overnight
lodging of travelers or for temporary occupancy of transients; and which
may include a public dining room and kitchen.
2. 156 Junk and Junk Yard
a. Junk - Junk shall include scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap
copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their
alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used machinery, used
vehicles which are not in operating condition, used tools, used
appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or
crates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used tires and other manufactured
goods, any of which are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make
14
l
LI
[ }
[ J
f l
l.~
L
L
L
L
them unusable in their existing condition, but are subject to being
dismantled or processed for reclamation, salvage or recycling.
b. Junk Yard - A junk yard shall consist of an outdoor storage yard or
premises where junk, waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
where no less than 25 percent of the storage, processing and
associated activities take place in an enclosed building.
2. 157 !&1 - A designated area of land, also referred to as a parcel or tract,
established by a plat or otherwise, as permitted by law, to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit.
a. lot Area - The computed area contained within the lot lines.
b. Lot. Corner - A lot situated at an intersection of two streets, where said
lot has frontage on both streets.
c. lot. Depth - The average distance between the front and the rear lot
lines.
d. Lot Lines - The property lines bounding the lot.
1. Lot Line. Front - The line separating the lot from the principal
street right-of-way on which the lot has frontage.
2. Lot Line. Rear - The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
3. Lot Line. Side - Any lot line other than a.front or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot
line.
e. Lot Width - The width of the lot between side lot lines measured at the
front building line as prescribed by the front yard regulations.
2.158 Membership Club - See "Social Hall, Club or Lodge".
2.159 Medical Offices and Buildings - Includes medical, buildings and offices used
by physicians, dentists and other professional personnel under the
supervision of a physician or dentist, for the treatment and examination of
patients, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on the premises;
but excluding "Specialized Medical Facilities", as defined in Section 2.190.
2. 160 Mobile Home Park - A parcel of Ian~ at least ten acres in size, under single
ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of two
or more mobile homes for non-transient use.
15
2.161 Motel - A building, or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected
units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, designed primarily for
transient travelers, and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities.
The term "motel" includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor
lodges, auto courts and other similar uses.
2.162 Municipality or City - The City of Arnold located in Westmoreland County,
Pa.
2. 163 Nonconforming Lot - Any lot, legally existing at the date of passage of this
Ordinance, which does not conform with either one or more of the following:
the minimum width, depth and area dimensions specified for the district
where such a lot is situated.
2. 164 Nonconforming Use or Structure
a. Nonconforming Structure - A building or structure or part thereof
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use, or extent of
use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment thereto or hereafter
enacted where such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application
of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
b. Nonconforming Use - A use, whether of land or building or structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance or amendment thereto or hereafter enacted, where such use
was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or
amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation.
2. 165 Nursing Home - An institutional use licensed under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for lodging, boarding and nursing care,
including any premises containing sleeping rooms or beds to be used by
seven or more persons who are lodged and furnished with meals, related
facilities and professional staff and nursing care on a 24-hour basis. Nursing
homes shall also include convalescent homes, skilled nursing facilities,
personal care facilities, and intermediate care facilities and infirmaries located
within homes for the aged, but shall exclude "Residential Care Facility for the
Elderly", "Residential Retirement Complex" or "Detention Centers" as defined
herein .
2.166 Obstruction To Vision - An "obstruction to vision" is defined as any
structure, fence, sign, plant material or other obstruction which obstructs
vision between a height of two to ten feet above the center line grade of the
adjoining streets or driveways within the triangle formed by the street or
driveway intersection, created by the right-of-way line of each street or
driveway extended to a point, and a line drawn between two points on the
16
. I
I •
[
I
r
r
L
0
L
( I
(,
L
L
L
L
right-of-way line of each street or driveway, each located 15 feet from the
street or driveway intersection for local and collector streets, and 30 feet for
major State and Federal traffic routes. All plant materials shall be kept
trimmed to ensure uninterrupted vision for motor vehicle traffic.
2.167 Parcel • See definition of "Lot".
2.168 Patio - A surfaced ground area, or a courtyard or a deck less than one foot
above the highest ground elevation over which it is located designed for
outdoor living purposes as an accessory use to a structure, which shall be
completely unenclosed except for any side which may adjoin a structure or
for any fences or walls, shrubs or hedges less than four feet in height.
Outdoor areas which are screened or enclosed by a roof or awning shall be
considered to be a structure (See definition of "Porch").
2.169 Permit - A document issued by the proper authority of the municipality
authorizing an applicant to undertake certain activities, as further defined
below:
a. Zoning Permit - A permit issued indicating that a proposed use, building
or structure is in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance or
with an order of the Zoning Hearing Board or Council and authorizing an
applicant to proceed with said use, building or structure.
b. Building Permit - A permit indicating that a proposed construction,
alteration or reconstruction of a structure is in accordance with the
construction provisions of any Building Code adopted by the
municipality, which authorizes an applicant to commence with said
construction, alteration or reconstruction. Such a permit shall not be
confused with a zoning permit or with an occupancy permit as may be
required under the terms of this Ordinance.
c. Occupancy Permit - A permit issued upon completion of the
construction of a structure, or change in use of structure or parcel of
land indicating that the premises comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance and may be used for the purposes set forth in the
Occupancy Permit.
2.170 Permitted Use - Any use which does not require special action by the
Planning Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board or the Council before a
zoning permit is granted by the Zoning Officer.
2.171 Planning Commission - The Planning Commission of the City of Arnold
established in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
2 .172 Porch - A structure or part of a structure which is enclosed on one or more
sides by a fence or wall which is four feet high or higher or covered by a
17
roof or awning; or a structure which would otherwise be classified as a
patio or a deck except that it is more than one foot above the highest ground
elevation over which it is located.
2.173 Principal Use - The primary or most important or main use of a lot, parcel or
structure.
2.174 Professional Office - Professional offices shall include the office of a
physician, dentist, optometrist, architect, landscape architect, engineer,
planner, insurance broker, realtor, accountant, lawyer, author or other
member of a recognized profession.
2.175 Public Notice - Notice for a Public Hearing published once each week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality.
Such Notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication
shall be not more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less
than 7 days from the date of the hearing (Also see Section 6. 700).
2. 176 Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle or piece of equipment, either self-powered or
designed to be towed, intended primarily for recreational or leisure time use.
Such vehicles may include travel trailers as defined herein, campers,
vehicles adapted for leisure time use, snowmobiles, mini-bikes, boat trailers
and other similar vehicles.
2. 177 Research Center - Land under single ownership or agreement, planned and
developed to provide service sites for structures and facilities, devoted to
experimentation in pure or applied scientific research, or to the design,
development and testing of new prototype machines, devices, products or
processes, and all accessory structures and facilities necessary to the
operation thereof.
2.178 Residential Care Facility For The Elderly - A residential complex, located on a
site of at least five acres, containing dwelling units and 24-hour staff
services to provide assistance and care for -elderly residents capable of
independent or semi-independent living, each of whom are primarily (at least
65%) at least 55 years of age or handicapped (or the spouse of an otherwise
qualified resident), but not requiring "Nursing Home" care.
2. 179 Residential Retirement Complex - A planned residential development for
persons of retirement age located on a site of at least five acres or more
which is held in one ownership and which provides residential living
accommodations and certain health care and other facilities for the residents.
Additional communal facilities may also include dining, recreation, open
space, parking and related facilities and other support services.
2.180 Rooming or Boarding House - A building containing one or more dwelling
accommodations in which at least two rooms are offered for rent for periods
18
1.
L
r
r
f
L
{ l
L
l'
of one month or longer, to adults aged 18 years or older, payable in money
or other consideration, including meals which may be furnished to
occupants, but where no public restaurant is maintained. A school or
college dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, membership club with
residents and other similar uses is not deemed to be a boarding or rooming
house.
2 .181 Sanitary landfill - A land site designed to meet the requirements of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) and on which engineering principles are utilized to bury deposits of
solid waste without creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances,
pollution or environmental degradation.
2 .182 Sanitary Sewer System, Private - A privately owned sewer system designed
and constructed to collect, centrally treat and dispose of all sewage from
any portion of a development or area.
2 .183 Sanitary Sewer System, Public - A sewer system serving all or a portion of
the municipality developed and administered by a governmental agency or
authority.
2 . 184 Satellite Earth Stations - A dish-shaped antenna designed to receive
television broadcasts or other electro-magnetic signals, and which are
relayed by microwave signals or other electro-magnetic, laser or similar
devices from earth orbiting communication satellites.
2.185 Sign. Advertising - An "advertising sign", also referred to as a "billboard", is
any graphic or visual display which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere
than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
2 .186 Sign. Business - A "business sign" is any graphic or visual display which
directs attention to a business or profession or to a commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located, or to whic~ it is affixed. ·
2.187 Sign. Gross Surface Area Of - The "gross surface area" of a sign or sign
structure shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of such sign or structure or display and in no
case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same, but not
including any structural or framing elements located outside the limits of the
display of such sign.
2.188 Social Hall, Club or Lodge - A building, structure, lot or land area, or portion
thereof, used as a private club or social organization or for activities or
services not generally extended to the general public and not conducted for
individual profit or gain.
19
2.189 Special Exception - A "Special Exception" is a use which may be granted or
denied pursuant to express standards and criteria established in this
Ordinance. Requests for such "Special Exceptions" shall be decided by the
Zoning Hearing Board after a review and recommendation from the Planning
Commission and after a hearing to determine compliance with said standards
and criteria.
2. 190 Specialized Medical Facilities - Facilities which are primarily used for the
treatment ·and care of persons suffering from certain classes of diseases or
conditions resulting from the use of drug, alcohol or other addititive
substances, persons seeking to undergo abortions, or persons with mental or
other conditions that require continuing supervision, treatment and
management to safeguard the health and safety of the persons being treated
and/or the personnel providing the services. Such "Specialized Medical
Facilities" shall in all cases be considered to be "Conditional" uses.
2.191 Storv and Half-Story - That portion of a building, included between the
surface of any floor, but excluding the basement or cellar, and the ceiling
next above it and having a vertical distance of not less than seven feet. Any
such portion of a building having a distance of less than seven feet shall be
considered to be a half-story.
2.192 Street - A public or private thoroughfare, having a right- of-way width
greater than 24 feet, which affords the principal means of access to abutting
property, including avenue, way, drive, boulevard, highway, road and any
other thoroughfare except an alley.
a. Public Street - A street, as defined hereinabove, which is dedicated to
and accepted by the Municipality, or which is otherwise owned by the
Municipality, and which is legally open to the general public for use as
a means of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
b. Frontage on Public Streets - No use shall be created nor any building
occupied unless the lot or tract on which it is situated has frontage on a
public street, or on a private street as may be permitted by the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the City of Arnold,
without traversing through or around another use and/or building;
provided, however, that private streets may only be permitted by City
Council and they shall have access to and be connected to a public
street.
All such uses shall have a minimum frontage on the street as required
by this Zoning Ordinance.
2.193 Structure - Anything constructed, including a building, the use of which
requires permanent or fixed location on the ground, or attachment to
something having a permanent location on the ground. The term "structure"
20
I.
I.
(
r L
L
I.
I
{,
L
L
L
shall include signs, fences, walls, stationary and portable carports, porches,
swimming pools, garages and other construction of all types.
2.194 Swimming Pool - Any body of water or receptacle for water having a depth
at any point greater than two feet which is used, or intended to be used, for
swimming or bathing and constructed, installed, or maintained in or above
the ground, outside any building.
2.195 Temporary or Seasonal Occupancy - The· use of any premises or structure for
living and/or sleeping purposes for 150 or less days in any calendar year.
2.196 Tract - See definition of "Lot".
2.197 Travel Trailer - A vehicle not exceeding 36 feet in total length which can be
moved over the highway and be used for temporary living or sleeping
purposes and standing on wheels and containing nqt more than one dwelling
unit.
2.198 Usable Open Space - A portion of a lot or tract used for residential purposes
exclusive of required front and side yard areas, which is not covered by
buildings or parking areas and is suitable for use as outdoor open space for
the residents thereon.
2.199 Use Class - A group of similar, related or compatible land uses which are
grouped together for inclusion in one or more zoning districts.
2.200 Use Class Subcategory - Within any single Use Class, those uses which are
considered to be similar or of the same type are included in the same
paragraph in Section 4.300. Any use located in the same paragraph as
another use as set forth in Section 4.300 shall be considered to be in the
same "Use Class Subcategory".
2 .201 Variance - The Zoning Hearing Board's authorized departure from the
provisions of this Ordinance where the Board finds that such provisions
inflict unnecessary hardship upon an applicant, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this Ordinance and with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2.202 Water Supply System, Private - A privately owned water supply system
designed and constructed to transmit and distribute water from a common
source for domestic use, firefighting and other purposes to any portions of a
development or area.
2 .203 Water Suoply System, Public • A water supply system serving all or a portion
of the municipality which has been developed and is administered by a
governmental agency or authority.
21
2.204 Yard - An open space, as may be required by this Ordinance, on the same lot
with a building or a group of buildings, which open space lies between the
principal building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line, as defined
below, and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
except as may be permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.
a. Yard. Front - An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the front lot line.
b. Yard, Rear - An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line.
c. Yard. Side - An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the principal building and the nearest side lot line.
2.205 Zoning Hearing Board - The Zoning Hearing Board of the City of Arnold.
2.206 Zoning Officer - The administrative officer charged with the duty of enforcing
the provisions of this Ordinance.
22
l
(
I.
f
L
[j
l~
I'
I.
L
l.
L
l
L
ARTICLE 3 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
3.100 NAMES OF ZONING DISTRICTS
The City of Arnold is hereby divided into the following seven districts:
Residential Districts
R-1 - Low Density Residential
R-2 - Medium Density Residential
R-3 - High Density Residential
R-T - Transitional Residential
Non Residential Districts
C-1 - General Commercial
8-1 - Boulevard Commercial
1-1 - General Industrial
3 .200 ZONING MAP
3.300
The location and boundaries of these districts are established as shown on the
attached Zoning Map of the City of Arnold. The Zoning Map is hereby made a part of
this Ordinance.
INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
If uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district shown on the Zoning Map, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the location of such boundary. Where doubt
exists as to the intended meaning of the language written and enacted by the City
Council, then the Board shall interpret the language after consideration of the
"Statement of Community Objectives" set forth in Section 1.500.
23
i I
r.
I
,
I
, 1.
.
1.
! .
I ,..,
I ;
f . I:
r : l j
r I·
( I·
r ~ I· f .
I·
r .
Ii
I ·,
I
I
T I
ARTICLE 4 - BASIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
4. 100 BASIC REGULATIONS
The basic regulations governing the use of land, the size of lots, yards and buildings
within each Zoning District are established in this Article. For certain· specific uses or
exceptional situations, these basic regulations are supplemented by Article Five and
by other provisions of this Ordinance.
4.101 Regulations Governing The Use of Land. - Regulations governing the use of
land within the various Zoning Districts shall be as set forth in Schedule I
and in Section 4.300.
Specific Use requirements and required criteria for such uses are included in
the following sections:
a. Permitted Uses - See Section -4.301
b. Special Exception Uses - See Section 4.302
c. Conditional Uses - See Section 4.303
4 .102 Regulations Governing The Size of lots. Yards and Buildings
:;:, .•
Regulations governing the size of lots, yards and buildings in the va'rious
zoning districts for Permitted Uses only shall be as set forth in Schedule II.
The size of lots, yards and buildings for Special Exception and Conditional
Uses shall be as set forth in Sections 4. 302 and 4. 303 respectively, except
where no requirement is indicated in these sections then the requirements in
Schedule I shall apply.
24
REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF'LAND
CITY OF ARNOLD, PA.
REFER ZONING DISTRICTS
TO
USE CLASS PAGE
No. (d)
R-1 R-2 R.'.3 R-T C-1
PERMITTED USES (al
1. .OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION USES 33 x x x
2. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 33 x x x x x
3. TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 33 x x x x
4. GENERAL COMMERCIAL 34 x
5. BOULEVARD COMMERCIAL 35
6. GENERAL INDUSTRIAL 36
7. CUSTOMARY ~CCESSORY USES 36 x x x x x
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES [b} 37
8. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, FAMILY CARE 38 x x x x
FACILITIES AND CONVERSIONS
9. GROUP CARE AND RELATED RESIDENTIAL 41 x x
1 0. TRANSITIONAL USES 42 x
11. ELDERLY/HANDICAPPED CARE FACILITIES 43 x . x
12. SPECIAL COMMERCIAL 44 x
13. SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL 45
14. APPROPRIATE PUBLIC USES AND 46 x x x x x . ESSENTIAL' SERVICES
CONDJTIO~Al USES [cl 47
15. RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT 48 x
16. ADULT ORIENTED USES 49
1 7. SPECIALIZED MEDICAL FACILITIES 50
53A-53F
- - ~ ..,
18. COMMERCIAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL I I
I
B-1 1·1
C/l
·X
x
x
x x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
x
NOti;': "X" indicates that the Use Class 1s permitted. See Section 4.300 tor a description ot the uses
included in each Use Class and for an explanation of the conditions under which they are
permitted in each District.
FOOTNOT~:
(al Uses which require no special action by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Planning Commission,
except where Site Plan Review is required, or where the requirements of Section 4 . 200 apply.
(b) Uses which must be referred to the Zoning Hearing Board and the Planning Commission.
(c) Uses which must be referred to the City Council and the Planning Commission.
(d) Page Numbers above are for the convenience of the reader, but all other applicable provisions
of this Ordinance will also remain in effect.
25
l
li
0
SCHEDULE 11 - FOR PERMITTED USES ONLY
BASIC REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SIZE OF LOTS, YARDS,
AND BUILDINGS FOR PERMITIED USES ONLY
CITY OF ARNOLD, PA.
ZONING DISTRICTS
TYPE OF
REGULATION RESIDENTIAL NON RESIDENTIAL
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-T C-1(c) B-1{c) 1-1
MINIMUM LOT SIZE (a) lb)
Area (SqFtl per dwelling unitla)
Width !Ft.I 7,200 6,000 4,800 4,800 4,800 6,000 40,000
Depth (ft.) 60 50 40 40 40 40 200
120 120 120 120 120 120 200
MINIMUM YARDS (FT.) (b)
Front Yard 25 20 20 20 5 5 35
Rear Yard 25 20 20 20 20 20 25
1 Side Yard 5 3 3 3 NA NA 2.0
Both Side Yds.Combined 8 6 5 5 NA NA 40
MAXIMMM BUILDING HEIG!::!T FOR TH5
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
No. of Stories 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 3 3 7
Height in Feet 35 35 35 35 35 35 75
MAXIMUM BUILDING COVERAGE 1%1 40% 40% 45% 45% 60% 60% 50%
NOTES: n (11 This Schedule does not apply to Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses unless otherwise noted. See
Sections 4.302 and 4 .303 for regulations governing such Special Exceptions and Conditional Uses.
See Article 5 for additional SUPPLEMENTARY Regulations governing variations from required areas,
including unique lots and building locations. accessory uses and structures, non-conforming lots. uses
and structures, off-street parking and loading, signs, temporary uses, site plan review, miscellaneous
provisions and flood prone areas.
(21
(31 NA equals Not Applicable.
Footnotes:
(a) Where Single Family Semi-Detached Dwellings or Two Family Dwelling Structures las defined herein) are
l permitted the average lot area per dwelling may be reduced to 80% of the figure indicated above.
O>l See Article 2 for definitions of "area". "width". "depth", "front yard", "rear yard" and "side yard".
(c) B-1 and C-1 requirements apply only to non-residential uses proposed for the B-1 and C-1 Districts.
I Proposed single family residential uses in the B·1 and C-1 Districts shall be governed by the R-2
residential use requirements set forth in this Schedule II.
I
L
u
L
L
26
4.200 PERFORMANCE. ENVIRONMENTAL AND TRAFFIC REQUIREMENTS
4.201 Performance and Environmental Impacts - In no district will an existing or
proposed use be permitted or operated in such a manner so as to create any
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive,
radioactivity, environmental or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke, dust,
dirt, or other form of air, solid waste or water pollution; electric_al, glare,
light, major traffic impact and/or traffic congestion or other disturbance of a
permanent or recurring nature which will adversely affect the surrounding
area or premises, or be dangerous to public health and safety.
The City may determine compliance with this section based on the following:
a. The requirements set forth in Section 4.200 herein
b. Data and information submitted with the Zoning Application.
c. Where such data and information is not sufficient for the Zoning Officer
to reach a determination, the Zoning Officer may consider the proposed
use as a "Conditional Use" subject to all requirements for "Conditional
Uses" as required herein and may so notify the applicant within 20
days of the receipt of the Zoning Application.
d. City Council may also require detailed expert review of all uses to
determine compliance in accordance with established standards or with
regulations of applicable governmental agencies.
4.202 Traffic Impact Requirements - All development projects will be evaluated by
the Zoning Officer to determine the level of traffic impact on the Municipality
and the area in which the project is to be located. This will apply to all new
projects or uses proposed or to any expansion of an existing development
which is proposed after the effective date of this Ordinance.
The level of traffic impact will be based on the estimated "trip ends"
generated by the proposed uses in the project. "Trip ends" are defined as the
total number of trips per day entering and leaving a specific land use or uses
located in a project. These "trip ends'' will be based on the estimated "trip
generation rates" for various types of land uses based on Schedule Ill herein
or on the Fifth Edition (1991} of the publication entitled "Trip Generation, An
Information Report", published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
The total number of average daily "trip ends" shall also mean "Average Daily
Traffic {ADT) ". Schedule Ill entitled "Trip Ends Per Day", adapted from the
above publication, may be used for estimating the ADT generated by any
proposed project or addition to a project. In lieu thereof, the developer or
the City may use the latest edition of above publication directly if it is
considered to provide a more applicable estimate of the "trip ends per day"
for the specific uses proposed. However, City Council shall make the final
27
I,
n
r.
I:
l.
L
I
l.
L
L
L
determination or interpretation as to the specific uses or procedures in t he
publication which are most applicable to the proposed use.
a. Determination of Major Traffic Impact - Any development which has an
estimated ADT (or daily trip ends per day) in excess of 1 ,000 shall be
considered to have a "major traffic impact".
b. Conditional Uses - All "major traffic impact" projects shall be
considered to be "Conditional Uses" as defined herein, even if they are
listed as Permitted or Special Exception Uses in Schedule I and all
procedures applicable to Conditional Uses shall apply to zoning
applications for such projects.
c.
d.
If any project is proposed after the date of adoption of this Ordinance
which does not have a "major traffic impact" as defined herein, and a
later or subsequent addition to that project is proposed within ten
years of the initial project, then the cumulative effect of all separate
submissions shall be used, regardless of any changes in ownership
which may take place over the time period under consideration. This
shall apply to major industrial and commercial uses, shopping centers,
medical centers, apartment complexes, resorts, multi-residential and
high rise buildings or any other use proposed under this Zoning
Ordinance.
The developer shall identify all subsequent phases of a project at the
time of submission of the initial phase.
Phased Projects - In the event that a project is to be phased over a
period of time, not exceeding ten years, the total traffic impact for the
entire period of phasing shall be used in determining the traffic impact.
Requirements For Projects Having a Major Traffic Impact
All projects which are determined to have a Major Traffic Impact shall
comply with the following:
Compliance with the site plan review procedures set forth in
Section 5.800.
All such projects shall have direct access to an Arterial Road or to
a Collector Road in the Municipality as identified by the Planning
Commission. In lieu of such access, the developer shall provide a
project road from the project site to the closest existing Collector
or Arterial road, which is capable of handling the level of traffic to
be generated and which is proposed for development by the
developer to Collector or Major Road standards, as established by
the Municipality.
28
e. Major Traffic Impact Study - A Major Traffic Impact Study shall include
at least th'e following:
1 . The applicant for all projects which have an estimated ADT
exceeding 1,000 vehicles per day shall be required to submit a
Traffic Impact Study prepared by a competent authority. The
requirements for such a study are set forth below.
2. Identification of all major roads and intersections serving and
substantially impacted by the project.
3. An analysis of how the proposed project users or residents will
use these major roads.
4. Existing traffic conditions (without the proposed project) including
traffic volumes {ADT) and peak hour volumes on the identified
major roads, based on PennDOT information, surveys and Trip
Generation Rates, see Schedule Ill. (In addition, commercial
projects shall provide weekend traffic volume data at peak hours.)
5.
6.
Projected traffic conditions (without the project) based on trends
in growth of traffic for ADT and peak hour volumes. (In addition,
commercial projects shall provide weekend traffic volume data at
peak hours.)
Estimates of traffic volumes (ADT) weekday peak hour volumes
and weekend peak hour volumes after development of all stages
of the project.
7. Highway and intersection traffic capacities and levels of service
for sections 3, 4 and 5 above, as defined by the PennDOT must
be calculated.
8. Identification of existing and projected traffic problems on roads
serving the project or substantially impacted by the project,
including highway capacity deficiencies for the various roads and
intersections involved.
9. Solutions proposed by the developer to alleviate the identified
problems and deficiencies and the proposed cost of these
improvements.
10. Identification and analysis of high accident areas located in
proximity to the project, as identified by the City and the effect
which the proposed project will have on the high accident areas
and locations.
29
r •
t
\ I
u
u
u
ll
l 1
l.
['
[ :
L
l ~
L
11. The "Competent Authority", as defined herein, that is responsible
for preparing the Major Traffic Impact Study shall certify to the
following:
12.
(a) That in the preparation of the Study that the applicable
Comprehensive Plan and any pertinent Municipality or other
traffic or transportation plan or study, as identified by the
Municipality, ·has been considered in the preparation of the
Major Impact Study.
(b) That in the professional opinion of the Competent Authority
the completed Major Traffic Impact Study is a true and
accurate Study which has given adequate consideration to
available information and includes reasonable projections and
analysis to the factors considered and that the Study
represents the best opinion of the Competent Authority on the
traffic impact of the proposed development.
(c) That, if it has not been possible to fully analyze all relevant
factors, then those factors not analyzed shall be identified,
together with the reasons for their exclusion from the Study.
The Major Traffic Impact Study shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and City Council in accordance with the Conditional
Use procedures established herein. The Planning Commission and
City Council may request additional data or information to clarify
the findings set forth in said Study. City Council shall not approve
any such Conditional Use if it determines that any traffic problem
to be created by the proposed development cannot be adequately
alleviated by the developer.
The applicant or developer, as determined by the Municipality, will
be responsible for the guarantee of payment for the proportionate
share of all traffic control devices or for the construction of public
facilities applicable to the proposed development, which are
required as a result of the traffic impact generated by the
· proposed development project.
30
LAND USE
A. RESIDENTIAL
- Single Family
- Low Rise Residential
Structures 12 or more
DU's/structurel
- Condominium Units
- Mobile Homes
- Retirement, Senior
Citizens Developments
- nmesharing
B. LODGING IAll typesl
C. RECREATION
- Open Space Uses
(includes golf courses)
· Outdoor Recreation
!limited to City and
local residents)
- Resort Outdoor Recrea·
tion (no spectator events
or places for public
assembly I
- Commercial Indoor
Recreation
- Outdoor Sports and Re·
creation !including large
scale places for public
assembly)
D. MEDICAL
- Hospital
· Nursing Home
- Outpatient Office or
Clinic
E. GENERAL OFFICE
BUILDING
- Under 25,000 s . f.
• 25,000 • 49,999 s .f.
• 50,000 - 99,999 s.f.
• 100,000 - 599, 999 s .f.
· 600,000 s .f. and over
• Office Park
F. COMMERCIAL SHOPPING
- Small Specialty Retail
Center
• Convenience Market
· Open less than 1 6
hours daily
· Open 16·24 hours daily
:St.;Ht:UULt: Ill
TRIP GENERATION RA TES
A VERA GE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT)
CITY OF ARNOLD, PA.
TRIP GENERATIONS
AVERAGE TRIP RATE
9.55/Dwelling Unit
6.59/Dwelling Unit
5.86/Dw1111ing Unit
4.81/Dwelling Unit
3.3/Dwelling Unit
Add 50% to above rates
10.19 per room
8.33/Acre
6.0/Acre
10.0/Acre
11.2/G.S.F.B.A.
100 to 250/Acre
11 .77/bed
2 .6/bed
54.6/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
24.60/1000 G.S.F .B.A.
19. 72/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
16.58/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
14.03/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
9.0511000 G.S.F.B.A .
11.42/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
40.6711000 G.S.F.L.A .
322.6/1 000 G.S.F.B.A.
737.9911000 G.S.F.B.A.
LAND use
F. COMMERCIAL SHOPPING
!Cont.I
• Shopping Center
• Under 50,000 s.f.
- 50,000 - 99,999 s .f.
- 100,000 - 199,999 s.f.
- 200,000 - 299,999 s.f.
- 300,000 - 399,999 s.f.
• 400,000 s.f. and over
• Discount Store
• Supermarket
- Wholesale Market
- Furniture Stor11
- Hardware/Paint Store
• New Car Sales
G. RESTAURANTS
• low Turnover lover 1
hour seatingl
• High turnover (less than
1 hour seating)
• Fast Food Restaurant
without drive through
window
• Fast Food Restaurant
with drive through
window
H. SERVICES
• Bank (Walk-In)
• Bank IDrive-lnl
- S&L IWallt·lnl
• S&L !Drive-In)
• Auto Service Station
l. INDUSTRIAL
• Industrial and
Manufacturing
· Industrial Park
- Warehousing. Gen11ral
· Research Center !which·
ever is greater) or
·Truck Terminal
• Storage (personal)
Warehouse
TRIP GENERATION
AVERAGE TRIP RA TE
167.59/1000 G.S.F.L.A.
91.65/1000 G.S.F.L.A.
70.67/1000 G.S.F.L.A.
54.50/1000 G.S.F.L.A.
46.8111000 G.S.F.L.A.
42.02/1000 G.S.F.L.A.
70.13/1000 G.S.F.L.A.
125.5/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
6.73/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
4.34/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
51.29/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
47.91/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
96.51/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
205.36/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
786.22/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
632.12/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
140.61/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
265.21/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
61 .0/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
74.17/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
133.0/Gas Pump
3.8511000 G.S.F.B.A.
6.97/1000 G.S.F.8.A .
4 .88/1 000 G.S.F.8 .A.
2 .67/Employee
7 .70/tOOO G.S.F.B.A.
9 .85/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
2.8/1000 G.S.F.B.A.
Source: Adapted from "Trip Generation, An Informational Report" published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Fihh Edition· 1991.
Note: "G.S.F.L.A." equals "Gross Square Feet of Leasable Area·
"G .S.F.B.A." equals "Gross Square Feel of Building Area"
31
I
I
l ,
l l
u
u
u
L
r
L
{.
L
L
4.203 Environmentally Sensitive Areas - All zoning proposals and applications are
subject to all of the applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and
Map, including the requirements of Section 4.200. Zoning proposals which
include actions in "environmentally sensitive areas" are also subject to the
requirements set forth below:
All uses proposed in such areas shall also be subject to the "Conditional Use"
procedures of this Ordinance which requires review by the Planning
Commission and City Council as set forth in Section 4.303.
a. Areas Subject To Flooding - All development proposed in any Flood
Prone areas, as defined herein, based on studies of the Federal Flood
Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) shall be designed in
accordance with sound floodplain management principles set forth in
City of Arnold's Floodplain Management Ordinance{s) and as these
ordinance(s) may be further amended. Said Ordinance(s) contain
provisions for compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program.
Any portion of the 100 Year Floodplain, excluding the "Floodway" as
defined in said Floodplain Ordinance, which is not suited for
development, based on the standards set forth in the above Ordinances,
may be utilized for uses which do not encroach, obstruct or limit the
flow of water. Such uses may include temporary or permanent
agriculture, horticultural and forestry uses, and outdoor recreation uses
which do not obstruct the flow of water as determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
b. Other Environmental Conditions - The Zoning Officer shall require
identification of any of the following conditions which may exist at any
proposed development site:
1) Wetland Areas
2) Groundwater Aquifer and Recharge Areas
3) Allegheny f3iver
4) Steep slopes
5) Stormwater Runoff Control
6) Areas subject to subsidence
7) Other Adverse Conditions
c. Actions Required - Where adverse environmental or hazardous conditions
exist, the Zoning Hearing Board shall evaluate the nature of the risk and
shall make a recommendation to City Council for the establishment of
suitable requirements to insure the public health, safety and welfare.
32
The City may utilize existing State agencies and other competent
professional assistance to determine the extent and nature of the
problem and may also request the zoning applicant to provide
information prepared by qualified professionals.
No permit for the development or use of any area of the City shall be
granted where hazardous conditions exist which may threaten the public
health and safety.
City Council may require the zoning applicant to carry out necessary
remedial actions before any application for a Zoning Permit is approved.
4.300 USE CLASSES IN ZONING DISTRICTS
The following "Use Classes" are hereby established as shown in Schedule I. Where
required, individual uses shall be subject to "Site Plan Review" in accordance with the
requirements of this Article and Section 5.800.
All uses are also subject to the applicable "Performance, Environmental and Traffic
Requirements" of Section 4.200.
Where a use is proposed which is not specifically listed in any specific Use Class or in
Section 5.907, then the Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the "Use Class
Subcategory" (as defined herein) which is most similar to the proposed use and said
proposed use shall be subject to all of the requirements of said Use Class Subcategory.
All such uses shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance
including, but not limited to the provisions of Article 5 "Supplementary Regulations"
which includes accessory uses, non-conforming uses, off-street parking and loading,
signs, temporary uses, site plan review, screening, and other applicable requirements.
The specific uses included in each Use Class are outlined below.
4.301 PERMITTED USES - Uses listed as "Permitted Uses'' in Schedule I shall require
no special action by the Zoning Hearing Board, the Planning Commission or
the City Council before a Zoning Permit is issued by the Zoning Officer,
except where such uses are otherwise classified as "Special Exception" or
"Conditional Uses" in accordance with Section 4.200 or with other applicable
sections of this Ordinance.
USE CLASS 1. OPEN SPACES AND CONSERVATION USES - Includes open
land conservation uses, steep slope areas, golf courses, nature preserves, fish
and wildlife refuges, wetlands, areas subject to flooding and outdoor
recreation uses including City parks and playgrounds, lakes, fishing, golf
course, bird sanctuary, trails, walkways; and similar low intensity recreational
uses, including any related structures such as pavilions, park recreation sheds
and related buildings, which comply with other applicable requirements and
which do not exceed five percent of the total lot area. Open space uses and
33
' -
L
{,
L
l~
L
l.
I.
I.
l.
L
l.
I ~
developments which exceed 20 acres in size shall be subject to the
"Conditional Use" requirements of this Ordinance.
USE CLASS 2. SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - Includes single-family
detached dwellings (including mobile homes as defined herein) .
USE CLASS 3. TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL • Includes single-family semidetached
residential and two-family detached dwelling structures.
USE CLASS 4. GENERAL COMMERCIAL - Includes the following general
commercial uses which shall be carried on in a completely enclosed building,
not exceeding 5,000 square feet in area, except for off-street parking and
loading facilities as required herein and limited outdoor displays not occupying
more than 30% of the lot area, but excluding shopping centers or malls or
groups of separate stores or establishments which exceed two in number and
also excluding facilities where more than 60% of the gross floor space is to
be used for related warehousing facilities and excluding vehicle drive-through
facilities to serve customers (See Use Class 12 for procedure which includes
some of the exemptions listed above).
a. Wholesale and retail trade establishments including supermarkets and
grocery stores, food establishments of all types including fruits and
vegetables, candy, nut and confectionery, bakeries, dairy products and
other food, greenhouses for the 'production of flowers and plants at retail
and the sale of lumber and other building materials; hardware, plumbing,
heating, ventilating and electrical equipment and supplies; paint, carpets,
glass, wallpaper, decorating supplies and farm equipment.
b. General merchandise, including department and discount stores, mail
order houses, variety stores, merchandise vending machine sales, direct
selling organizations, radio, TV, and video and electronic sales and
appliances of all types, clothing of all types, custom tailoring, furriers and
fur apparel, furniture, home furnishings and equipment, music supplies,
eating and drinking establishments, drug and proprietary products,
antiques, book and stationery stores, sporting goods and equipment,
farm and garden supplies, fuel and ice.
c. Personal and household service establishments of all types including
laundering, dry cleaning and dyeing services, photographic, video and
electronic services and repair, beauty, barber and masseuse services,
and apparel repair.
d. Hotels and motels, bed and breakfast and other similar lodging
accommodations.
e. Professional services and offices, legal, financial, insurance, real estate,
34
accounting, engineering, architectural and other professional services
and including office buildings of all types.
f. Medical and allied uses, including "Medical Offices and Buildings" as
defined herein, hospitals, medical and dental testing laboratories, medical
and orthopedic appliance stores, retail outlet for drugs and medical
supplies, and medical and dental offices and centers, but excluding
"Specialized Medical Facilities" as defined in Section 2.190.
g. Business services and offices including advertising, consumer and
mercantile credit reporting services, adjustment and collection services,
duplicating, printing, mailing and stenographic services, news syndicate,
employment services, and off-street parking; and warehousing and
storage services not exceeding the limitation included above.
h. Commercial indoor entertainment and recreation facilities carried out in a
completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading
facilities as required herein, which may include skating rinks, swimming
pools, tennis courts, racquet ball, billiards, exercise rooms and gyms,
spas, indoor court games, bowling, theaters, museums, club houses,
night clubs, art galleries and cultural establishments, amusement game
machines and "other amusement machines" as defined herein.
Such indoor entertainment and recreation facilities shall conform with the
requirements of Schedule II except that such uses may also be
developed and located within another use permitted in the District. 1 .
USE CLASS 5. BOULEVARD COMMERCIAL - Such uses include the following
uses which require access from an important traffic thoroughfare and which
are carried on in a completely enclosed building not exceeding 5,000 square
feet in area.
a. Business or professional offices
b. Eating and drinking establishments
c. Personal care establishments such as barber and beauty shops
d. Business services
e. Banks and Financial institutions
f. Cultural facilities, museums and libraries
All such uses shall comply with the requirements for Permitted Uses in the 8-1
District as set forth in Schedule II, and shall comply with the parking and
loading requirements specified in Section 5.500.
35
r
I
l.
,
L.
USE CLASS 6. GENERAL INDUSTRIAL - Includes the following types of
industrial uses of which at least 40 percent of the activity shall be carried on
in an enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading facilities and
vehicle, boat, trailer and mobile home sales areas.
a. Limited industrial uses include the manufacture, fabrication, processing,
assembly, repair, testing, packing and storage of all types of products
made from previously prepared materials and also the processing of raw
materials.
b. Research facilities, laboratories and research centers of all types.
c. Wholesale business, storage and warehousing establishments, truck and
freight terminals, and delivery and distribution centers .
d. Wholesale produce and meat markets, mechanical and equipment repair
establishments, greenhouse facilities, dry cleaning and dyeing plants,
carpet and rug cleaning establishments, laundries and sign painting,
printing and engraving.
e. Offices related to any permitted use in this Use Class.
USE CLASS 7. CUSTOMARY ACCESSORY USES - Includes uses customarily
accessory to the principal use of a lot. Such uses include the following:
Uses which are customarily subordinate to the principal use of a lot or a
building located on the same lot, and which serve a purpose customarily
incident to the use of the principal building or lot within any district. Such
uses as they may be further regulated in Article 5 herein, include:
a. Home occupations, as regulated in Section 5.302.
b. Home gardening and non commercial crop farming, nurseries and
greenhouses in residential areas, but not including outdoor storage of
equipment and vehicles except where required to maintain the property .
All such equipment and vehicles shall be maintained in operating
condition and the storage of junk shall not be permitted as an accessory
use.
c. Private garages or parking areas and Off-street parking and loading to be
utilized primarily by the surrounding occupants and neighbors except for
when located in commercial or industrial areas.
d. Signs, in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
e. Temporary tract offices, in accordance with this Ordinance.
f. Unoccupied accessory travel trailers or recreational vehicles provided
that they shall not be closer than ten feet to any side or rear yard
36
property line and they shall not be permitted in any front yard.
g. Customary domestic pets including, but not limited to dogs, cats and
birds, for the private use of the family or household residing on the
premises, but not for commercial or breeding purposes, may be kept on
all lots and properties used for residential uses. The Zoning Officer shall
determine which animals will be considered domestic pets, as set forth
below.
Dogs may also be kept for security purposes on residential and nonresidential
properties and the City may require registration of such dogs
with the Police Department.
Proper health and sanitary practices and facilities shall be established, as
determined by the Zoning Officer, and maintained by persons keeping
such pets or security dogs.
The number of such animals may be limited by the Zoning Officer if it is
determined, based on complaints or proper inspection, that inadequate
space and facilities for the keeping and maintenance of such animals
exist on the property. In making the necessary determinations required
above, the Zoning Officer may confer with such recognized authorities,
as the ASPCA or veterinary and animal experts and shall also consider
the number of animals and the amount of space required for their proper
care, and potential hazards or danger to health, safety, life and property
and the need for proper health and sanitary practices and facilities to
assure the health of all animals, adequate disposal of all animal wastes,
protection of the public health and the avoidance of excessive noise or
nuisance hazards, odors and sanitary problems for residents.
Conventional farm animals, exotic animals or semi-wild or wild animals
which may create potential hazards or a danger to life and property are
prohibited.
h. Other buildings and uses customarily appurtenant to other Permitted,
Special Exception or Conditional Principal Uses which comply with
minimum yard, area and other requirements of this Ordinance.
4.302 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES - Uses listed as "Special Exception Uses" in
Schedule I shall require individual consideration in each case because of their
unique characteristics. Such Special Exception Uses shall be referred to the
Pl .. mning Commission by the Board for review and recommendation and such
uses may be permitted only upon authorization by the Board subject to certain
conditions and safeguards, as provided in this Section and after a hearing.
All Special Exception Uses shall conform with the requirements of Section
4.200 and with other applicable sections of this Ordinance.
37
[.
l~
lJ
I.
l.
I
l.
L
l
L
Such Special Exception Uses which are authorized by the Board shall be
subject to any additional conditions and safeguards established by the Board
in each case which may be warranted by the character of the areas in which
such uses are proposed or by other special factors and which are necessary
to implement the purposes and Statement of Community Objectives of this
Ordinance.
A Special Exception Use shall not cause substantial injury to the value of
other property where it is to be located; shall conform with regulations
applicable to the District where located; shall be compatible with adjoining
development; shall provide adequate landscaping and screening to protect
adjoining areas; shall provide off-street parking and loading so as to minimize
interference with traffic on the local streets; and any required or permitted
signs shall be compatible with adjoining development and such special
exception uses and shall not jeopardize the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience.
Such special exception uses shall be appropriate to the character of the
District and neighborhood in which they are proposed and with the presence
of other conforming uses located in the area and also with the area which the
uses will serve.
Applicants for Special Exception Uses shall comply with the Site Plan Review
Procedures set forth in Section 5 .800.
The following regulations shall apply to Special Exception Uses which are
authorized by the Board.
USE CLASS 8 . MUL Tt-FAMIL Y RESIDENTIAL, FAMILY CARE FACILITIES
AND CONVERSIONS - Includes the following multi-family dwelling structures,
Family Care Facilities and Conversions which shall be served with adequate
public water, sewer and parking facilities and with adequate yard planting and
screening provided to effectively screen off any adjoining commercial uses.
a. Multi-Family Dwellings - Multi-family dwelling structures may be located
only in the Districts shown in the following table and they shall be
planned and developed with adequate yards, building layout and spacing
and open space and shall comply with the following:
38
MINIMUM MAXIMUM MAXIMUM MAXIMUM
TYPE PARCEL BUILDING BUILDING NET PROJECT
SIZE HEIGHT IN COVERAGE DENSITY
(Sq.Ft.) STORIES (Units per Acre)
R-2 R-3 C-1 8-1
&
R-T
Multi-Family 7,000 3.0 45% 18.2 22.0 22.0 18.2
Structures designed
for use by all age
groups.
Multi-Family 20,000 6.0 30% NA NA 35.0 NA
Structures designed
exclusively for
elderly (aged 60 or
over and including
the C-1 District
located only along
Freeport Rd.
Note: NA equals Not Applicable.
b. Family Care Facilities - Family Care Facilities, as defined herein, which
may only be approved in the R-2, R-3, R-T, C-1 and 8-1 Districts and
shall conform respectively with the minimum lot size, minimum yards,
maximum building height and maximum building coverage requirements
set forth for the R-2 District in Schedule II.
c. Additional Requirements - The above multi-family dwelling structures and
family care facilities shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
1) Any proposed development with 20 or more dwelling units shall be
provided with usable open space as follows:
Developments designed for all age groups shall include suitably
designed open space, improved and maintained for use as play
areas for children and/or as outdoor recreation space for
residents in amounts not less than 250 square feet per dwelling
unit.
Developments designed to primarily serve elderly residents, age
60 years of age or over, shall include suitably designed open
space improved and maintained for use by residents in amounts
not less than 150 square feet per dwelling unit.
39
I
I •
l
[I
I.
L:
0
LI
11
[ I
{ 1
r.
L'
LJ
L
Lr
L
d.
2) Common open space shall be conveniently accessible so as to serve
the development. The developer shall provide assurances for the
permanent maintenance and preservation of such permanent
common open space.
3) Adequate, safe, convenient and permanently designed vehicular and
pedestrian circulation facilities, including roadways, driveways,
adequate and safe turn-around areas, off-street parking and loading,
sidewalks, malls and landscaped areas to serve the development.
4) Drainage facilities, including curbs and/or gutters and storm sewers
adequate to handle storm waters and to prevent erosion and the
formation of dust.
5) Public water and sewer facilities and other required utilities with all
new electric utility distribution lines to be installed underground as
required by the Public Utility Commission order of July 8, 1 970.
6) Appropriately designed landscaping and trees.
7) Street name signs at all intersections with public streets.
8) Street or roadway lights to adequately illuminate the development.
9) Fire hydrants to insure adequate fire protection.
10) Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required herein.
11) The orientation of buildings shall provide adequate light, air and
open space and adequate yards, building layout and spacing shall
be provided and shall generally be designed to avoid long rows or
blocks which exceed 160 feet in length.
12) Proposed development shall be designed to be harmonious with
neighboring areas.
1 3) All proposed improvements are to be constructed and installed in
accordance with the requirements of the City.
14) The proposed Site Plan, as required by Section 5.800, and the
improvements to be installed, shall comply with the above
applicable requirements.
Conversions - Except for "Accessory Dwelling Units", as defined herein
in Article 2 (Section 2.1 38 g) which may be permitted as an accessory
use in Use Class 7, other conversions may only be permitted by the
40
Board as a Special Exception in accordance with the following
requirements:
1 ) Conversions include the redesign and conversion of existing
conforming residential structures into two or more dwelling units or
the redesign of existing non-conforming non-residential structures
which are to be permanently converted into residential use in their
entirety in the R-2, R-3, R-T, C-1 and 8-1 Zoning Districts. All
conversions shall comply with the off-street parking requirements of
Section 5. 500 and shall have adequate light, air, heating and
plumbing facilities, and shall have adequate yards and building
layout to adequately serve all units.
2) The parcel or lot on which such conversions are located shall have
an average lot area equal to at least 2,600 square feet for each
residential unit to be created or which will remain in the structure.
3) All residential units in the structure shall have a separate and
independent entrance and shall comply with the applicable Building
and Housing Code(s) of the City and with the requirements of the
PA Department of Labor and Industry.
4) Each dwelling unit shall be designed as a unit for occupancy by not
more than one family, as defined herein for living and sleeping
purposes.
5) Site Plan and Construction drawings for the property to be
converted shall be submitted to the Board for their review in
accordance with Section 5.800.
6) Conversions shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
7) All conversions shall be compatible with areas in which they are
located, shall not create adverse congestion, traffic or parking loads
on the area and shall not detract from the residential character of
the area in which they are located.
USE CLASS 9. GROUP CARE AND RELATED RESIDENTIAL USES - Includes
Group Care Facilities as defined herein, and related residential uses or facilities
such as rooming houses, nursing homes, personal care facilities, bed and
breakfast homestead or inn as defined in Article 2 and dormitories as defined
herein, nurseries for the day care of young children or elderly, non-profit social
halls, clubs and lodges, and funeral homes.
All such uses may be located in the R-T, C-1 and B-1 Zoning Districts and
shall comply with the following:
41
[ 1
L
I~
l.
L
I.
l.
l.
L
1 :
u
a.
b.
c.
Except for a sign, as further regulated in Section 5.600, there shall be no
external evidence of any gainful activity for such uses which are located
in a residential zone.
Any such uses shall have sufficient parking to serve the anticipated
number of users and employees as specified in Section 5.500, and shall
have suitable street access without causing excessive traffic on local
residential streets.
Bed and Breakfast Homesteads or Inns shall further comply with the
following:
The residential character and appearance of the structure and
adjoining neighborhood shall be preserved
One business/identification sign not exceeding 1 6 square feet
d. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in the following
tabulation:
TYPE OF REGULATION REQUIREMENT
Minimum Parcel Size (Sq.Ft.} 12,000
Minimum Yards (Ft.)
- Front Yard 20
- Rear Yard 25
- Each Side Yard 15
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) 35
Maximum Building Coverage (%) 45.%
Maximum Density {a} 50
FOOTNOTE:
a) Includes residents, guests and employees measured in
square feet of usable building space per person.
e. All such uses must be fully registered with and licensed by the City and
with any other applicable State agency, with information provided on
their operation, availability of professional personnel, physical facilities
and other characteristics.
USE CLASS 10. TRANSITIONAL USES - Includes the following transitional
uses in the R-T and B-1 Zoning Districts which shall be reviewed by the Board
as Special Exception Uses:
42
All uses set forth in "Use Class 4 - General Commercial", "Use Class 5 •
Boulevard Commercial" and "Use Class 6 - General Industrial", as
permitted in those use classes.
Such transitional uses shall comply with the following minimum lot size,
minimum yards, maximum building height and maximum building
coverage set forth below:
TYPE OF REGULATION REQUIREMENT
Minimum Parcel Size (Sq.Ft.) 12,000
Minimum Yards (Ft.)
- Front Yard 20
- Rear Yard 25
- Each Side Yard 15
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) 35
Maximum Building Coverage (%} 45%
The Board shall determine if the transitional nature of any of the Uses in
the R-T or B-1 Zoning District shall have an adverse impact on adjoining
or nearby residential or commercial areas and shall, if required by the
nature of existing conditions impose any additional yard restrictions or
landscaping or buffer requirements to protect adjoining or nearby
residential uses, as set forth in Section 5.901.
Adequate parking and loading facilities are provided in accordance with
Section 5. 500 and Schedule V.
The Board shall also determine that adequate ingress and egress to the
proposed site exists without creating adverse traffic conditions or
disturbances for other areas.
USE CLASS 11. ELDERLY /HANDICAPPED CARE FACILITIES - Includes a
"residential retirement complex" and a "residential care facility for the elderly"
and "nursing home" as defined herein, and housing and related facilities to
serve the handicapped, the elderly (aged 55 years and over) and retired
persons.
Such uses shall include a combination of one or more of the following
facilities specifically designed to serve the handicapped, the elderly and retired
persons:
Multi-family dwellings for independent and semi-independent living
43
I ! .
l l
l l
u
u
L
L
L
l~
Personal care and long-term care facilities for persons requiring nursing
or convalescent care for extended periods of time
Community and activity rooms for special activities such as auditorium,
library, lounge, chapel, dining facility. and indoor recreation facilities
Necessary administrative and service facilities including medical support
facilities and personal care services
Related outdoor recreation uses and other ancillary uses
All such uses shall be developed on one tract of land at least two acres in
size which is held in one ownership.
The maximum building coverage and for any tract of land developed for such
a use shall not exceed 45 percent, the maximum building height shall not
exceed 35 feet and the Net Project Density for independent and semiindependent
living units shall not exceed 1 5 dwelling units per gross
residential acre.
Front, rear and each side yard area shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
All buildings in such a development shall be harmoniously arranged to
enhance the benefits for project residents and clients and to provide for a safe
and efficient operation which will maximize the public health.
Such development shall be compatible with adjoining residential uses and shall
not create excessive traffic loads on public streets in a residential area, shall
provide adequate lighting, parking, loading and access, and necessary
informational signs to serve the residents and administrative staff and visitors
to the area.
Adequate buffer areas and landscaping in accordance with Section 5.901,
shall be provided to minimize the impact of such a development on adjoining
or nearby residential areas.
USE CLASS 12. SPECIAL COMMERCIAL - Includes the Special Exception
Commercial Uses set forth below:
Includes all uses which are set forth in "Use Class 4 - General Commercial"
and in addition may include the following uses:
a. Such uses may include building areas exceeding 5,000 square feet.
b. Such uses may include outdoor displays and sales areas which occupy
up to 40% of the lot area.
44
c. Such uses may include groups of separate stores or establishments
which exceed two in number including shopping centers or malls.
d. Such uses may include vehicle drive-through facilities to serve
customers. Such facilities must be properly designed to avoid traffic and
safety problems and to prevent congestion on public access streets and
to protect pedestrians.
e. Such uses may include auto and vehicle sales, mobile home and trailer
sales, auto service and repair including major auto and body shop
repairs, vehicle washing establishments and auto/vehicle gas and service
stations and off-street parking lots and garages.
f. All such uses shall not detract from the residential character of any
surrounding residential neighborhood or create excessive traffic or noise
which will adversely affect residential areas.
g. Such Special Commercial Uses shall comply with the other requirements
set forth in Schedule 11 for the 1-1 Zoning District.
USE CLASS 13. SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL - Includes the Special Exception
Industrial Uses set forth below:
Includes all uses which are set forth in "Use Class 6 - General Industrial" and
in addition may include the following uses:
a. Industrial activities which require greater use of outdoor areas such as
contractor yards and supply yards of all types, including construction
yards and related outdoor and vehicular equipment storage, recycling
operations and other similar uses. The Board shall determine if a portion
of such uses shall be carried on in a completely enclosed building, except
for off-street parking and loading facilities.
b. All such uses shall be developed in conformance with the minimum lot
area, minimum lot size, yard, building height and building coverage
requirements for the I District set forth in Schedule II.
c. Solid waste disposal facilities which are limited to transfer stations
and/or recycling facilities, compost areas and other related facilities
which conform to applicable Solid Waste Management Plan approved by
the City and the PA Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
d. Junkyards, salvage and other recycling facilities, as defined herein.
e. Animal hospital, kennel or veterinarian offices.
45
[
r
(
ll
n
[
L
l !
l.
L
l.
L
L'.
L
L
f. Detention Centers as defined herein for persons involuntarily committed
to penile, juvenile, delinquent, medical, mental health or other interment
facilities. All such facilities shall comply with State standards and have
adequate security and be on a minimum tract size of 5 acres.
g. Such Special Industrial Uses shall comply with the other requirements set
forth in Schedule II for the 1-1 Zoning District.
All such facilities shall be designed to protect adjacent properties and
adjoining streets from adverse or objectionable influences and shall be further
subject to provision of adequate buffers pnd to the "screening requirements"
of Section 5. 901 , as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board after
recommendation from the Planning Commission as required herein.
All such facilities shall be further subject to all required approvals f ram
applicable regulatory agencies including, but not limited to, the Pa. DEP and
the County Conversation District.
USE CLASS 14. APPROPRIATE PUBLIC USES AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES -
Includes the following appropriate public uses and essential services provided
by public utilities:
a. Appropriate Public Uses - Includes public and quasi-public uses of a
welfare, educational, religious, historic, recreation, governmental and
cultural nature, and associated accessory uses; radio, television and
telephone transmission or receiving towers; and essential public utilities
that require enclosure within a building.
b. Essential Services for public utilities as defined in Article 2 which
conform to the height regulations of the Zoning District in which they are
proposed.
All proposals for such new public uses, or for additions or changes to existing
public uses, shall be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board, together with
required plans, to provide the Board with sufficient information to determine
compliance with the Special Exception provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board shall review the nature of the proposed use, the size of the parcel
on which it is to be located, the traffic and parking requirements of the
proposed use, the hours of operation to determine if disturbances will occur to
the surrounding neighborhood, and the effect of the use on adjoining or
nearby properties. Based on this review, the Appropriate Public Use or
Essential Service may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a Special
Exception only if it determines that the use shall be appropriate to the
character of the District and the neighborhood in which it is proposed and also
with the presence of other conforming uses located in the area and also with
the general area which the use will serve.
46
The Board shall also determine and require that such Appropriate Public Uses
and Essential Services shall have adequate access, shall provide off-street
parking and loading as specified in Section 5.500, shall provide necessary
landscaping and screening to protect adjoining areas, as required in Section
5.900, and shall have lot areas, yards and building coverage which protect
and preserve the character of the neighborhood and the District requirements
in which they are proposed.
4.303 CONDITIONAL USES - Uses listed as "Conditional Uses" in Schedule I shall
require individual consideration in each case because of their unique
characteristics. Such Conditional Uses shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for the Commission's review and recommendation. The
Commission may hold a public hearing to receive public comment prior to
completing their review and recommendation to City Council and such uses
may be permitted only upon authorization by City Council after a public
hearing, subject to certain conditions and safeguards as provided in this
Section.
All Conditional Uses shall conform with the requirements of Section 4.200
and with other applicable sections of this Ordinance.
Such Conditional Uses which are authorized by City Council shall be subject
to any additional conditions and safeguards established by City Council in
each case which may be warranted by the character of the areas in which
such uses are proposed or by other special factors and which are necessary to
implement the purposes and Statement of Community Objectives of this
Ordinance.
A Conditional Use shall not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property where it is to be located; shall conform with regulations applicable to
the District where located; shall be compatible with adjoining development;
shall provide adequate landscaping and screening to protect adjoining areas;
shall provide off-street parking and loading so as to minimize interference with
traffic on the local streets; and any required or permitted signs shall be
compatible with adjoining development and such Conditional Uses and shall
not jeopardize the public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
Such Conditional Uses shall be appropriate to the character of the District and
neighborhood in which they are proposed and with the presence of other
conforming uses located in the area and also with the area which the uses will
serve.
Applicants for Conditional Uses shall submit plot plans in sufficient detail to
provide City Council and the Planning Commission with enough information to
properly evaluate the proposed planned use and shall comply with the Site
Plan Review requirements of Section 5.800.
47
f.
IJ
n
{]
{
L
(
(.
I. :
The following regulations shall apply to Conditional Uses which are authorized
by City Council.
USE CLASS 15. RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT - Includes Riverfront uses
designed to take advantage of the land fronting on the Allegheny River and to
provide access to the river in an environmentally sound manner. This will
provide recreational opportunities, amenities and features to serve residents
and workers in the City and the general public and an opportunity for
commercial development on industrial land which fronts the river. Private
commercial facilities may be developed on parcels or tracts of land at least
two acres in size.
Such riverfront commercial uses are not intended to duplicate general purpose
shopping areas and commercial uses found in other parts of the City, but to
provide special purpose related commercial activities and uses which can take
advantage of the Riverfront and which can complement other recreation,
entertainment and residential uses which are designed to attract the public
and to increase the commercial market area of the City. Such uses may
include the following:
a. Development of marinas and access to the river for boating and related
boat service facilities.
b. Well designed outdoor terrace dining or outdoor riverfront eating and
drinking areas designed for the enjoyment of patrons.
c. Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities.
d. Limited number of commercial shops and retail trade establishments.
e. Entertainment and recreational uses may include: Off-tract and lotto
wagering, bandshells, indoor and outdoor theatre, indoor and outdoor
pools, video games, dance stages, tennis and volleyball, carousel, water
slides and aerial trams, and other related facilities for the active use and
enjoyment of the public.
f. All structures shall be designed with adequate spacing, with convenient
parking and building layout, with outdoor courtyards and fountains.
amenities designed to serve customers, employees, patrons, residents
and users of the buildings.
g. Low rise structures shall not exceed forty percent maximum building
coverage of the gross site area (including limited use areas in the 100
year floodplain). Buildings shall not exceed two stories in height or 35
feet maximum height.
48
h. Permanent City owned recreation and open space with access to the
Allegheny River shall be provided, including limited use areas in the 100
year floodplain, to serve the public.
i. Parking space shall be provided in accordance with Section 5.500.
Requjrements Prior To Approval Of Above Facilities - Before granting approval
for any such use included in this Use Class 15, City Council shall determine
the following:
1 . That an economic market exists for the uses proposed. A special market
study may be required from the applicant, prepared by a competent firm
or authority. Said study shall identify the proposed customers for such a
facility and shall provide an estimate of the level of investment and
economic demand for such facilities and the phasing of construction
proposed.
2. That the proposed facility will be carried out in an environmentally sound
manner and will not result in the degradation of the ground water supply,
pollution of the River, or in other adverse environmental impacts.
3. The impact which the facility will have on the residents of the City, on
the economy and tax base of the area.
4. Compliance with all other restrictions set forth above and in other
provisions of this Ordinance.
5. Compliance with the Site Plan review requirements and conditions set
forth in Section 5.800.
USE CLASS 16. ADULT-ORIENTED USES - Such uses include any legal adultoriented
use consisting of commercial establishments such as adult book or
video stores or adult picture theaters and similar uses, or the conduct of live
activities or uses, where 20 percent or more of the services, activities or
stock-in-trade of such establishments includes adult oriented uses or activities
as defined herein, and whose activities are not illegal or prohibited as set forth
in Section 5.907.
Such uses may be located in the 1-1 Zoning District, provided that such uses
must be located at least 1 ,000 feet apart and not located any closer than
1,000 feet from any public school, church, kindergarten, day care center,
residential zoning district or residential area or other establishment requiring
the congregation of minor children.
All such uses shall be developed in accordance with the Minimum Lot Size,
Minimum Yards, Maximum Building Height and Maximum Building Coverage
provisions set forth for the 1-1 Zoning District in Schedule II.
49
' J
l ·-
l;
u
0
c:
L
L
L
u
0
Li
u
USE CLASS 17 - SPECIALIZED MEDICAL FACILITIES - Facilities which are
primarily used for the treatment and care of persons suffering from certain
classes of diseases or conditions resulting from the use of drug, alcohol or
other addictive substances, or of persons seeking to undergo abortions, or
persons with mental or other conditions that require continuing supervision,
treatment and management to safeguard the health and safety of the persons
being treated and/or the personnel providing the services. Such "Specialized
Medical Facilities" shall in all cases be considered to be "Conditional" uses.
The Applicant for such a facility shall provide the following information:
a. Site Plan Review - Compliance with the Site Plan Review submission
requirements as set forth in Section 5.800.
b. Need - The Applicant shall demonstrate that there is a need for the
proposed facility in the City of Arnold. The following information shall
be provided by the Applicant and submitted to the Zoning Officer in the
form of a written narrative with appropriate documentation.
c.
1 . The type of medical problems and treatments to be provided at the
proposed facility shall be described in sufficient detail to provide an
understanding of the activities to be undertaken and of the services
to be provided.
2. The principle market and service area which the proposed facility is
intended to serve shall be identified, including information on the
capacity of the proposed facility and including an estimate of the
potential number of users that may utilize the facility.
3. The estimated number of yearly clients which may be expected to
use the facility over the first five years and the maximum number of
clients which can be accommodated at the facility during any one
day.
4. The peak number of clients that can be accommodated and properly
treated at the facility during peak hourly periods when maximum
usage is expected shall be estimated.
Impact On The City and The Neighborhood - The Applicant shall provide
a written narrative presenting information on the expected impact which
the facility will have with respect to the following:
1. Performance, Environmental and Traffic Impacts
(a~ The performance, environmental and traffic impacts set forth in
Section 4.200 shall be addressed, including identification of any
dangerous, injurious, noxious or. other hazards which will
adversely affect the City or surrounding neighborhood or
adversely affect the public health and safety.
50
(b) With respect to traffic requirements, the number of clients using
vehicles to arrive at the facility during various periods of time
shall be identified and estimated, including breakdowns of peak
traffic flows to be generated, based on the requirements of
Schedule Ill where applicable.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
applicable requirements of Schedule V, plus one additional
parking space for every three clients which are licensed to be
served at the facility by the Commonwealth of PA, as approved
by the City.
2. Additional lmoacts to be Identified Shall Include the Following;
(a) Detrimental affects on children are to be identified, including
any adverse influences which may be generated along
pedestrian and bus routes which are used by children or which
are in close proximity to schools or religious institutions or other
establishments used by children under the age of 18.
These detrimental affects may result from inappropriate hours of
operation, noise, congestion and loitering of clients or persons
on the street outside of the proposed facility while awaiting
treatment, or other impacts which may provide inappropriate
enticements to children.
(b) Adverse influences affecting other persons, including the
solicitation of persons for the purpose of engaging them in
illegal or criminal activities.
(c) Other identified adverse influences and nuisance activities or
public health and safety hazards which may be identified,
including but not limited to the disposal of infectious or
hazardous waste materials or substances generated by the
proposed use.
d. Location Of Facility - Specialized Medical Facilities may be located in the
1-1 General Industrial District as a Conditional Use subject to the
following restrictions:
( 1) The lot or property line of such a facility shall not be located within
500 feet of any residential district or of any property whose use is
principally residential.
(2) The lot or property line of such a facility shall not be located within
1,000 feet of any parcel of land which contains any one or more of
the following specified land uses:
la) Child care facility
51
r
[I
[
L
c
l
0
0
Li
r~
l.1
lJ
l'
u
(b} Church or other similar institution
(c} Community Center
(d) Library
(e) Municipal Building
(f) Park or recreation area
(g) School or educational facility
(h) Other land or uses where minors congregate
e. All Such Uses Shall Comply With Building Requirements Set Forth in the
Following:
f.
TYPE OF REGULATION REQUIREMENT
Minimum Parcel Size (Sq.Ft.) 12,000
Minimum Yards (Ft.)
- Front Yard 20
- Rear Yard 25
- Each Side Yard 15
Maximum Building Height (Ft.) 35
Maximum Building Coverage ( %} 45%
Other Requirements - All Specialized Medical Facilities shall conform with
the following:
1. The Specialized Medical Facilities shall comply with all other
appropriate Federal, State and local requirements and suitable
certificates or licenses required for their operation shall be secured
as a condition for any "Conditional Use" approval which may be
granted under this Ordinance.
2. The operator/owner of such a facility shall prepare and submit a
Statement of Operating Procedures for the proposed facility. Said
operating procedure shall indicate how the use of the facility will be
controlled and monitored to prevent noise, nuisances, excessive
lighting or glare, loitering and congestion; and providing for the
control of traffic flows and parking problems; and setting forth
measures' to be taken to prevent adverse impacts on the City and/or
neighborhood and nuisances resulting from the above conditions
which adversely affect adjoining and nearby properties or uses.
52
3. The facility shall also be managed in a manner which will provide
for the timely clean-up of litter on the premises and for the proper
maintenance of the building and parking areas, landscaping and the
exterior grounds of the facility.
53
USE CLASS 18. - COMMERCIAL- LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
A. STANDARDS OF POPULATION DENSITIES, LAND COVERAGES & BUILDING
INTENSITIES
The following regulations and City of Arnold Zoning Ordinance control the
population density and intensity of land coverage by buildings within the
redevelopment area.
The following uses are allowed in areas designated as Commercial/Light
Industrial on the · '
Permitted Uses:
Commercial
Includes the following general commercial uses which shall be carried on in a
completely enclosed building except for off-street parking and loading facilities as
required herein and limited outdoor displays not occupying more than 30% of the
lot area, but excluding shopping centers or malls or groups of separate stores or
establishments which exceed two in number and also excluding facilities where
more than 60% of the gross floor space is to be used for related warehousing
facilities and excluding vehicle drive-through facilities to serve customers.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Wholesale and retail trade establishments including supermarkets and
grocery stores, food establishments of all types including fruits and
vegetables, candy, nut and confectionery, bakeries, dairy products and
other food, greenhouses for the production of flowers and plants at retail
and the sale of lumber and other building materials; hardware, plumbing,
hearing, ventilating and electrical equipment and supplies: paint, carpets,
glass, wallpaper, decorating supplies and farm equipment.
General merchandise, includlng department and discount stores, mail
order houses, variety stores, merchandise vending machine sales, direct
selling organizations, radio, TV, and video and electronic sales and
appliances of all 'types, clothing of all types, custom tailoring, furriers and
fur apparel, furniture, home furnishings and equipment, music supplies,
eating and drinking establishments, drug and proprietary products,
antiques, book and stationery stores, sporting goods and equipment, farm
and garden supplies, fuel and Ice.
Personal and household service establishments of all types including
laundering, dry cleaning and dyeing services, photographic, video and
electronic services and repair, beauty, barber and masseuse services, and
apparel repair.
Hotels and motels and other similar lodging accommodations.
53-A
e. Professional services and offices, legal, banking. financial, insurance, real
estate. accounting, engineering, architectural and other professional
services and including offices buildings of all types.
f. Medical and allied uses, including "Medical Offices and Buildings" as
defined in the city zoning ordinance, hospitals, medical and dental testing
laboratories, veterinarian offices and clinics, medical and orthopedic
appliance stores, retail outlet for drugs and medical supplies, and medical
and dental offices and centers, but excluding uSpecialized Medical
Facilities" as defined in the city zoning ordinance.
g. Business services and offices including advertising, consumer and
mercantile credit reporting services, adjustment and collection services,
duplicating, printing, mailing and stenographic services, news syndicate,
employment services, and off-street parking; and warehousing and
storage services.
h. Funeral homes
i. Commercial and other schools
j. Commercial indoor entertainment and recreation facilities carried out in a
completely enclosed building, except for off-street parking and loading
facilities as required herein, which may include skating rinks, swimming
pools, tennis courts, racquet ball, billiards, exercise rooms and gyms,
spas, indoor court games, bowling, theaters, museums, art galleries and
cultural establishments.
Such indoor entertainment and recreation facilities shall conform with the
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Schedule II) except that
such uses may also be developed and located within another use
permitted in the redevelopment area.
Customary Accessory Uses
Includes uses customarily accessory to the principal use of a lot. Such uses
include the following:
a. Signs, in accordance with the requirements of the city zoning ordinance.
b. Other buildings and uses customarily appurtenant to other Permitted or
Conditional Principal Uses which comply with minimum yard, area and
other requirements.
Appropriate Public Uses and Essential Services
Includes the following appropriate public uses and essential services provided by
public utilities:
a. Appropriate Public Uses - includes public and quasi-public uses of a
welfare, educational, religious, historic, recreation, governmental and
cultural nature, and associated accessory uses; and essential public
utilities that require enclosure within a building.
b. Essential Services for public utilities that conform to the height regulations
of the zoning district in which they are located.
Conditional Uses
Light Industrial
I
Includes the following types of industrial uses of which at least 40% of the activity
shall be carried on in an enclosed building, except for off-street parking and
loading facilities and vehicle, boat, trailer and mobile home sales areas.
a. Limited industrial uses include the manufacture, fabrication, processing,
assembly, repair, testing, packing and storage of all types of products
made from previously prepared materials and also the processing of raw
materials.
b. Research facilities, laboratories and research centers of all types.
c. Wholesale business, storage and warehousing establishments, truck and
freight terminals, and delivery and distribution centers.
d. Wholesale produce and meat markets, mechanical and equipment repair
establishments, greenhouse facilities, dry cleaning and dyeing plants,
carpet and rug cleaning establishments, laundries and sign painting,
printing and engraving.
e. Offices related to any of the above uses.
f. Amusement game machines and "other amusement machines," as
defined in the city zoning ordinance, and membership clubs.
Area and Bulk Regulations
Regulations governing the construction of buildings are shown in Schedule I at
the end of this section.
53-C
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as indicated in
Schedules II and Ill at the end of this section.
Schedule I: Area and Bulk Regulations
Commerclal/light
Accessory uses
industrial district
Minimum lot size 9,600 NJI
(square feet}
Minimum lot width (feet) 80 NA
Minimum lot depth (feel) 120 NA
Minimum front yard 10 same yard
(feet) regulations as
principal structure
Minimum side yard 10 same yard
(feet) regulations as
principal structure
Both side yards 20 NJI
combined (feel}
Minimum rear yard 25 same yard
(feel} regulations as
principal structure
Maximum height of 35 same regulations
building (feet) as principal
structure
Maximum number of 3 same regulations
stories as principal
structure
Maximum building 45 coverage (percent) *
* Maximum building coverge of all principal and accessory
buildings on a lot
53-0
Schedule II: Off-Street Parking Req!Jlrements
1.
5.
6.
Indoor recreation
Commercial
Shopping centers
Retail, services, and commercial
entertainment
Banks and financial institutions
Offices and office buildin s
Gasoline service stations
Auto rentals or sales
Funeral homes
Medical and related facilities
Hos itals
1 for every 3 persons of total capacity or 1
for every 200 square feet, whichever is
reater
5 for every 1,000 square feet of net retail
sales area
1 for eve 1.5 beds
Medical, dental, and veterinarian offices and 3 for every doctor, dentist, or professional
clinics person, plus 1 for every other 2 employees
53-E
Schedule II: Off.Street Parking Requirements (continued)
Theaters and other-places of assembly,
including spectator. recreation, and cultural
facilities
Schedule Ill: Off·Street Loading Requirements
5 classroom seats
Every commercial, industrial, resort or other building which requires the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise shall provide one off.street loading
space for each 10,000 square feet of gross building ground floor area or part thereof,
and each such space shall be at least 400 square feet in area. Said loading spaces
shall apply only to any new construction, new uses or to the enlarged section of any
addition which may be approved by the city.
ARTICLE 5 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
5 .100 PERMITIED V ARIA TIO NS FROM REQUIRED AREAS
J ! !
I:
[
G
n
\J
[!
u
u
L
L
u
u
L.
u
The minimum lot, yard and height requirements of Article 4 shall prevail in all cases,
except as follows:
5.101 Existing Nonconforming Lots - In any district where a vacant nonconforming
lot exists as a separate entity at the time of passage of this Ordinance, and
where the owner of the nonconforming lot does not own an adjoining lot, then
the following development is permitted on such a lot:
a. If the lot is located in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T, C-1 or B-1 Zoning District,
or in any district in which a single-family dwelling is listed as a Permitted
Use, then only a single-family dwelling, including any attached permitted
accessory use, may be constructed on it as a permitted use subject to
the requirements shown on Schedule IV following this page, except that
the minimum distance between principal structures on the same lot or on
adjoining lots shall not be less than five feet.
Accessory structures which are not attached to the principal structure
may be built up to two feet to any side lot line or not less than five feet
from the rear lot line provided that such accessory structures are not
located closer than eight feet from any principal structure.
b. If the lot is located in any remaining non-residential zoning district ( 1-1),
then a structure not exceeding two stories in height may be constructed
on it, for a use permitted in the district in whicli it is located, as shown
on Schedule I, provided that the off-street parking and loading
requirements of this Ordinance shall be complied with and that the front,
side and rear yards are not reduced by more than one-third of the
requirements of Schedule II.
c. For changes to existing conforming uses located on nonconforming lots,
see Section 5. 1 05.
d. For requirements governing nonconforming uses and structures, see
Section 5.400.
54
SCHEDULE IV
PERMITTED VARIATIONS
FOR EXISTING NON-CONFORMING LOTS
IN VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS
REQUIREMENT NON-CONFORMING LOTS LOCATED IN:
R-1 R-2 R-3, R-T B-1
and C-1
MINIMUM LOT SIZE (S.F.) 2,500 2,500 2,000 2,500
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH (FT.) 25 20 20 25
MINIMUM YARDS (FT.)
- FRONT YARD 25 20 20 20
- REAR YARD 20 20 20 20
- ONE SIDE YARDS 3 2 2 3
- BOTH SIDE YARDS 6 4 4 6
COMBINED
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT {FT.)
(FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDING)
- STORIES 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
- HEIGHT (FT.) 35 35 35 35
MAXIMUM BUILDING COVERAGE 40% 45% 50% 50%
(%)
NOTES: See Section 5.101 for uses permitted on Non-Conforming Lots.
This Schedule applies only to Non-Conforming Lots on which a single family dwelling and
related accessory uses may be constructed as a permitted use.
55
,
r 1
J
u
0
[ !
[l
I ~
I .
1
I
l J
L
5. 102 Height Limitations - District height limitations for church spires, cupolas and
domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks, antennas, farm
structures, silos, and flag poles may be increased by 20 feet. Required utility
and radio and television station transmitting or receiving towers which are
permitted under the requirements of this Ordinance may exceed the District
height limitations by 35 feet.
5.103 Front Yard Exception - When an unimproved lot is situated between two
improved lots each having a principal building within 25 feet of the side lot
line of the unimproved lot, and where the lot is not located on a major State
or Federal highway, then the required front yard may be reduced to a depth
equal to that of the greater front yard of the two adjoining lots.
5.104 Projections Into Yards - Projections into required yards may be permitted as
follows, except that no such projection shall be located closer than two feet
to any side lot line, or fifteen feet to any rear lot line, or 20 feet to any front
lot line, except as may be provided for in 5.101 for "Existing Nonconforming
Lots":
5.105
a. Fire escapes, uncovered stairs and landings, canopies, eaves, or other
architectural features not required for structural support may project into
the required side, front or rear yard not more than a total of four feet.
b. Accessory structures may project into yards as set forth in applicable
Sections 5.301 and 5.101.
c. Patios may be located in any required yard area, not closer than the
following to any property line, except that patios constructed on existing
nonconforming lots may line up with and be as wide as the principal
structure on the lot.
- Side property line ~ 1 O feet
- Rear property line - 10 feet
- Front property line - 20 feet
Changes To Conforming Uses and Buildings - Any conforming use or building
may be repaired, maintained, restored or rebuilt up to the same dimensions
existing at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.
Any enlargement of a structure, which houses an existing conforming use, on
the same lot, which is proposed after the effective date of this Zoning
Ordinance must comply in all respects with the regulations of this Ordinance.
56
5.200 UNIQUE LOTS AND BUILDING LOCATIONS
5.300
5.201 Two or More Buildings On A Lot - Two or more principal buildings located on
a parcel in single ownership shall conform to all the requirements of this
Ordinance which would normally apply to each building if each were on a
separate lot.
5.202 Through Lots - Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from
one street to another parallel or nearly parallel street or alley, the Planning
Commission shall decide which street will be considered as the front street.
No principal structure shall be erected on any portion of a lot which does not
have primary access from an improved public street, except as specified in
Section 5.201 and 5.203.
5.203 Lots Fronting On An Alley - Individual lots existing at the effective date of
this Ordinance, fronting on an alley, shall comply with all the requirements of
this Ordinance and the district in which said lots are located, except that no
principal structure shall derive its primary or only access from an alley.
5.204 Side Yard of a Corner Lot - The side yard of a corner lot which abuts a street,
shall be equal to the required front yard for that street, except as may be
limited by Section 5.205.
5.205 Obstruction to Vision - No obstruction to vision, as defined herein, shall be
planted, constructed or maintained in the vicinity of any street intersection or r ·.
driveway, entrance, or on a corner lot, which creates potential vehicular _
safety hazards.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES L
5.301 Accessory Structures - All accessory structures, unless otherwise provided for f -
in this Ordinance, shall conform with the minimum yard regulations l
established in Article 4, except for nonconforming lots as set forth in Section
5.101, and except as permitted below:
a. Unattached Structures Accessory To Residential Buildings - Structures
accessory to residential buildings which are not attached to a principal
structure shall not be higher than 20 feet or two stories, and may be
erected within the required rear and side yards of the lot provided that
they conform with the following:
1. Distance From Side lot Line - Not less than three feet from the side
lot line. except in the case of corner lots where the side yard as
specified in Section 5.204 shall be maintained.
2. Distance From Rear Lot Line - Not less than fifteen feet from the
rear lot line.
57
l
I_
f
L.
i.
l .. .J
{ }
ll
{ J
u
0
0
( l
I
u
L
I~
3. Distance From Principal Structure - Not less than ten feet from a
principal structure.
b. Unattached Structures Accessory to Non-Residential Buildings - Such
accessory structures shall comply with front, side and rear yard
requirements for the principal structure.
c. Variation For Nonconforming Lots - In lieu of the above requirements,
permitted accessory structures located on nonconforming lots shall
comply with the requirements of Section 5. 101.
d. Signs and Off-Street Parking - Signs and off-street parking areas may be
located in required yard areas as set forth in Sections 5.500 and 5.600.
5.302 Home Occupations - A single home occupation per residential dwelling unit
may be permitted as either a "Permitted Use" or as a "Special Exception Use"
as provided herein:
a. "Permitted Use" Home Occupations - A home occupation shall be
considered to be an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit located
in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T, C-1 and B-1 Zoning Districts. Such accessory
home occupations shall be subject to the following requirements:
They shall be conducted only by one or more permanent residents
of the dwelling assisted by not more than one non-resident.
They shall be restricted to occupations which do not generate more
than an average of six customers, visitors or clientele in any one
hour, measured over a five day work week for the normal daily
business period not to exceed 8 hours for the type of business
involved.
They shall comply with all other legal requirements.
They shall not detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood or exhibit any influences or emissions which are
detrimental to the health, safety, welfare or morals of the residents
of the neighborhood.
They shall comply with all off-street parking requirements of
Section 5.500.
They shall not exhibit any external characteristics or evidence of
their presence, except for a sign not to exceed three square feet in
area. Said sign shall be a non-flashing sign which may be
moderately illuminated for visibility but which shall not provide
excessive glare or lighting which will adversely affect adjoining
residential areas.
58
A permitted home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes,
but shall not exceed 35 percent of the total usable floor area of the
dwelling, excluding attics and basement areas.
Such home occupations, subject to the above requirements may
include, but are not limited to professional offices, the operation of
a photographic studio, the training or tutoring of up to four adults in
small classes, nursery school, child care or daycare classes limited
to no more than six children, custom dress making, millinery or
tailoring, laundering, home-cooking and the rooming or boarding of
not more than two persons and the operation of a single
"Accessory Dwelling Unit" as defined herein.
All such home occupations shall be located within the principal
residential structure.
b. "Special Exception Use" Home Occupation - Any resident wishing to
operate a home occupation which requires the employment of more than
one non-resident person, but not more than two persons, and/or who
wishes to locate the home occupation in an approved accessory
structure such as a garage, barn or residentic~I storage building may apply
for a permit which shall be subject to all of the Special Exception Use
procedures of this Ordinance. In such cases, the Planning Commission
shall review said application to determine the following before making a
recommendation to the Zoning Hearing Board:
That the home occupation is in conformity with all of the other
applicable provisions set forth in subsection a. above.
That, beyond a reasonable doubt, the nature of the home
occupation and of the traffic and clientele to be generated shall
remain relatively stable and shall not grow to a point where it may
detract from the residential character of the neighborhood or exhibit
any other adverse influences on the neighborhood.
c. Application For Home Occupation - All applicants for permits to
undertake a home occupation shall submit the following information to
the Zoning Officer:
A complete description of the nature and operation of the home
occupation. r 1
The type of use, product or service produced or rendered.
The names of the residents who will operate the home occupation.
59
\ ..
'.I l .
l1
ll
u
r ~
[ 1
Ii
u
L1
u
L
The number of additional employees or other non- resident
personnel, if any, to be utilized by the home occupation.
The portion of the residential or accessory structure to be devoted
for the use of the home occupation.
Any building or structural modifications, signs or other physical
changes required to the interior or the exterior of the structure.
The expected average number of customers, visitors or clientele
expected to be served by the home occupation during any one hour
and the number of hours and schedule of operations when home
occupations shall be open to the public, as measured over a five
day work week.
A description or plan indicating how compliance will be achieved
with off-street parking requirements.
A certification by the applicant that the home occupation shall not
detract from the residential character of the neighborhood and that
all of the facts submitted with the application are true and correct
and that any incorrect information submitted shall be cause for the
City to require cessation of the home occupation.
A certification and agreement by the applicant that the home
occupation will be discontinued if changes occur in the character
and growth of the operation so that it no longer complies with the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
5.303 Home Gardening, Nurseries and Greenhouses - Home gardening and accessory
structures used for nurseries or as greenhouses are permitted in residential
areas provided that such activities shall not constitute a commercial operation
except in compliance with the provisions for home occupations set forth
above. Only limited outdoor storage of equipment and supplies may be
permitted provided that such storage shall not create a nuisance or adverse
influence on nearby adjoining residential properties, as determined by the
Board.
5.304 Private Outdoor Swimming Pools - A single private outdoor swimming pool
and/or hot tub are permitted as accessory uses to a residential structure
provided that such facilities are for the private use of the residents of the
dwelling unit or for their guests as set forth below:
a. Swimming Pools - Such a pool may be located within the required rear or
side yards for the District in which the pool is to be located except that
no portion of the body of water in the pool shall be located closer to the
property line than three feet, or two feet if located on a non-conforming
lot, and no portion of any walks or accessory pool appurtenances
60
surrounding the body of water shall be closer than two feet to any
property line.
All pools shall be surrounded and enclosed by a four foot high fence or
wall structurally suitable to deter direct access to the body of water in
the pool. Such a fence or wall shall not have openings, holes or gaps
therein larger than four inches in width or, if larger than four inches in
width, no larger than four inches in length except for doors or gates;
provided, however, that if a picket fence is erected or maintained the
horizontal dimension between pickets shall not exceed four inches;
provided, further, that a dwelling house or accessory building may be
used as a part of such a fence or wall and provided, further, that existing
hedges which effectively screen and deter access to the pool, may be
used as such enclosure or a part or parts thereof with the written
approval of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer may approve such
existing hedges, which substantially comply with the above
requirements.
All gates or doors opening through such an enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep, and capable
of keeping, such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in
actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by
human beings and forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove
required need not be so equipped.
Fences shall be constructed of weather-resistive materials and shall be
assembled or fabricated with sufficient rigidity to prevent any substantial
alteration or deformation of the lawful openings, holes or gaps.
The sides of a pool constructed above the ground level shall be
considered to meet the requirements for a fence preventing direct access
to the pool provided that such sides of the pool are at least four feet
high and provided further that any stairs, steps or ladders used to reach
the water surface of the pool shall be removable or capable of being
folded up or secured in a way which will prevent their use when the pool
is not in operation by the residents of the property or their guests.
l
Any pool whose body of water is closer than ten feet to a property line
shall be shielded by a six-foot high privacy fence, hedge or other suitable
visual obstruction where required to insure privacy for the adjoining
property as determined by the Zoning Officer. Such a privacy fence l
may also serve as the fence required to deter direct access to the body
of water as required herein if it conforms with the other requirements of
this Section.
All swimming pools and hot tubs shall also comply with other applicable
1
ordinances and requirements.
l..
61
I ,
l '
r·
{.
L
l1
n
('
0
r
L
l.
{
L
l.
L
5.305
b. Hot Tubs - A single non-commercial hot tub may be constructed as an
accessory use to serve a residential structure. The water surface area of
such a tub shall not exceed 36 square feet or seven feet in length. All
hot tubs shall be provided with a permanent secure locked cover which
shall be kept locked when not in use.
All of the yard, fencing and other requirements applicable to swimming
pools shall also apply to hot tubs.
Adequate buffering or privacy fences shall be provided to preserve
privacy and to prevent visual .or noise nuisances or the glare of related
lighting for adjoining properties in accordance with the fencing and
screening requirements of Sections 5.305 and 5.901.
All plumbing associated with hot tubs shall meet City code standards
and shall consist of a permanent all weather system maintained in good
repair.
Fences, Walls and Planting Materials
a. General Requirements - Any person, corporation, firm or association
intending to erect a fence shall, before work is commenced, make
application to the Zoning Officer as required below and by this Ordinance
and no work on such a fence shall be commenced before receipt of a
permit from the Zoning Officer.
Fences may be either a "Natural Living Fence" or a "Fabricated Materials
Fence" as defined in Article 2.
Well-maintained and safe trees, shrubs or hedges and other appropriate
plant material, which do not constitute a Natural Living Fence as defined
herein, and which are designed to enhance the livability and
attractiveness of any lot may be located in any yard or court, provided
that they do not encroach on adjoining properties or uses, or provide an
"obstruction to vision" as defined in Article 2.
b. Location of Fences - Fences may be located up to the property line in
front, rear or side yards and shall not encroach on any public right-ofway.
All fences shall be located completely on the owner's property and shall
not overlap property lines. Fence designs and locations must permit the
fence to be maintained completely from the owner's side of the property.
c. Height of Fences - The height of all fences shall be as set forth in the
Table below.
62
d. Obstruction to Vision - No fence shall create an "obstruction to vision"
as defined in Article 2.
TYPE OF FENCE
AND
LOCATION
FABRICATED MATERIALS
FENCE - LOCATED IN:
- FRONT YARD
- SIDE YARD
- REAR YARD
NATURAL LIVING FENCE -
LOCATED IN:
- FRONT YARD
- SIDE YARD
- REAR YARD
Footnote:
HEIGHT OF FENCES
MAXIMUM HEIGHT (FEET} (a)
LOCATED ON PARCELS USED PREDOMINANTLY FOR:
RESIDENTIAL OR
OPEN SPACE USE
4
6
6
4
6
6
NON-RESIDENTIAL OR
RESORT USE
6
6
6
6
6
6
(a) Special situations requiring security, complete prevention of access or the provision of
buffers to protect adjoining uses as required by Section 5.901, may have a higher
fence if approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall determine that such
additional height is necessary to meet these objectives and also to protect the public
safety and general welfare, and shall not adversely affect adjoining properties. In such
cases, the Board may require that the fence be setback from the property line to
preventing adverse effect on adjoining properties.
If approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, fences which are six feet high or over may
also be topped with special restrictive devices where necessary to prevent access and
provide security, provided that the Zoning Board shall deem such devices to be safe
and substantially free from accident exposure.
63
I
l J
r.I
r
' .
!.
'·'
l. '
•I
11
I •
L
[]
u
u
fJ
[
11
l
[J
{ !
L~
e. Removal of Unsafe Or Nuisance Fences - Any fence which obstructs
vision as defined herein or which impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic
or which causes a fire hazard, restricts safe access, unduly restricts light
or air and/or affects public or traffic safety, or which creates a nuisance
as defined under Section 5.405 a. shall be removed. The Zoning Officer
shall have the authority to direct the removal of such unsafe or nuisance
fences or to direct the trimming or modification of any natural living
fence or of any other vegetation so as to eliminate the unsafe or
nuisance conditions.
f. Swimming Pool Fences - Private outdoor swimming pools shall be
protected with a fence as set forth in Section 5.304 above.
g. Fence Materials and Construction
( 1) All fences shall be designed and constructed to serve as
"permanent" fences which are solidly constructed and which are
capable of resisting the effects of weather and which are
permanently affixed in place, except as provided below.
(2) The following fences or fencing materials are specifically prohibited:
Razor wire fences
Barbed wire fences except in areas used for agricultural
purposes
Picket or pointed fences which are less than 48 inches in
height.
Canvas fences.
Electrically charged fences
Snow drift fencing
Temporary fences such as snow fences and expandable fences
and collapsible fences, except when needed to meet emergency
conditions or during construction of a building.
(3) All chain link fences erected shall be erected with the closed loop
at the top of the fence.
(4) All entrances or gates shall open into the property.
64
(5) All fences or walls must be erected so as not to encroach upon a
public right-of-way or easement.
(6) If the fence is wood cover on wood frame, the framework must
face onto the interior of the lot, unless the fence is so designed as
to provide equal frame and cover area to adjoining yards.
(7) If the fence is open metal mesh, supported by posts and frames of
either pipe or wood, the posts and frames must be on the interior of
the mesh.
(8) If the fence is of masonry construction, a finished surface must be
provided on the exterior side.
5.400 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Any legal nonconforming use or structure may be continued, repaired, maintained and
improved except as provided below. An Application for such changes shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer.
5.401 Enlargement - Such nonconforming use or structure may not be enlarged more
than 40 percent of the existing floor or ground area except for junk yards
which may not be enlarged. Such enlargement shall not exceed the maximum '
height or maximum building coverage requirements set forth in Schedule II for
the district in which such nonconforming use is located and shall be
accompanied with the required off-street P.arking spaces to serve the
expansion as set forth in Section 5.500.
r 5 .402 Restoration - If no more than 75 percent (measured by its total floor area or
use on a lot) of an existing nonconforming use or structure is damaged or
destroyed, then a permit for its restoration may be obtained if such application
is filed within 1 80 days of the initial damage or destruction, and restoration is
completed within 24 months of the issuance of the permit.
L ..
5.403 Discontinuance - No such use or structure may be reestablished after it has
been discontinued or vacated for a period of 24 months. Also, a
nonconforming use or structure when razed or removed from premise shall not
be relocated except in conformity with the regulations of the district to which
it is moved.
5.404 Change of Use - A nonconforming use or structure may be changed to
another nonconforming use or structure only if such use is listed in the same
"Use Class Subcategory" in which the nonconforming use or structure is first
listed, as set forth in Section 4.300. A permit for such a change may be
approved by the Zoning Officer provided that the Zoning Officer shall
determine that the following conditions which are generated by the proposed
use are not greater than those generated by the existing nonconforming use at
any time for a period of two years prior to the proposed change:
65
! \_.
·1
. ,
[ I
[ l
[J
1. ~
u
L
l :
l.
L
l i
l
5.405
Number of employees.
Amount of employee and visitor parking required.
Number of commercial vehicles serving the proposed use and number of
such vehicles to be parked at the premises or vicinity of the use.
Traffic volumes and congestion to be generated.
Adverse environmental effects generated by the proposed use.
A proposed change to a nonconforming use which is not listed in the same
"Use Class Subcategory" as required above shall be considered to be a
"Conditional Use" subject to review and action by the Planning Commission
and City Council as required in this Ordinance. In such cases, City Council
may approve such change only if it determines that the change is equal or
more appropriate to the character ·of the District and neighborhood in which it
is located. Such a determination shall be based on a consideration of the
same factors listed above for consideration by the Zoning Officer.
Termination - Certain types of nonconforming uses or structures which
present a special nuisance or hazardous condition shall be terminated as
follows:
a. General Nuisances - Upon a complaint registered by the Zoning Officer
from fifty percent of the property owners within five hundred feet of a
nonconforming use which is considered to be a general nuisance or
which is not in compliance with the "Performance, Environmental and
Traffic" impact requirements of Section 4.201, or is operated in a
manner which adversely affects adjoining or nearby properties or disrupts
the peace and tranquility of the area during early morning or night time
hours, or is otherwise considered to be a hazard to the health, safety,
welfare and morals of persons residing or working in or using the area,
City Council shall hold a hearing and make a finding with respect to the
nuisance, hazardous condition or adverse Performance, Environmental or
Traffic impact which exists and shall determine the necessity of
terminating such nonconforming use. Such uses shall be terminated
within such reasonable time as shall be determined by City Council after
consideration of the seriousness of the condition and time required for
the reasonable amortization of the capital investment in such uses, or as
may be provided for by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
66
5.406 Off-Street Parking - Sufficient off-street parking spaces shall be provided, as
set forth in Section 5. 500 to serve any proposed expansion permitted by
Section 5.401.
5.500 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5.501 Off-Street Parking - In all Districts, off-street parking spaces shall be provided
as set forth in Schedule V whenever any building is erected, enlarged or
converted. Such spaces shall have an area of at least 1 80 square feet
exclusive of access drives or aisles and shall have adequate and well-designed
ingress and egress and shall be located on the same lot as the use to which
they are accessory or within a radius of 400 feet in the same district or in an
adjoining district when approved by the Board.
Said Schedule V shall apply only to any new construction, new uses or to the
enlarged section of any addition which may be approved by the City after the
effective date of this Ordinance.
5.502 Parking For Home Occupations - Permitted home occupations shall provide the
following number of off-street parking spaces:
The required number of spaces for the residential structure as shown in
Schedule V.
The required number of spaces for the most applicable use listed in
Schedule V to which the Home Occupation is most similar, but in any
case no less than one off-street parking space for each non-resident
employee and one additional for each roomer, student, patron, patient,
customer or other visitor which the home occupation serves during any
one-hour period of maximum use.
67
·-· I
I
l
f
I ..
f
I.
I L •
I l .
SCHEDULE V
REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES (a)
Type of Use (b) No. of Parking
Spaces Required
1 . Recreation and Open Space Uses
- Outdoor Recreation
- Indoor Recreation
1 per 2 potential peak day users or 1 for every 3
persons of total capacity, whichever is greater.
1 for every 3 persons of total capacity or 1 for
every 200 s .f., whichever is greater.
2. Residential
. - Conventional residential dwelling units 2 per dwelling unit.
I'
3.
l
- Residential Care Facility for the Elderly 1 per dwelling unit, plus 1 for 2 employees
- Residential Retirement Complex
- New dwelling units created by
approved conversions
- Home occupations
Resort Development
2 per dwelling unit.
1 per 1 dwelling unit.
See Section 5.502.
Cumulative totals of more specific lodging,
recreation, eating and drinking facilities and other
uses.
r 4. Lodging
l
L
L
L
- Motels, hotels and inns 4 for every 3 sleeping rooms.
- Bed and Breakfast Homestead 1 per rental bedroom, plus 2 for the residents
- Rooming houses and dormitories 1 for every bed.
Eating and Drinking Establishments
- Restaurants and dining facilities 1 for every 3 seats or 3 per 100 gross sq. ft.,
whichever is greater. (c)
- Nightclubs, Taverns, Bars, 1 for every 2 seats.
Cocktail Rooms
(continued on following page)
68
Type of Use (b} No. of Parking
Spaces Required
6. Membership For Private Clubs. 1 for every 200 gross sq.ft.
Social Halls and Lodges
7. Commercial
- Shopping Centers 5 for every 1 ,000 sq. ft. of net retail sales area
- Retail, services, and 1 for every 200 gross sq. ft.
commercial entertainment
- Banks and financial institutions 1 for every 200 gross sq. ft. plus 1 for each 100
gross sq.ft. used to serve customers
- Offices and Office Buildings 1 for every 200 gross sq. ft.
- Gasoline service stations 1 for each 150 gross sq.ft.
- Auto rentals or sales 1 for each 100 gross sq.ft.
- Funeral homes 1 for each 4 chapel seats plus 1 for 2 employees,
plus 1 for every sq. ft. of aggregate floor area in
viewing rooms or parlors.
- Bowling alleys 5 for each alley
8. Medical and Related Facilities
- Hospitals
- Nursing Homes and Group Homes
- Medical, dental and veterinarian
offices and clinics
9. Educational Facilities
- Commercial and other schools
1 0. Places of Assembly
- Churches, theaters, auditoriums
and other places of assembly including
spectator recreation and
cultural facilities
1 for every 1 . 5 beds
1 for every 3 beds
3 for every doctor, dentist or professional
person, plus 1 for every other 2 employees.
1 for every 5 classroom seats
1 for every 50 gross sq.ft. or 1 for every 3 seats
or persons to be accommodated, whichever is
greater. ( c)
(continued on following page)
69
L
!
l.
r
I
L
Type of Use (b) No. of Parking
Spaces Required
11 . Manufacturing and Wholesale or
Warehouse Establishments
1 for each 3 employees plus 1 for each 1,000
gross sq.ft., but not less than 25% of the total floor area
FOOTNOTES: ! (a)
I \b}
L
l c)
l1
u
l l
u
I
I
L
l
< L
l.
L
This Table applies only to new construction or to new uses and to the enlarged section
of any addition in all Zoning Districts. For multi-purpose facilities, use the cumulative
total of all uses included.
For any use not specifically listed, the Zoning Officer shall apply the requirements of
that listed use which he determines to be most similar, or shall analyze the maximum
number of potential users which the use is capable of attracting at least 20 times per
year.
Where benches are provided in lieu of seats then each 20-inch width of bench shall be
equivalent to one seat.
70
5.503 Off-Street Loading - Every commercial, industrial, resort or other building
which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles or materials or
merchandise shall provide one off-street loading space for each 10,000 square
feet of gross building ground floor area or part thereof, and each such space
shall be at least 400 square feet in area .
Said loading spaces shall apply only to any new construction, new uses or to
the enlarged section of any addition which may be approved by the City after
the effective date of this Ordinance.
5.504 Develooment of Parking and Loading Spaces - All off-street parking and
loading areas shall conform with the following:
a. Off-street parking and loading spaces may be developed on any required
side, front, or rear yard, except that such spaces located in the
Residential Districts shall have landscaping setbacks of at least two feet
from any street right-of-way and from any side or rear yard lot line on
which they abut. Such spaces shall be properly designed in relation to
adjoining uses and/or buildings. Adequate barriers shall be provided to l
protect buildings and sidewalks, and screening shall be provided as
required in Section 5.901.
b. The design of all parking areas shall give special attention to the
applicable site design guidelines set forth in Section 5. 804 and special
attention to avoidance of the following problems:
Shielding of lighting fixtures to prevent glare and control of light
intensities on adjoining properties. '-
Proper design to prevent vehicles from backing out into public
streets and to promote safe traffic circulation.
Proper grading and management of stormwater runoff.
Screening and planting along perimeter of parking areas to protect
adjoining properties and to enhance appearance of the area,
including evergreen shade trees and shrubbery.
Reservation of parking space(s) for use by handicapped persons.
c. All required parking areas shall be surfaced with a bituminous or
concrete paving material or equivalent as approved by the Zoning Officer
and/or the City's Engineer and shall be properly designed, graded and
drained to dispose of all surface water.
71
r ,
I
l_
r
.... ..
.
'··
·-
[
!.
r \
L
L
d. Upon a request from the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board, in
accordance with the "Special Exception Use" procedure set forth in this
Ordinance, may permit a reduction in the number of parking spaces to be
paved if the applicant demonstrates that the full number of spaces as
required herein will not be necessary to serve the proposed use for a
period of five years. Such a reduction in the number of paved parking
spaces required shall not relieve the applicant from the submission of an
overall plan for the parking lot which designates the total number of
parking spaces as required by Schedule V. Said Plan shall indicate those
spaces which are not to be paved for immediate use and those which are
reserved for potential use as required by the Zoning Hearing Board.
e. Spaces shall be arranged and marked for the orderly and safe movement,
loading, parking and storage of vehicles and shall be adequately
illuminated if designed for use by more than three cars after dusk. All
illuminated parking areas shall be designed to shield and prevent glare on
adjoining properties.
f. Exit and entrance driveways or access points shall be approved by the
Zoning Officer and shall be at least 20 feet wide for two-way driveways
and 16 feet wide for one-way driveways and shall not exceed 40 feet in
width, and wherever practical shall not occupy the full length of the
streets, alleys, or other right-of-way from which they derive their access,
but shall be limited to well·defined points, and shall be so designed to
provide maximum safety for other adjoining or nearby uses. This
subsection applies only to non-residential uses.
5.505 Off-Street Parking In Residential Areas - On any lot used for residential
purposes in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-T residential districts only one commercial
vehicle may be parked on the residential lot.
Qs.600 SIGNS
I.
( l
(
L
L
L~
5.601 Scope and Aoplicability
a. Signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used, removed or moved,
only in compliance with the provisions of this Section and with any other
applicable City regulations.
b. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection or alteration of any
such sign, except that changes in the copy of any sign, or official
governmental signs shall not require such a permit.
c. Any existing signs which do not conform with the provisions of this
· Section shall not be altered or enlarged unless approved as a Special
Exception.
72
5.602 General Sign Regulations
a. No sign shall be erected which states that a property may be used for
any purpose not permitted by this Zoning Ordinance.
b. Signs referring to a use or product no longer in existence or available
shall be removed within six months after cessation of the original use.
c. No sign shall be located or used in a manner that interferes with traffic
on a street by causing glare, an obstruction to vision as defined herein,
by causing confusion with traffic control devices or through other
means.
d. Illuminated signs adjoining or visible from nearby residential areas shall
be shielded to protect adverse effects or nuisances upon nearby
dwellings.
e.
f.
An awning, with or without graphics and visual displays shall not be
considered to be a sign under this Ordinance, but shall be subject to the
applicable accessory use requirements of Sections 5.100 and 5.300,
except that all awnings which project over any public rights-of-way or
private areas shall be subject to the requirements of Section 5.603c.
No part of any sign, except for an official governmental sign, shall be
located within the official right-of-way of any street or alley, unless
specifically permitted herein.
g. Any vehicle to which a sign is attached in such a manner that the sign is
no longer incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose shall be considered
to be a free-standing sign subject to ttie sign provisions for the zoning
district in which the vehicle is located.
h. Every sign shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be kept in
good condition and repair.
i. Flashing and moving signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district.
5.603 Location. Height and Projection of Signs
a.
b.
Location of Signs - Unless otherwise provided for herein, all signs may
be located in any required yard area and may be free-standing or
attached to a building or other permanent feature on the site, excluding
fences located closer than five feet to any side yard property lines.
Height Limitations - Signs shall not exceed the following height
limitations:
73
r _,
I·-
r
t
L,
r
I L
I
I L
[ ....
l
1 1
l 1
r.~
[]
u 5.604
I ~
L'
L
l
L
I ,
L
( 1) Signs accessory to residential uses located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and
R-T Zoning Districts shall not exceed ten feet in height.
(2) Signs accessory to non-residential uses located in the C-1, B-1, and
1-1 Zoning Districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
(3) No sign may be attached to a building in a manner which allows it
to exceed the root height of the building.
c. Projection of Signs
( 1 ) No sign erected or replaced a~ter the effective date of this
Ordinance shall project more than one foot over a public sidewalk
or street right-of-way, unless specifically approved by City Council.
All projecting signs over pedestrian areas shall be at least eight feet
high.
(2) Signs which project over private areas shall conform with other
applicable City requirements may be approved by City Council, but
in all cases be at least ten feet above the level of any area used for
vehicular traffic and eight feet above pedestrian traffic.
(3) Signs may be attached parallel to the wall of a building, but such
signs shall not project more than four inches from the face of the
building, and such signs shall be at least eight feet above the
ground level.
(4) The owners of all signs and awnings which project over any public
right-of-way shall provide insurance in an amount specified by the
City sufficient to hold the City harmless in the event of any damage
to life or property caused by such a sign in the public right-of-way.
Type of Signs Permitted in Zoning Districts
The size and type of signs permitted in the various zoning districts are set
forth below:
a. R-1. R-2. R-3, R-T and B-1 Zoning Districts - The following signs,
accessory to residential uses, are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T and
B-1 Zoning Districts:
( 1) A simple Name Plate Sign containing the name, address,
professional or home occupation activity of the occupant of the ~ '
premises is permitted. Such sign shall not be illuminated or be
constructed of highly reflective materials and shall not exceed one
square foot in area. Such signs shall be attached to the building to
which they pertain.
74
(2) A single Identification Sign or Bulletin Board, not exceeding 1 2
square feet in area is permitted, in connection with any church,
school, college, hospital, institution, park, playground, or other
similar public or semi-public use. Such signs may be attached to
the building to which they pertain and shall not be located within
five feet of all lot lines if they are free-standing.
(3) A single Identification Sign attached to the building to which it
pertains and not exceeding 10 square feet in area is permitted for
any legally existing non-conforming use.
(4) Any Business or Identification Sign applicable to an approved
Special Exception or Conditional Use, not exceeding 20 square feet
in area which is specifically approved by City Council.
f
b. C-1. B-1. 1-1 and R-T Zoning Districts - The following signs, accessory to , ...
non-residential uses, are permitted in the C-1 , 8-1 and 1-1 Zoning I
c.
Districts and in the R-T District for any legally approved business use. I
( 1)
r·.
Business or Identification Signs are permitted which direct attention [_,
to a business, profession, product, service, activity, use or
entertainment sold or offered on the premises where such a sign is {
located. The total area of such a sign or signs shall not exceed ten _
percent of the surface of the building facade, or of the wall area on
which the sign is mounted or to which the sign pertains, except as [
provided for in Section 5.604 c. below. J
(2}
(3)
A single Identification Sign or Bulletin Board, not exceeding 24
square feet in area is permitted in connection with any church,
school, college, hospital, institution, park, playground or other
similar public or semi-public use.
A single Identification Sign, not exceeding 24 square feet in area is
permitted for any legally existing non-conforming use.
(4} Advertising Signs or billboards which direct attention to a business,
product, service, activity, use or entertainment not conducted, sold
or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
Advertising signs shall not be closer to each other than 100 feet.
Maximum Size of Signs In C-1. B-1. 1-1 and R-T Zoning Districts - The
total square foot area of all signs located on any single parcel under the
provisions of Section 5.604 b above shall not exceed two square feet for [
every one lineal foot of lot width having frontage on a public street,
provided that on corner lots only the longest dimension may be used.
r
L The height of such signs shall not exceed 30 feet.
75
I
l
r•
d. Sign Plaza - A "Sign Plaza" may be created by a group of commercial
and/or industrial establishments for the purpose of providing an attractive
landscaped area where various signs may be grouped together for the
benefit and convenience of the public and to provide an integrated
directory of information about these establishments. The total square
foot area of all signs for these establishments, including those to be
located in the Sign Plaza shall not exceed the maximum combined size of
signs for all participating businesses as established in Section c. above.
5.605 Design of Signs
I Wherever possible the applicant for any sign shall consider the following
design principles for the purpose of establishing a coherent and attractive
visual appearance for the area in which the sign is located:
[l
lJ
{ 1
I !
l j
a. The height, size and general appeararce of signs, shall be consistent in
appearance and shall be of uniform height and layout and harmonious
with other adjoining signs located within 300 feet of the parcel.
b. Signs shall be visible from the street to both pedestrians and vehicular
passengers.
c. Signs shall not be designed to block the visibility of other adjoining signs
and wherever possible shall be attached flat or parallel to the building to
which they pertain and shall not project out more than four inches from
the face of the building.
d. Free-standing signs shall be set back from the property lines and shall be
consistent and harmonious with the size of the structure to which they
pertain and shall not detract from the visibility or appearance of any
adjoining structures.
e. Advertising signs and billboards shall not dominate the view of the
structures located within 500 feet of such signs.
5.606 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
a. Signs which in any way simulate official governmental signs that are not
concerned with the protection of the public health and safety.
b. Banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used for
commercial advertising purposes whether containing a message or not
may be permitted only for temporary time period not exceeding 60 days,
except that they are completely prohibited in the R· 1, R-2 and R-3 areas.
76
c. Flashing, blinking, twinkling signs, not including signs that alternately
display the time and temperature.
r-
5.607 Temoorary Signs 1
I
Temporary signs not exceeding six square feet for the sale or rental of
individual properties, and not exceeding 24 square feet for identifying
residential developments, developers, contractors, and/or realtors are
permitted in all districts while property is under construction or offered for
sale or rental. Such signs shall be removed within ten days of the date of the
final sale or rental of the property.
5. 700 TEMPORARY USES
5.701 Special Events or Activities - Any applicant may submit a Zoning Application
for the purposes of requesting permission to undertake or conduct a special
event, activity or use (hereinafter referred to as a "Temporary Use") that shall
be temporary in nature. Such a Temporary Use shall exist for a period of time
not to exceed one year. Said application shall be submitted in accordance
with the "Special Exception Use" procedure established in Section 4.302, and
the Temporary Use shall be clearly related to the requirements for Permitted
Uses set forth in this Ordinance.
Said application shall clearly set forth the following:
a. The exact purpose, nature and location of the proposed Temporary Use,
including all private and public lands and right-of-way involved.
b. The relationship of the Temporary Use to other uses permitted in the L
Zoning District.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
The number of employees, spectators, participants or other persons or
agencies, equipment or other paraphernalia to be involved or used in L
such Temporary Use.
Evidence that the City will be held harmless from any unforeseen adverse [
consequences resulting from such Temporary Use and evidence of the
availability of sufficient insurance coverage.
An evaluation of the Traffic Impact of said use based on the
requirements of Schedule Ill and Section 4 .202.
The length of time for which a Temporary Use permit is requested.
Any special requirements, hardships or conditions to be imposed on the
City, or its residents or to other uses which may be affected by the
Temporary Use.
77
L
L
L
.....
,
I J
[~
u
u
I
l.
L
L
L
The Zoning Hearing Board shall review the proposed Application as a "Special
Exception Use" and shall reach a decision after receipt of a recommendation
from the Planning Commission as required by this Ordinance.
The Zoning Hearing Board may reject the application or may determine that
the Temporary Use is needed to support an existing or permitted use or to
serve the needs of the majority of the City or neighborhood residents affected
by such Use. Any approval of such a Temporary Use shall be subject to the
applicable safeguards and procedures established in Sections 4.200 and
4 .202.
5.702 Excavations and Fill Material
a. Operations Subject to State Regulation - All quarry, or other non-coal
mining operations are considered Temporary Uses under this Ordinance
as required by Section 5. 701 above. Such Uses which are subject to
State law. or to regulations of the Pa. DEP shall require necessary
permit(s) from the appropriate State Agency. Particular reference is
made to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania "Non-Coal Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act No. 1984-219", as it may be
amended and to other requirements relating to the operation of sanitary
landfill areas and to preservation of water quality in the Commonwealth
as administered by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (Pa. DEP).
All excavations or placement of fill in "wetland" areas shall be subject to
the requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP and the ARMY Corps of
Engineers.
Such operations may take place in the City only in those areas where
permitted by this Ordinance.
All applicants for such operations shall submit a copy of any request for
a State Permit to the Zoning Officer, together with any plans required by
the State for the reclamation operation of such areas. The Zoning
Officer shall also require a Zoning Permit application form to be
submitted plus any other information required to properly evaluate the
application. Approval of any Zoning Permit for an operation permitted
in the City shall be conditioned upon the receipt by the operator of any
permit required from the State.
The City may present information to or request a public hearing of Pa.
DEP to be held on such applications for a permit which are submitted to
the State.
b. Other Excavations - Any other excavations, regrading of the natural
terrain where ground levels are affected by more than one foot, the
78
removal of topsoil or other earth products, the placement of fill, or the
alteration of drainage patterns may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board only as a Temporary Use as required in Section 5. 701 above.
Such excavations must be adequately drained to prevent the formation
of pools of water. The Zoning Hearing Board may require that such an
excavation be enclosed by a fence if it is deemed to be a menace to the
public health, safety and welfare.
Unless specifically permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board, open
excavations shall not be maintained, except those excavations made for
the erection of a building or structure for which a permit has been
issued.
The dumping of earth, gravel, rock or other materials not subject to
decay, noxious or offensive odors may be permitted in any zone or any
vacant land provided that the existing grade shall not be raised , more
than one foot above the grade of the nearest road, that
hazardous or nuisance conditions are not created, and that an unsightly
appearance or unstable slopes are not created. Industrial or other
operations requiring the dumping of such materials above the grade of
the nearest road may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
"Special Exception Use" subject to the receipt of any required permit
from a County, State or Federal Agency, if the Zoning Hearing Board
determines that such dumping is not a menace to the public health,
safety or welfare or a nuisance to nearby residential areas.
Operations affecting drainage patterns shall be studied by the City's
Engineer and appropriate recommendations or conditions developed for
consideration by the Zoning Hearing Board. Necessary reviews from L
other affected agencies such as the Westmoreland County Conservation
District shall also be secured prior to the issuance of any permit.
5.800 SITE PLAN REVIEW
5.801
5.802
Purpose and Procedure - Site Plan Review and the submission of a Site Plan is
required herein for all Special Exception and Conditional Uses, or for any other
use requiring such review in accordance with the requirements of Article 4 or
other provisions of this Ordinance. The following Site Plan procedure shall be
followed to ensure the safe and efficient movement of traffic, adequate
drainage and connection to utilities, compliance with other applicable
regulations and to promote the development of an attractive and well-planned
City, to enhance sound site planni1;1g and to best serve the interests of public
health, safety and general welfare and with the objectives of this Ordinance .
Optional Site Plan Review Procedure - In lieu of submittal of all of the site plan I
req·uirements itemized below, the applicant may elect to submit a preliminary
sketch site plan, containing lesser information, for unofficial review by the l
79 l
[I
l j
f I
[
L
I
L
I
L
L
[_;
5.803
Planning Commission . Such sketch site plan shall be for the purpose of
indicating to the Planning Commission the general nature and intent of the
proposal which will enable the Commission to present its initial considerations
for the purpose of guiding the developer in the preparation of the official Site
Plan, in accordance with these Zoning requirements.
The entire purpose of this optional procedure is to facilitate the proper
development of a Site Plan, as required herein and to prevent unnecessary
expenses associated with the development of a Site Plan. This optional
procedure shall be considered to be a convenience for the applicant and shall
not constitute an official zoning permit application or submission and shall not
convey any benefits or assurances to the applicant which he would not
otherwise have had if such an optional site plan were not submitted by the
applicant. All such optional plans shall be clearly marked with the words
"Optional Sketch Plan".
Site Plan Requirements - The official Site Plan shall include the following
information:
a. An application for a Use located in a Use Class requiring Site Plan
Review, as required by this Ordinance, shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer. The applicant shall also submit five complete sets of site plans
certified by a registered engineer, surveyor, architect or Community
Planner with AICP Certification.
b. When a site plan has been officially submitted, it shall be placed on the
Planning Commission agenda for review at its next regular meeting,
provided the official submission is made ten days or more before the
regular meeting.
c. Within 45 days after the official submission of a site plan, the Planning
Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Zoning Officer,
the Zoning Hearing Board or City Council, depending on whether the
zoning permit requested is for a Permitted Use, a Special Exception Use
or a Conditional Use respectively, on whether the Plan should be
approved or disapproved. The written recommendation shall include the
underlying findings and reasons affecting the Planning Commission's
recommendation. In making such a recommendation, the Planning
Commission may receive advice and review comments from the City's
Engineer or any other competent review authority.
d. The appropriate body (Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board or City
Council) shall take action by approving or disapproving the plan either
within 45 days after receiving the Planning Commission's written
recommendation or within 90 days after the site plan is officially
submitted. The Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant in writing of the
80
action taken by the appropriate body and shall issue any applicable
permit.
e. Site plan approval shall neither relieve the applicant from any other
provisions of this Ordinance nor constitute a recommendation for a
variance or other relief that the applicant may seek from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
f. The following information shall be included on the site plan. Any such
information which is not considered applicable to the proposed use may
be waived by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Zoning Officer.
1)
2)
A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet showing the location, dimensions and area of each lot, the
location, dimensions and height of proposed buildings, structures,
streets, roads, and any existing buildings in relation to property and
street lines. If the application relates to property which is
scheduled to be developed in successive stages, such plans shall
show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
3) The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open spaces and r
yards, landscaping, fences and buffer yards, including methods and
materials to be employed for screening. L 4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to be used
for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, off-street loading and
unloading, and provisions to be made for lighting such areas.
The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for signs and
exterior lighting.
The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be
devoted to pedestrian use.
Sanitary and stormwater facilities and connections. Provisions to
be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial
wastes, water supply and storm drainage. Submission of a
Stormwater Management Plan with supporting calculations shall be
required.
The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes, including information on total land
area, area to be reserved in common open space, density,
maximum building coverage, total area to be covered with
81
L
I
I
l
[
[ :
L
IJ
lJ
tJ
L
[
I.
L
L
L
L
5.804
impervious surfaces and other information which will assist the
Commission in determining compliance with this Ordinance.
9) A description of any proposed use in sufficient detail to permit the
Commission to determine compliance with the performance and
trattic impact requirements set forth in Section 4.200 and the
requirements for Environmentally Sensitive Areas set forth in
Section 5. 1000.
10)
11)
12)
13)
14)
Site topographic contours shall be provided as follows:
Two foot intervals on tracts with grades of up to 5%
Five foot intervals on tracts with grades exceeding 5 %
All proposed site grading; drainage provisions; road, driveway and
parking lot construction and proposals.
A key map showing the entire project and its relation to surrounding
properties and existing building thereon.
Soils, slopes and floodplain delineations.
Certification by engineer or surveyor.
15) Certification of ownership and acknowledgment of plan by owner or
developer.
Site Design Guidelines - In addition to the requirements of Section 5.803, the
following guidelines are presented to assist the applicant in the preparation of
site and building plans and to assist the Planning Commission in the review of
all site plans.
These guidelines are divided into nine categories and are meant to encourage
creativity, innovation and well-designed developments. They not only apply
to principal buildings and structures, but also to all accessory buildings,
structures, free-standing signs and other site features.
a. Preservation of Landscape - Preserve the landscape in its natural state by
minimizing tree and soil removal. Ensure that grade changes are
compatible with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
b. Relation of Proposed Buildings to Environment - Relate proposed
structure(s) harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings that
have a visual relationship to the proposed structure(s). To achieve this
favorable relationship between existing and proposed uses, create focal
points with respect to avenues of approach, terrain features or other
82
c.
d.
e.
buildings and relate open space between all existing and proposed
buildings.
Drives. Parking and Circulation - For vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
including walkways, interior drives and parking, give special attention to
the location and number of access points to public streets, width of
interior drives and access points, general interior circulation, separation
of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, arrangement of safe and convenient
parking areas. Design these vehicular and pedestrian areas to enhance
the appearance of and access to the proposed buildings and structures
and to the neighboring properties.
Surface Water Drainage - Give special attention to proper site surface
drainage to ensure that removal of surface waters will not adversely
affect either neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system.
Remove and efficiently carry away all storm water from all roofs,
canopies and paved areas. Collect surface water in all paved areas to
permit vehicular and pedestrian movement.
Utility Service - Place electric and telephone lines underground, where
possible. Locate, paint and under take any other treatment to ensure [
that any utilities which remain above ground will have a minimal adverse
impact on neighboring properties.
f.
g.
Advertising Features - Ensure that the size, location, lighting and
materials of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising structures or
f ea tu res will enhance rather than detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
Soecial Features - Provide needed setbacks, screen plantings and other
screening methods for exposed storage areas, exposed machinery
installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and
structures and similar accessory areas and structures to help make them
compatible with the existing or contemplated site design and with
neighboring properties.
h. Performance. Traffic Impact and Environmental Requirements -
Adequately address all applicable requirements identified in Section
4.200.
i. Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance Requirements - Where the
zoning proposal requires approval under the City's Land Subdivision and
Development Ordinance, the Site Plan shall also address the major
requirements of that Ordinance.
83
l
l
I '
l
l
j
iJ
L
[J
u
l j
L
5.900 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
5.901 Screening Requirements - Adequate screening, as described herein, shall be
provided along the front, side, and rear boundaries of any industrial,
manufacturing, commercial, public or resort use which is carried on outside of
any completely enclosed building, or for any off-street parking or loading area
for more than five vehicles, which abuts a residential area or zoning district or
which is directly visible or across a street or alley from a residential area, or
along the boundaries of any other use where such screening is required by
this Ordinance.
Open construction or storage yards, Solid Waste transfer stations and
recycling centers, junk yards or similar uses shall be screened in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
Screening shall also be provided to prevent infusion of light and glare into
residential areas from outdoor lighting fixtures provided by commercial,
industrial and other operations.
The Zoning Hearing Board may waive any screening requirement, in part or in
its entirety, where natural terrain considerations eliminate the need for such a
screen or where. access considerations or adjoining development would not
substantially benefit from such a screen, as determined by the Board.
Such screening shall conform with the appHcable fence requirements of
Section 5.305 and consist of a visual screen or obstruction of sufficient
height, but not less than six feet high, to effectively obscure the area being
screened from adjoining uses. Such a screen or obstruction shall consist of a
suitable permanent fence or wall or of appropriate planting materials such as
shrubs, hedges or trees located within a buffer ·strip having a minimum width
of five feet. Such fence, wall, or planting materials shall be maintained in
good condition without any advertising thereon.
Any space between such fence, wall or planting materials and adjoining lot
lines shall be attractively surfaced and/or landscaped with grass, hardy
shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition.
5.902 Slope of Yards - The surface area of any yard of open space adjacent to a
building or structure shall be graded so that surface water will be drained
away from any such structure.
5.903 Design of Highway (Non-Residential) Development - It is the objective of this
Ordinance to encourage the orderly development of commercial, industrial,
and other non-residential parcels in a manner which will provide for proper
access and reduce traffic conflicts and provide for the health and welfare of
the population of the municipality. This shall be accomplished as follows:
84
a. The design of streets, service drives and pedestrian ways shall provide
for safe, convenient and hazard-free internal circulation of goods,
persons and vehicles.
b. Non-residential parcels shall be limited to no more than two driveway
access points from the street or highway from which they derive their
principal access and such driveway access points shall not be more than
40 feet wide and shall be designed in a manner which will minimize their
interference with any traffic movements on the street or highway.
c. Where a number of individual parcels or buildings are being developed
jointly, or where a parcel or building is being developed adjacent to
another parcel used or suitable for non-residential development
consideration shall be given to the following:
1) The location and planning of driveway access points to permit their
joint use by adjoining parcels so as to minimize the number of
intersections with the street or highway from which they derive
their access.
2) The development of parking and loading areas which permit f
convenient traffic circulation between adjoining parcels.
3) The development of pedestrian walkways between adjoining rparking
areas and buildings.
4) The provision of landscaping and other features which will enhance
the usability, character and attractiveness of the area.
5.904 Animals and Fowls - In all Zoning Districts the establishment, maintenance, I
and operation of boarding stables, dog kennels, boarding kennels, aviaries, or
similar facilities for the housing, boarding, service, treatment, care, breeding
or sale of animals and fowls is prohibited, except for animal hospitals, kennels
and veterinarian offices as set forth in Article 4 - Use Class 1 3.
Customary domestic pets and security dogs may be permitted as set forth in
Use Class 7 - "Customary Accessory Uses".
5.905 Size of Dwellings - In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare ot1
occupants residing in residential dwelling structures, the following minimum
floor areas for human habitation shall be required in all dwelling units designed
for permanent occupancy. Where a greater minimum floor area is required by
any applicable City Code or Ordinance then that higher minimum shall apply.
85
L.
.,
,
l 5.906
]
r j
0 5.907
[J
f J
0
IJ
{J
LJ
L
l
L:
No. of Bedrooms
Efficiency Unit
One Bedroom
Two Bedrooms
Three Or More Bedrooms
Minimum
Floor Area
(Square Feet)
450
575
700
800 + 100 for each additional
bedroom exceeding three
No dwelling unit shall be less than 12 feet wide.
Public Water and Sewer Facilities - All buildings within the City shall be served
with public water and sanitary sewer facilities when-available and where such
facilities are not available suitable alternate facilities meeting the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (OEP) shall be
provided.
Any residential dwelling unit not served with a Pa. DEP approved public or
private central sanitary or water supply system shall have a minimum net lot
area of at least one acre, except for existing nonconforming lots.
Prohibited Uses - The following uses shall be prohibited:
a. Prohibited Uses
1) Obscene Materials or Activities - Any use involving activities which
constitute violation of 18 Pa. C.S.A. 5903, as amended, or as
defined herein relating to display, sale, lending, distribution or
exhibiting of obscene and other sexual materials are prohibited in
every zoning district.
The exhibition or dissemination of obscene materials or activities, as
defined herein, which do not constitute a violation of 18 Pa. C.S.A.
5903, as amended, shall only be permitted in a zoning district
which clearly lists such a use, and all such uses shall be conditional
uses as defined herein.
2) Cemeteries - Cemeteries are not permitted in the City, except for
the existing cemetery located on the east side of Freeport Road.
86
ARTICLE 6 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6 .100 GENERAL PROCEDURE
l
'i
I
[l
l ~
L
{
l.
L
6.101
6.102
General Sequence of Steps - Persons desiring to undertake any new
construction, structural alteration, or changes in the use of a building or lot
shall apply to the Zoning Officer for a Zoning Permit by filling out the
appropriate application form and by submitting the required fee. Where
required, as set forth in Article 4, a Site Plan in accordance with Section
5.800 shall also be submitted with and made a part of the application.
Based on the applicable regulations of this Ordinance and, if required, after
any required review by other officials,· the Zoning Officer will either issue or
refuse the Zoning Permit and the Zoning Officer will indicate in writing any
conditions attached to the Permit or the reason for any refusal. If refused a
permit, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for further
consideration. After the Zoning Permit has been received by the applicant,
he/she may proceed to obtain other necessary permits and undertake the
action permitted by the Zoning Permit and by the other necessary permits,
and upon completion of such action, shall apply to the Zoning Officer for an
Occupancy Permit where such a permit is required. If the Zoning Officer finds
that the action of the applicant has been taken in accordance with the Zoning
Permit, he will then issue an Occupancy Permit allowing the premises to be
occupied.
Upon receipt of an application for a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall
examine the application and supporting information to determine compliance
with this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable City Ordinances, statutes and
regulations. The Zoning Officer shall complete this examination within twenty
(20) days from the date the application, was filed with the City and receipt of
all required fees . The Zoning Officer shall determine if subdivision and/or land
development approval and/or stormwater management plan approval has been
obtained, if state sanitation inspection requirements have been met, and, in
the case of public buildings, if the required permits have been issued by the
Department of Labor and Industry. No zoning permit shall be issued unless
the applicant presents the Zoning Officer with proof that any applicable
permits have been issued and all other required City approvals and permits
have been granted or issued. The Zoning Officer shall mark the application as
either approved or disapproved and shall return one copy of the application to
the applicant. The other copy shall be retained by the Zoning Officer for the
City files .
Zoning Permit Types - Under the terms of this Ordinance, the following
classes of Zoning Permits may be issued:
a. Permitted Uses - A Zoning Permit for a permitted use may be issued by
the Zoning Officer on his/her own authority.
87
b. Special Exception Use - A Zoning Permit for a Special Exception Use may
be issued by the Zoning Officer upon the order of the Zoning Hearing
Board, after a hearing, and after any required review by the Planning
Commission.
c. Conditional Use - A Zoning Permit for a Conditional Use may be issued
by the Zoning Officer upon the order of the City Council, after a hearing,
and after receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Commission ..
d. Zoning Permit After An Appeal Or a Request For A Variance - A Zoning
Permit may be issued by the Zoning_Officer upon the order of the Zoning
Hearing Board and after a hearing held by the Board for the purpose of
deciding upon the appeal or a request for a variance.
e. Temporary Use Permits - Zoning permit for a temporary use may be
issued by the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board as required by
any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
6.200 ZONING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
6.201
6.202
6.203
Applications To Zoning Officer - All applications for Zoning Permits for
Permitted, Special Exception or Conditional Uses; for Occupancy Permits, for
Certificates of Nonconforming Use, for variances, and for interpretations of
any fact or provision of this Ordinance shall be made directly to the Zoning
Officer. Such applications shall be in writing and shall include a plot plan
drawn to scale showing the location and dimensions of the lot area and of the
proposed uses of buildings and/or land and any other information required by
this Ordinance.
All applications for Special Exception or Conditional or other Uses subject to
Site Plan review as set forth in Section 5.800 shall also include the
information required therein.
The Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board or the City Council may require any
additional information deemed necessary to properly evaluate the application
for the purpose of determining its conformity with this Ordinance.
Applications to Zoning Hearing Board - All appeals where it is alleged that the
Zoning Q_fficer has made an error shall be filed directly with the Secretary
and/or Solicitor of the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeals shall be in writing
and shall explain fully the facts and particulars of the case and shall clearly
state the reasons and provisions of the Ordinance on which the appeal rs
based.
l.
f"'
l
Zoning Permits - A Zoning Permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer for [ .
the-following purposes:
88
l
l.
. ,
I
.. ,
I
' j
u
L
l
u
l.~
[ I
u
Li
l:
Li
u
6.204
a. For any erection, construction, alteration, extension, replacement,
relocation, or conversion of any building or structure or the
commencement of excavation for construction of any building or
structure;
b. For the change in use of any building, structure, sign and/or land. No
zoning permit shall be required for repairs to or maintenance of any
building, structure or land, provided such repairs do not change the use,
alter the exterior dimension of the building or structure, or otherwise
violate the provisions of this Ordinance or any other applicable City
Ordinance or applicable statute or regulation. Zoning permits shall be
issued in duplicate and one copy shall be kept conspicuously on the
premises. No person shall make any change in land use or perform the
actions described herein unless a Zoning Permit is being displayed .
Permits granted for uses of a temporary or seasonal nature may be limited to
the appropriate length of time. The Zoning Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board
or the City Council may revoke a Zoning Permit at any time if it appears that
the application is in any respect false or misleading or that work being done
upon the premises differs materially from that called for in the application .
No Zoning Permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for any Special
Exception or Variance or Appeal, except on written order of the Zoning
Hearing Board; and no Zoning Permit for a Conditional Use shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer except on written order .of the City Council; or for any
proposed construction, alteration or use that would be in violation of any
provision of this Ordinance.
Unless there has been substantial progress in the work for which a Zoning
Permit was issued, as determined by the Zoning Officer, said permit shall
expire one year from the date of issue, except that the Zoning Officer may
grant a request for a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed one year, if
warranted by the nature of the construction involved.
The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance in the case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the
permit or approval was based, or if the permit has issued in error, or if work is
not undertaken in accordance with the permit or for any other proper cause.
Permit holders shall proceed with work at their own risk and subject to the
rights of aggrieved parties to appeal the issuance of the zoning permit as
authorized by the Municipalities Planning Code.
Occupancy Permits - The purpose of an Occupancy permit is to certify that
the premises comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and may be used
for the purposes set forth in the Occupancy Permit. Prior to the use or
occupancy of any land or building, or for any change of use of any existing
89
building or for any change of use of land, an Occupancy Permit shall be
secured from the Zoning Officer. A copy of the Occupancy Permit shall be
kept upon the premises and shall be displayed upon request made by any
officer of the municipality. All applications for Occupancy Permits shall be in
writing on forms to be furnished by the Zoning Officer.
6.205 Certificate of Nonconforming Use - The registration of an existing nonconforming
use and/or structure may be requested by the owner of the
property where such a use or structure is located. Upon application by such
an owner, the Zoning Officer shall inspect and register the non- conforming
uses and/or non-conforming structures on the property.
The owner of the premises occupied by the lawful nonconforming use or
structure will then be issued a Certificate of Nonconforming Use from the
Zoning Officer. Such Certificate shall be for the purpose of certifying to the
owner his right to continue such nonconforming use or structure in
accordance with the requirements of Section 5.400.
6.300 ZONING OFFICER
6.301 Aooointment of Zoning Officer - This Ordinance shall be enforced by the
Zoning Officer who shall be appointed by City Council. Said Zoning Officer
shall not hold any elective office in the Municipality. The Zoning Officer shall
meet the qualifications established by the Municipality and shall be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of City Council a working knowledge of
municipal zoning.
..
I'
l .
l
6.302 Duties and Powers
a.
b.
c.
The Zoning Officer shall administer this Ordinance in accordance with its
literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this Ordinance.
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his employment.
l
The Zoning Officer shall receive and examine all applications required l
under the terms of this Ordinance and shall issue or refuse permits within
20 days of the receipt of the application or where applicable shall refer
said application within 20 days to the Zoning Hearing Board, City Council
and/or Planning Commission. The Zoning Officer shall issue a written
notice of violation to any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this Ordinance. He shall keep records of applications, of
permits, or certificates issued, of variances granted, of inspections made,
of reports rendered and of notice or orders issued and, where applicable
in accordance with Section 6.205, shall identify and register
L
90
nonconforming uses and structures and shall make all inspections
required to determine conformance with this Ordinance and perform all
other duties as called for in this Ordinance.
d. The Zoning Officer is specifically authorized to enter any property or
building for the purpose of investigation and enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, and may be authorized by the City Council
to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement
when acting within the scope of his/her employment.
6.400 ZONING HEARING BOARD
.
I
I !
[ 1
L
I l l l
(.
I.
I
l
l.
L
6.401 Board is Hereby Created - A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby established in
accordance with the provisions of the State Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247
as reenacted and amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
The members of the Board shall be residents of the Municipality an·d shall be
appointed by the resolution of City Council to serve for terms as prescribed in
Section 9.03 of the Municipalities Planning Code. Vacancies occurring in said
Board by expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled in the same manner.
6.402 Organization of Board - The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect officers and
conduct any hearings and take any actions required by the Ordinance and may
make rules and forms for its procedure.
6.403 Board Functions - The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct its business in
accordance with Article IX of the Municipalities Planning Code and shall be
responsible for the following :
a. To hear and decide appeals against any alleged errors or actions of the
Zoning Officer.
b. To hear and decide all requests for the interpretation of any fact or
provision of this Ordinance.
c. To hear and decide all requests for "variances".
d. To hear and decide all requests for "Special Exceptions" in accordance
with the standards and criteria set forth in this Ordinance.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board or by law, a special exception
shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning permit within six (6)
months from the date of authorization thereof by the Board or by the
Court if such special exception has been granted after an appeal, or fails
to complete any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
change in use authorized by the special exception approval within two
.(2) years from the date of authorization thereof by the Board, or by the
Court if such special exception has been granted after an appeal. The
91
,
6.404
Board, upon written application and for reasonable cause shown may
extend the approval for an additional period of up to one ( 1) year.
e. To hear and decide challenges to the validity of this Ordinance or Zoning
Map or to any procedural questions or defects which are within its
jurisdiction.
f. The preparation and submission of a report of its activities to City
Council once a year.
g. To hear and render final adjudications in any other matter for which the
Board shall have been granted jurisdiction by Article 9 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.
All findings and decisions of the Board shall be in writing and shall be
rendered within 45 days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing
Board and if the Board fails to render such a decision, then the decision shall
be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
The Board shall perform such other duties as may be provided or made
necessary by this Ordinance, or by State Act No. 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, as
reenacted and amended, including the interpretation of zoning boundaries,
the holding of hearings after proper notice, the referral of any pertinent matter
to the Planning Commission for review and recommendations. The Board
shall keep a full public record and a summary of the facts in cases over which
it has jurisdiction and shall maintain adequate records on its findings and
decisions.
Notice of Hearings - Notice of all hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be given to the public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Planning
Commission, City Council and such other persons who have made a timely
request for such notice. Such notice shall be given in accordance with the
definition for "Public Notice" set forth in Article 2.
In addition, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
6.405 Referral To Planning Commission - The Zoning Hearing Board shall refer to the
Planning Commission all applications for Special Exceptions, Conditional Uses,
requests for curative amendments and any other applications or appeals
which, in the opinion of the Zoning Hearing Board, require review by the
Planning Commission. In its review, the Planning Commission shall determine
compliance with the standards and criteria set forth in this Ordinance, and in
all cases may report in writing its findings and recommendations to the Zoning
Hearing Board or City Council within 14 days, as required by this Ordinance.
If such report is not received by the Board or by City Council within said time
92
·-
L
r
I
r
period, the Board or City Council may then proceed to final action on the
case.
6.500 VARIANCES
I
[
[
l
l
l.
{
L
6.501 Board May Authorize Variances - The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear
requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may
grant a variance provided the following findings are made where relevant in a
given case:
a. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of Jot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located;
b. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property;
c. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
d. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development
of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
e. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that
will afford relief and will ·represent the least modification possible of the
regulation in issue.
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions
and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
act and the Zoning Ordinance.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board or by law, a variance shall expire if
the applicant fails to obtain a zoning permit within six (6) months from the
date of authorization thereof by the Board or by the Court if such variance has
been granted after an appeal, or fails to complete any erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or change in use authorized by the variance approval
within two (2) years from the date of authorization thereof by the Board, or by
the Court if such variance has been granted after an appeal. The Board, upon
93
written application and for reasonable cause shown may extend the approval
for an additional period of up to one (1) year.
6 .600 CITY COUNCIL
6.601 Function of City Council - The City Council will be responsible for the
following:
a. To hear and decide all requests for "Conditional Uses" after a public
hearing and after review and/or receipt of a recommendation from the
Planning Commission in accordance with the standards and criteria set
forth in this Ordinance.
b. To hear and decide all requests for recommendations for amendments
submitted to the Municipality by the Planning Commission or any other
applicant for an amendment as set forth herein and as may be provided
for in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code State Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.
All findings and decisions of the City Council shall be in writing and shall be
rendered within 45 days after the last hearing before the City Council and if
the City Council fail to render such a decision, then the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant
has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
City Council shall perform such other duties as may be provided or made
necessary by this Ordinance, or by Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, as
amended, including the holding of hearings after proper notice and the referral
of any pertinent matter to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendations. City Council shall keep a full public record and a summary
of the facts in cases over which it has jurisdiction and shall maintain adequate
records on its findings and decisions.
6.602 Notice of Hearings - Notice of all hearings of City Council shall be given to the
public, the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Hearing Board and such other persons who have made a timely request for
such notice. Such notice shall be given in accordance with the term "Public
Notice" as defined in Article 2.
In addition, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the. hearing .
6.603 Referral To Planning Commission - City Council shall refer to the Planning
Commission all applications for Conditional Uses, and any other applications
or appeals which, in the opinion of City Council, require review by the
Planning Commission. In its review, the Planning Commission shall, in the
94
I~
l
case of Conditional Uses, determine compliance with the standards and
criteria set forth in this Ordinance, and in all cases may report in writing its
findings and recommendations to City Council within 14 days.
6.700 HEARINGS
Io
I.
L
I
I.
L
L
L
{.
6.701 Public Notice - Public Notice required for any hearings to be held by the
Zoning Hearing Board, or City Council shall be given as described in Sections
6.404 and 6.602 above.
6. 702 Date of Hearing - The hearing shall be held within sixty {60) days from the
date of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time.
6. 703 Conduct of Hearings - All hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
following:
a. The parties to the hearing shall be City Council, any party who called for
the hearing, person affected by the application who has made timely
appearance of record, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board or by City Council.
b. City Council shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
c. The parties shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
d. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply; but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
e. The Board, City Council, or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be,
shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings.
f. The Board, City Council, or the Hearing Officer shall not communicate,
directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection
with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties
to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed
and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
95
g. The Board, City Council, or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be,
shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application within forty-five (45) days after the
last hearing before the Board, City Council or Hearing Officer. Where the
application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied
by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this Ordinance
or of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to
the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. Where the Board, City Council
or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, fails to render the decision
within the period required by this subsection, or fails to hold the required
hearing within sixty days from the date of the applicant's request for a
hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of
the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record
to an extension of time.
h. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no
later than the day following the date of the decision. To all other
persons who have filed their name and address with the Board or City
Council not later than the last day of the hearing, a brief notice of the
decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or<findings may be examined shall be mailed.
6.800 AMENDMENTS
·s.801 Procedure - City Council may, on its own motion or by petition, amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this Ordinance, including the Zoning
Map. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice as required by
State Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended.
Any landowner, or the City itself may propose and prepare a "Curative
Amendment", as defined in Article II, to· the Zoning Ordinance for
r
'-·
r
L~
consideration by the City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth
in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 1
24 7, as reenacted and amended. l .
In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, City Council shall submit each amendment to the Planning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment. In all cases, City Council shall also submit any proposed
amendment to the Westmoreland County Planning Department at least 30
days prior to the public hearing on such proposed amendment. Said
submittals shall provide said Planning Agency an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
96
I l_
,
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised, or further revised, to include land previously not
affected by it, City Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to
public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment. At all public
hearings, full opportunity to be heard shall be given to any citizen and all
parties in interest.
Within thirty days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
Ordinance shall be forwarded to the Westmoreland County Planning
Commission.
6.900 APPEALS. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
l~
r~
r :
[I
[ :
[I
l.
[
l.
L
6.901 Appeals - Appeals may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board not later than
thirty days after the date of the action which is being appealed has been
made, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.
6.902 Violatjons - The construction, excavation, alteration, maintenance or use of
any structure, building, sign, land or landscaping or the change of use, area of
use, percentage of use or displacement of the use of any structure, building,
sign, land or landscaping without·first obtaining a zoning permit; or the use of
any building, structure or land without receipt of a certificate of use and
occupancy; or the use or maintenance of any building, structure, sign or land
for a use or in a manner which is not in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance; or the use of property for the use different from that set forth in
any zoning permit of certificate of use and occupancy which has been granted
for the property without applying for and being granted a zoning permit and
certificate of use and occupancy for such new or different use; or the failure
to comply with any other provisions of this Ordinance; or the violation of any
conditions imposed upon the grant of a special exception or variance by the
Zoning Hearing Board or a conditional use by City Council or by a Court of
competent jurisdiction if a special exception, variance or conditional use is
granted by such Court are hereby declared to be violations of this Zoning
Ordinance.
97
6.903 Enforcement Notice
a. If it appears to City Council that a violation of this Ordinance has
occurred, the City shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this Ordinance.
b. Tha enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel
on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and
to any other person so requested in writing by the owner of record.
c. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the City intends to take action.
The location of the property in violation.
The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this Ordinance.
The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board within a period of ten days.
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes
a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
6.904 Causes of Action - In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is
proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted,
maintained or used in violation of this Ordinance, City Council or, with the
approval of City Council, an officer of the City, or any aggrieved owner or
tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or
about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice
of that action shall be served upon the City at least thirty days prior to the
time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint to City Council.
No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
98
l
I•
I
l.
r
l I
( !
[J
6.905 Enforcement Remedies
a. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the City, pay a judgment of not more than five hundred dollars plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City as a
result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the City may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice 'determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this Ordinance to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be paid over to the City.
b. The Westmoreland County Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may
grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine
pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
c. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the City the right to commence
any action for enforcement pursuant to this Section.
L 6. 1000 FILING FEES
L
L
L
l ~
L
Filing fees for the review and processing of applications for Zoning Permits, Occupancy
Permits, requests for variances, amendments or appeals, Certificate for Registration of
Nonconforming Uses, and other related matters to determine compliance with this
Ordinance shall be charged to the Applicant in accordance with Appendix A attached
hereto. Said Appendix A may be amended from time to time by City Council by
ordinance or resolution.
99
APPENDIX A
ZONING REVIEW FEES
CITY OF ARNOLD, WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PA
Adopted by Ordinance and/or Resolution dated February 10, 1998.
In accordance with Section 6.1000 of the City of Arnold Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer
shall levy "Filing Fees" to cover the reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the City for
reviewing and processing all applications for Zoning Permits, Occupancy Permits, Certificate for
Registration of Nonconforming Uses, requests for variances, amendments or appeals, Public
Hearings, interpretations and other related Zoning matters, and for determining compliance with
this Ordinance, as required herein. Such fees shall be payable by the Applicant at the office of
! ·the Zoning Officer or City Clerk.
I
\
A. Zoning Permits ·and Applications - Applications for Zoning Permits or other actions shall
l.
l
L
L
L
l ' -.
'•
IL
.11 ·:
B.'
1 ·
L
L
L
be required to pay the following fees:
1 . Zoning Permit for a Permitted Use:
2. Zoning Application requiring one special Zoning Board or
City Council meeting and/or a Public Hearing and
3.
4.
5.
6 • .,
action by either body. The Zoning Application may include
the following:
a. Permits for "Special or Conditional Uses"
b. Request for Amendment
c. Request for Variances
d. Appeals for alleged errors
Occupancy Permits
Certificate and Registration of Nonconforming Uses
Request for Interpretation (not requiring Public Hearing)
Application for Permits for Home Occupations, signs and fences
$ 25
$200
$200
$200
$200
$ 25
$ 25
$ 25
$ 25
Special Review Fees - In the event that any applications of the type listed under
Section A.2 above require more than one meeting and/or public hearing by the Zoning
Hearing Board or City Council, then additional reasonable fees may be prescribed by
the City for the necessary compensation for the Secretary and Members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative overhead
connected with the hearing, in accordance with the requirements of Section 908 of the
PA Municipalities Code.
101
C. Basis for Fees - The above fees are necessary to pay for the cost of advertisements,
recordance and minutes, administration by Zoning Officer, review by Planning
Commission, legal fees and other expenses.
Fees for a required stenographic record of the proceedings and for the cost of
transcripts shall be shared by the City Council and the applicant as also set forth in
Section 908 of the PA Municipalities Code.
The Applicant may dispute the amount of such fees in accordance with the
requirements of Section 503(1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.
102
