ROSTER OF CITY OFFICIALS
City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
January 2017
Elective Officials
Robert J. Donchez Mayor
George Yasso Controller
Kaija L. Farber Treasurer
Members of City Council
J. William Reynolds, President
Bryan G. Callahan
Michael G. Colón
Eric R. Evans
Shawn M. Martell
Olga Negrón
Adam R. Waldron, Vice-President
Appointive Officials
Louise M. Kelchner City Clerk
John F. Spirk, Jr., Esq. City Council Solicitor
William P. Leeson, Esq. City Solicitor
David L. Brong Business Administrator
Michael Alkhal Director of Public Works
Warren Achey Fire Chief
Mark A. DiLuzio Police Chief
Edward J. Boscola Director of Water and Sewer Resources
Alicia Karner Director of Community and Economic Development
Darlene L. Heller Planning Director
Kristen J. Wenrich Health Bureau Director
1
BILL NO. 34 -2017
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-34
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM,
COUNTIES OF LEHIGH AND NORTHAMPTON,
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA,
ESTABLISHING AN OPEN DATA PROGRAM AND OPEN DATA ONLINE PORTAL
WHEREAS, the City Council (“City Council”) of the City of Bethlehem, (“City”) and
the City administration (“Administration”), under the leadership of the Mayor, express their joint
support for creating a more open, accountable, and accessible City government through the
development and implementation of a financially and operationally feasible open data program,
including the proactive publication of certain government information on a freely accessible
open data online portal;
WHEREAS, pursuant to the Bethlehem Charter Commission Report of Findings and
Recommendation, dated July 27, 1959, which sets forth the City’s current form of government,
City Council is authorized to establish policies by which the City is governed;
WHEREAS, the Pennsylvania Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. §§67.101 et seq., as amended,
creates a presumption in favor of transparency and public access to certain government
documents and the City of Bethlehem, Office of Open Records Right-to-Know Law Policy,
dated April 13, 2016, as amended, governs release of certain City information in response to
right to know requests from the public;
WHEREAS, municipalities in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and throughout the
country have implemented open data programs to promote certain policy objectives, which the
City Council and Mayor hereby support, including program elements designed to: Increase
government accountability, transparency, accessibility and foster greater civic engagement and
participation in government; Improve municipal services and coordination among city agencies
through data sharing and related applications; and Promote efficient use of City resources and tax
revenue;
WHEREAS, City Council and Mayor believe that establishment of a robust open data
program will advance the City’s strategic goals by improving the City’s capacity to develop and
implement informed, evidence-based public policy and operating strategies, to collect, analyze,
and synthesize information and utilize data analytics, and to better measure the effectiveness of
municipal programs and services;
WHEREAS, open data programs can stimulate economic development, entrepreneurship,
and community-based research by allowing data to be assembled, visualized, and analyzed in
innovative ways for businesses, consumers, and researchers, by providing opportunities for data
sharing partnerships between local government, educational institutions, non-profits, and the
private sector, and by facilitating development of new applications and tools to collect, organize,
and share public data for the benefit of City residents and the general public, and City Council
and the Mayor support these policy objectives; and
Ord. 2017-34
2
WHEREAS, implementation of this open data program must be balanced with the City’s
need to operate in an efficient and cost-effective manner and its important obligations to comply
with applicable law and regulation, to protect private and confidential information, and to ensure
public safety; therefore, adoption of this Ordinance and implementation of the program is neither
intended nor to be interpreted to alter, narrow or invalidate exceptions and exemptions from
disclosure of records under the Pennsylvania Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. §§67.101 et seq., as
amended, or any other Law and/or Policy as defined in this Ordinance.
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS.
A. City Department or Department - any City of Bethlehem department, bureau, office,
administrative unit, or agency, but excluding the Law Bureau and all authorities,
commissions, advisory committees, and quasi-public corporations.
B. Contractor - means the third party contractor that creates or acquires Data, Datasets or
any element thereof on behalf of the City or any Department.
C. Data - means up-to-date final versions of statistical or factual information that (i) are in
alphanumeric form reflected in a list, table, graph, chart or other non-narrative form, that
can be digitally transmitted or processed; and (ii) are regularly created or maintained by
or on behalf of a Department and are controlled by such Department; and (iii) record a
measurement, transaction or determination related to the mission of such Department.
The term “Data” shall not include information provided to a Department by other
governmental entities, image files, such as designs, drawings, photos or scanned copies of
original documents, Word documents, whether draft or final, emails, working papers, or
documents with similar purpose.
D. Dataset - means a named collection of related records, with the collection containing
Data organized or formatted in a consistent, specific or prescribed way, often in tabular
form.
E. Effective Date - The date on which this Ordinance takes effect pursuant to the “Third
Class City Code" meaning the Act of June 28, 1951, P.L. 662, as amended.
F. Law and/or Policy - Any provision of a federal, state or local law, rule, regulation or
City Policy governing the release or prohibited disclosure of information, including
without limitation, the Pennsylvania Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. §§67.101 et seq., as
amended (“PA RTK Law”), the City of Bethlehem, Office of Open Records Right-to-
Know Law Policy, dated April 13, 2016, as amended (“City RTK Policy”), and any other
City policy.
G. Metadata - means descriptions of the content or context of a given Dataset that makes it
easier to understand and use, including, but not limited to, title, description, tags, date the
Data was last updated, frequency of publication, format, field names and explanations,
departmental origin and contact information.
Ord. 2017-34
3
H. Open Data - means Data, a Dataset or any element thereof, that is published on the Open
Data Portal (defined below), in Open Format, with no legal restrictions on use or reuse
unless otherwise required by law or contract, and is available for all to access and
download in full without fees or registration requirements.
I. Open Format - means any widely accepted, nonproprietary, searchable, platformindependent,
machine-readable method for formatting data which permits automated
processing of such data and facilitates analysis and search capabilities.
J. Publishable Data - Data which is not Protected Information or Sensitive Information and
which has been prepared for release to the public on the Open Data Portal.
K. Protected Information - means any Data, Dataset or portion thereof determined by the
Chief Data Officer not in the best interests of the City to release. Release of Protected
Information shall be subject to the discretion of the Chief data Officer after consultation
with the applicable Open Data Coordinators and affected Departments. Protected
information includes, but is not limited to, the following: (1) Any Data, Dataset or
portion thereof to which a Department may deny access pursuant to applicable Law
and/or Policy; (2) any Data or Dataset, or portion thereof, that contains a significant
amount of Data to which the City may deny access pursuant to applicable Law and/or
Policy, if the removal of such Protected Information from the Dataset would impose an
undue financial or administrative burden on the City; (3) Data that reflects the internal
deliberative process of a Department, including but not limited to opinions, mental
impressions, strategy, draft documents, internal discussions pertaining to procedures and
time tables to be followed, negotiating positions, future procurements, or pending or
reasonably anticipated legal or administrative proceedings; (4) Data stored on a Cityowned
personal computing device, or data stored on a portion of a network that has been
exclusively assigned to a single Department employee or a single Department-owned or
controlled computing device; (5) Materials subject to copyright, patent, trademark,
confidentiality agreements or trade secret protection; (6) Proprietary applications,
computer code, software, operating systems or similar materials; (7) Employment
records, internal employee-related directories or lists, and facilities data, information
technology, internal service-desk and other data related to internal Department
administration; (8) Legacy data: Any public data set that, due to its size or complexity, or
due to technology constraints, cannot be made available on the Open Data Portal without
creating a material administrative or financial burden for the City, shall be classified as
legacy data; (9) Any Data, Dataset or portion thereof which contains any personally
identifiable information or financial identifying information that can be associated with a
particular individual through one or more identifiers or other information or
circumstances and specifically includes, but is not limited to, a private individual’s home
address, personal electronic mail address, personal telephone number, social security
number, credit card information, and/or driver’s license number; or (10) criminal
investigative materials, notes, correspondence, reports, recordings, and/or evidence
associated with any criminal investigation regardless of whether charges are filed.
Ord. 2017-34
4
L. Sensitive Information - means any Data, Dataset or element thereof which, if published
online or otherwise released, could raise privacy, confidentiality or security concerns or
have the potential to jeopardize public health, safety or welfare to an extent that is greater
than the potential public benefit of publishing that data.
SECTION 2. OPEN DATA PROGRAM.
A. The City shall develop an open data program (“Open Data Program”) pursuant to this
ordinance (“Ordinance”) and implement policies and practices to accomplish the
following policy objectives:
1. Proactively release high quality Publishable Data, with Metadata, making it freely
available, in the public domain, in appropriately varied and useful Open Formats, and
fully accessible to the broadest range of users to use for varying purposes to
encourage maximum use;
2. Establish and maintain, directly or through a third party, an open data web portal that
provides a central location for published Open Data (“Open Data Portal”);
3. Minimize limitations on the disclosure of otherwise public information, while
appropriately safeguarding public safety, confidentiality, Protected Information, and
Sensitive Information, and while ensuring that any published Open Data complies
with applicable Law and/or Policy;
4. Encourage innovative uses of the City’s Open Data by City Departments, the public,
educational institutions, researchers, non-profits, private sector entities, and City
contractors and work to generate economic development opportunities through the
release and utilization of Open Data;
5. Proactively seek out partnerships to encourage the development of new software
applications and tools to collect, organize, and share Open Data; and
6. Balance release of useful information with the needs of the City to conduct operations
in an efficient and cost-effective manner.
B. The requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to all Departments as defined in section
1.A of this Ordinance.
SECTION 3. GOVERNANCE OF OPEN DATA PROGRAM.
A. Program Administration; Chief Data Officer. Development, implementation, and
operation of the Open Data Program will be managed by the by the Chief Data Officer
(defined below), who will collaborate with the City Departments and oversee the Open
Data Management Team (defined below).Within ninety (90) days of the Effective Date,
the Mayor shall designate a “Chief Data Officer” who shall report to the City Business
Administrator, unless directed otherwise by the Mayor.
Ord. 2017-34
5
B. Open Data Management Team. Within ninety (90) days of the Effective Date, the
Mayor shall establish an “Open Data Management Team” chaired by the Chief Data
Officer, consisting of the following individuals: (a) Chief Data Officer; (b) a
representative from each Department, and City bureau, if appropriate, appointed by the
Mayor (each an “Open Data Coordinator”); (c) Two (2) individuals designated by City
Council, at least one (1) of which is a City Council member; and (e) an attorney from the
City Solicitor’s office. The Open Data Management Team shall meet at least once
quarterly, or more often as may be necessary, as determined by the City Business
Administrator or Chief Data Officer.
C. Open Data management Team Responsibilities. The Chief Data Officer shall manage
the Open Data Management Team to ensure the performance of the following Open Data
Program functions and operations:
1. Implementation Plan. Submit an Open Data Program implementation plan
(“Implementation Plan”) to the Mayor and City Council, within one (1) year of the
Effective Date, which shall include detailed departmental action items and timelines
for developing and implementing processes, policies, and procedures necessary to
support the Open Data Program in in accordance with this Ordinance.
2. Data Catalogue. Oversee the creation and periodic update of a “Data Catalogue”
meaning a comprehensive inventory of potential City Datasets possessed, controlled,
or managed by each Department that could feasibly be published on the Open Data
Portal.
3. Open Data Policy. Prepare a comprehensive “Open Data Policy” document,
incorporating operationally and financially reasonable procedures, practices,
processes, and technical standards to achieve the objectives of the Open Data
Program, adapted to the City’s needs and operating constraints, which shall be
reviewed with reasonable frequency for appropriate revision.
4. Risk Assessment and Management; Privacy protection. In collaboration with the
City Solicitor: (a) Develop, document, and implement a process for determining the
relative level of risk and public benefits associated with potentially releasing
Publishable Data to make determinations about whether and how to publish such
information on the Open Data Portal; (b) Ensure that the City is reasonably insured
for potential liabilities associated with operation of the Open Data Program; (c)
Develop, document, and implement an ongoing privacy risk mitigation process to
reasonably minimize privacy risks and legal liability related to publication of Open
Data; (d) Ensure that the Open data Program continually complies with applicable
Law and/or Policy.
5. Release Factors and Prioritization. Develop, document, and implement a process
for prioritizing potential publication of Datasets which takes into account factors such
as: (i) whether publication improves public knowledge of City operations, aligns
with City strategic priorities, increases accountability, improves efficiency and
responsiveness of City services; (ii) whether publication increases availability of
Ord. 2017-34
6
information commonly requested by the public; (iii) whether the financial and
operational costs of releasing such information outweigh the public benefit derived
from the potential release; and (iv) any other reasonable factors developed by the
Open Data Management Team from time to time.
6. Release Timeline. Develop a routinely updated, public timeline for new Dataset
publication.
7. Publication Logistics. Develop, document, and implement processes for publishing
Datasets to the Open Data Portal, including processes for coordinating with
Contractors, if any, and any third-party entities providing Open Data Portal services
to the City.
8. Outreach. Develop and implement a process for proactively collaborating with and
soliciting feedback from members of the public, Department staff, Contractors, if any,
and other stakeholders to identify demand for particular high-value Datasets.
9. Contracting; Procurement Policies. Where operationally and financially feasible,
the Chief Data Officer shall coordinate with the City Purchasing Department, the City
Solicitor, and other appropriate City Departments to develop rules for including open
data requirements in applicable City contracts and standard contract provisions that
promote the City's open data policies, including, where appropriate, provisions to
ensure that the City retains ownership of Contractor-produced or controlled Data and
the ability to post such data on the Open Data Portal or make it available through
other means. The foregoing shall not prohibit the negotiation of contract terms which
do not include open data requirements where deemed appropriate by the
Administration or the City Solicitor to conform to the exceptions and exemptions
from disclosure under applicable Law and/or Policy or to protect a vendor’s or a
contractor’s intellectual property rights or proprietary interests.
10. Partnership and Funding opportunities; Employee Education. In order to
facilitate program improvement and sustainability, actively seek out institutional
partnerships, funding, and capacity-building opportunities such as grants and
technical assistance programs and identify and fund reasonable open data educational
opportunities for City employees with open data responsibilities.
11. Other Responsibilities. Perform any other tasks reasonably necessary for the
implementation, resourcing, and long-term maintenance of a robust and sustainable
open data program.
SECTION 4. ONLINE PORTAL.
A. Open Data Online Portal; Updates. A single web portal (“Open Data Portal”) shall be
(i) established and maintained by or on behalf of the City to publish Open Data. The
Open Data Portal shall be administered by the Chief Data Officer or as otherwise
determined by the City Business Administrator. To the extent that applicable City
Departments regularly maintain or update such information, published Datasets shall be
Ord. 2017-34
7
updated periodically with reasonable frequency, using automated processes when
practical, including real-time data when practical, in order to preserve the integrity and
usefulness of such information.
B. Portal Features. The Open Data Portal shall include at least the following features: (i) a
list of all Datasets currently available on the portal; (ii) a mechanism for online public
feedback and for submission of recommendations for publishing additional Datasets; and
(iii) System tracking of user website behavior and other analytics to facilitate generation
of usage metrics for ongoing program improvement.
SECTION 5. OPEN DATA REPORT AND PROGRAM REVIEW.
A. Open Data Report. Within one (1) year of the Effective Date, and thereafter at least
annually, the Chief Data Officer shall submit to the Mayor and City Council an
“Open Data Report” which shall at least include the following elements: (1)
assessment of progress towards achievement of Open Data Program goals and
Implementation Plan action items; (2) comments on the state of open data availability
from the previous year; (3) open data program plan for the subsequent year to
improve public access to open data, maintain and improve data quality, and improve
open data collaboration between City Departments; (4) a list of currently published
Datasets and Datasets targeted for release in the next year; (5) estimated program
funding requirements for the next year; (6) discussion of open data education
completed and planed for the upcoming year; and (7) discussion of efforts to engage
in data sharing and open data internal capacity-building partnerships; (8) discussion
of efforts to seek out grant and other potential outside funding opportunities; (9)
discussion of progress creating and/or revising key open data program documents,
such as the Open Data Policy, during the prior year and plans for creating and/or
revising such documents during the next year in response to significant legal and/or
policy developments, if any; and (10) suggestions for improving the City’s open data
management processes in order to ensure that the City continues to move forward in
achieving the policy goals of the Open Data Program.
SECTION 6. LEGAL PROVISIONS; ONLINE TERMS OF USE AND DISCLAIMERS
A. Open Data Portal Terms of Use and Disclaimers. The Open Data Management
Team shall collaborate with the City Solicitor to develop and periodically update
appropriate legal provisions for display on the Open Data Portal, including without
limitation, terms of use, disclaimers, and privacy policy language. Such provisions
shall indicate, but not be limited to advisories of the following nature:
1. the Open Data published on the Open Data Portal is provided for
informational purposes only.
2. the City does not warranty the completeness, accuracy, content or fitness for
any particular purpose or use of any Open Data made available on the Open
Data Portal;
Ord. 2017-34
8
3. there are no express or implied warranties, or warranties to be inferred with
respect to the Open Data or the Portal itself.
4. the City is not liable for any deficiencies in the completeness, accuracy,
content or fitness for any particular purpose or use of, or detrimental reliance
upon, any Open Data, or application utilizing such data provided by any third
party.
5. the City assumes no liability for any virus or other damage to any computer or
information technology system that might occur during or as a result of
accessing the Open Data or Portal or information re-published therefrom.
B. No private right of action. This Ordinance shall not create any private rights or any
private right of action to enforce its provisions. Failure to comply with this Ordinance
shall not result in any liability to the City, its employees, agents, contractors, or
counterparties to any data-sharing or other agreements.
C. Immunities and defenses preserved. Nothing in this Ordinance or any City policy
or act attributable to a City official or employee shall be construed to waive any
privilege, right, defense, or immunity arising out of any applicable governmental
immunity laws, statutes, rules, regulations, or common law.
D. Discontinuance of Data; Voluntary Release. The City reserves the right to amend
or discontinue any policy or practice regarding availability of any content on the
Open Data Portal, and to withdraw any data published on the Open Data Portal, at
any time and for any reason. Subject to applicable Law and/or Policy, nothing in this
Ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit a City Department from voluntarily disclosing
information not otherwise defined by this Ordinance.
E. No Intellectual Property Rights Granted. No user of the Open Data Portal or any
Open Data, nor any recipient of data from the Portal, whether acquired directly or
indirectly, shall acquire or have intellectual property rights or proprietary interests in
the Open Data or any other information or element thereof published on the Open
Data Portal, including without limitation any written materials, logos, trademarks,
trade names, copyrights, patent applications, patents, know-how, trade secrets or
moral rights. The City reserves the right to claim or seek to protect any patent,
copyright, trademark, or other intellectual property rights in any of the information,
images, software, or processes displayed or used on the Open Data Portal.
F. No Partnership. No use of Open Data shall be deemed to constitute a partnership or
joint venture between the user and the City or between a third party and the City.
SECTION 7. MISCELLANEOUS
A. City Rules and Regulations. The Mayor, the Administration, and the City
Departments shall have the authority to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations,
from time to time, to implement and enforce the requirements of this Ordinance.
Ord. 2017-34
9
SECTION 8. REPEALER
That all ordinances and sections thereof that are inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby
repealed.
Sponsored by: /s/ Eric R. Evans
/s/ Shawn M. Martell
PASSED finally in Council on this 8th day of November, 2017.
/s/ J. William Reynolds
President of Council
ATTEST:
/s/ Louise M. Kelchner
City Clerk
This Ordinance approved this this 9th day of November, 2017.
/s/ Robert J. Donchez
Mayor
ARTICLE 1301
TITLES, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
1301.01 Title
A Zoning Ordinance regulating and restricting the height, location, size and
use of buildings and/or land in the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, the
areas to be occupied by buildings in proportion to the size of the lots upon
which they stand: the size of yards and other open spaces appurtenant
thereto and the density of population, and for these purposes establishing
districts and boundaries, and other uses within such districts and
boundaries and providing for the appointment of a Zoning Hearing Board,
and setting forth the duties and functions of said Board and providing for
administration, charges and enforcement of this Ordinance and providing
penalties for violation thereof.
1301.02 Short Title
This Zoning Code shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania." It is also hereinafter
referred to as Zoning Ordinance.
1301.03 Purpose
The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is to promote the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare by:
(a) Encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
(b) Preventing the overcrowding of land.
(c) Conserving the value of land and buildings.
(d) Lessening the congestion of traffic on the roads.
(e) Avoiding undue congestion of population.
(f) Providing for adequate light and air.
(g) Securing safety from fire, flood and other dangers.
(h) Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public facilities.
(i) Giving reasonable consideration, among other things, to the
character of districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses.
(j) Guiding and regulating the orderly growth, development, and
redevelopment of the city in accordance with the adopted
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Bethlehem which contains the
long-term objectives, principles and standards deemed beneficial to
the interests and welfare of the people.
1301.04 Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall be controlling.
1301.05 Separability
It is hereby declared to the legislative intent that:
(a) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this
Ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are
expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all
other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue to be separately
and fully effective.
(b) If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any
provision or provisions of this Ordinance to any lot, building, or other
structure, or tract of land, to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in
part, the effect of such decisions shall be limited to the person,
property, or situation immediately involved in the controversy, and
the application of any such provision to other persons, property or
situations shall not be affected.
1301.06 Application to Public Utility Corporations
This Ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof,
used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if upon petition of the corporation, the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing decide that the present
or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the
convenience or welfare of the public.
ARTICLE 1302
DEFINITIONS
1302.01 General
(a) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this Ordinance to have the meanings
herein indicated:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership,
association and individual.
(4) The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
(5) The word "lot" includes the word "parcel", "tract", or "plot".
(6) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or
building shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
(7) The word "City" means the City of Bethlehem, Lehigh and
Northampton Counties, Pennsylvania; the terms "Council",
"Zoning Board", "Planning Commission" mean respectively,
the City Council, the Zoning Hearing Board and the City
Planning Commission of the City. County refers to Lehigh
County and/or Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
(8) All definitions stated in Article II of the Subdivision and
Development Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem, as
amended, shall represent the usage of those words when
used in this Ordinance.
1302.02 Accessory Building or Use
A subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and located on the
same lot occupied by the main use or building. The term "Accessory
Building" may include a private garage, garden shed or barn, private
playhouse, private greenhouse, private swimming pool, guesthouse,
caretaker's cottage, or servants' quarters, as hereinafter provided.
Where any part of the wall of an accessory building is part of the wall of a
main building, or where the accessory building is attached to the main
building by a roof, including carports however covered, such accessory
building shall be deemed part of the main building.
1302.03 Alley
A public right-of-way having a right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet or less,
which affords a secondary means of access to the rear or side of abutting
property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. Regardless of
whether an alley is given a street name, no main building shall have its
frontage on an alley.
1302.04 Alteration
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another,
or conversion of one use to another by virtue of interior change.
1302.05 Basement
A floor level partly or completely below grade. A basement shall be
considered a story if more than one-third of the perimeter walls are five (5)
feet or more above the finished grade level of the ground immediately
adjacent to the walls.
1302.06 Bed and Breakfast Home
A single family detached residence, owner-occupied, which may provide
overnight lodging and serve breakfast to transient guests.
1302.07 Boarding or Rooming House
A dwelling in which at least two rooms are offered for rent, payable in
money or other consideration, whether or not meals are furnished to lodgers
and in which no transients are accommodated and no public restaurant is
maintained. A school or college dormitory, fraternity or sorority house,
membership club with residents, and other similar uses are not deemed as
a boarding or rooming house.
1302.08 Billboard
Any sign used to identify the product made or the activity being pursued by
any individual, business, service, commercial or industrial enterprise, for the
purpose of informing the public of the location of such enterprise and/or the
type of activity in which it is engaged.
1302.09 Buffer Yard
Strips of land planted with trees, shrubs and lawns and/or fenced or walled,
which serve to separate incompatible uses or zoning districts. See also
"Screen or Screening", Section 1302.78.
1302.10 Building
A structure constructed or erected on the ground, with a roof supported by
columns or walls. Structures divided by unpierced masonry division walls
extending from the ground to the roof shall be deemed to be separate
buildings.
(a) Detached Building - Any structure, having a roof supported column
or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or chattels, which is surrounded by open space on
the same lot and which has no party, or division wall in common with
any other building.
(b) Completely Enclosed Building - A building separated on all sides
from adjacent open space, or from other buildings, by fixed exterior
walls or party walls, pierced only by windows, entrance or exit doors,
and covered by a permanent roof.
1302.11 Front of Building
The wall of a building most nearly parallel with and adjacent to the front
of the lot on which it is situated.
1302.12 Main Building
A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
situated. In any residential zone, a dwelling shall be deemed a main
building on the lot on which the same is located, unless otherwise provided
for elsewhere in this Zoning Code.
1302.13 Building Area
The aggregate of the ground floor area of all enclosed and roofed spaces of
the principal building and all accessory buildings. Such area shall be
computed by using the outside building dimensions of each building
measured on a horizontal plane at floor level. The area of any roof or any
portion thereof which is at ground level or which has direct access to ground
level and which further provides usable plaza, park and/or other open area
shall not be considered in calculating building area.
1302.14 Building Line or Building Setback Line
The line between which, and the street or lot line, no building or other
structure or portion thereof, except as provided in this Zoning Code, may be
erected above grade level. The building line is considered a vertical surface
intersecting the ground on such line.
1302.15 Building Permit
See 1302.99 - Zoning and Building Permit.
1302.16 Bulk
The size and shape of building uses, and the exterior relationship of their
exterior walls, or their location, to lot lines and other buildings or other walls
of the same building; and all open spaces required in connection with a
building. Bulk regulations include regulations dealing with lot area, lot are
per dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot width, height, required yards, courts,
usable open space, floor area ratio, spacing between buildings on a single
lot, and the length of buildings in a row.
1302.17 Business Office
A business establishment which does not offer a product or merchandise for
sale to the public. Personal services such as barber and beauty shops and
repair services are not deemed a business office.
1302.17A B.Y.O.B. Club
“B.Y.O.B. Cub” means any business facility such as a dance hall, club or
association not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, wherein
patrons twenty-one (21) years of age and older may, after payment of an
entry fee, cover charge or membership fee, consume alcoholic beverages
which said patrons have carried onto the premises; also commonly referred
to as “Bring Your Own Bottle” clubs; provided that a facility which is rented
for a limited period of time, not to exceed six (6) hours, by individual(s) or an
organization for the purpose of a private party in which alcoholic beverages
are carried onto the premises shall not be considered a B.Y.O.B club under
the terms of this Ordinance. B.Y.O.B. club shall not include a restaurant as
defined in Section 1302.75, as amended, of the Codified Ordinances of the
City of Bethlehem.
1302.18 Cellar
A basement having more than one-half (1/2) its height, measured from floor
to ceiling, below the average finished grade level of the ground immediately
adjacent to the building.
1302.19 Certificate of Occupancy
A certificate issued by the Bureau of Inspections upon completion of
construction or alteration of a building or upon approval of a change in
occupancy or use of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge
compliance with requirements of this Ordinance, such adjustments thereto
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, and/or all other applicable
requirements. (See Bill No. 18 - 1970, Ordinance No. 2197).
1302.20 Church
A building used for public worship.
1302.21 Commercial Vehicle
Any motor vehicle which is required by law to bear any license plate other
than that issued for passenger car use. Also, any motor vehicle including
passenger cars which by reason of a characteristic coloring, or marking
exceeding one (1) square foot in area is identified or commonly associated
with any business, industry, or public agency, shall be considered a
commercial vehicle within the terms of this Ordinance. Other passenger
cars used in business by a resident shall not be considered a commercial
vehicle.
1302.22 Comprehensive Plan
The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Bethlehem.
1302.23 Construction Area.
For the purposes of Section 1318.29 entitled "Development Standards for
Steep Slopes", "construction area" shall mean the total land areas proposed
to be used for and/or within 20 feet of any and all of the following proposed
features:
(a) Principal and accessory buildings.
(b) Gravel or paved areas (including driveways) other than walkways.
(c) Areas proposed to be graded.
1302.24 Convalescent Home
A building in which persons are housed or lodged and furnished with
nursing care for hire, also known as a nursing home.
1302.25 Courts
An unobstructed open area, bounded on three (3) or more sides by the
walls of a building or buildings. It does not include any such area with no
windows opening upon it except windows on a stairway.
1302.26 Curb Level
The mean curb level as established by Council or, in the absence of an
established curb level, the mean level of the existing curb or of the lot at the
street line.
1302.27 Dump
A lot or part thereof used primarily for disposal by abandonment, dumping,
burial, burning, incineration, or any other means for whatever purpose, of
garbage, offal, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts
thereof, or waste materials of any kind.
1302.28 Dustless Surface
An adequate covering or paving with concrete, bituminous products, or
screenings, stone, or gravel, and maintained in good condition at all times.
1302.29 Dwelling
A building used as a residence.
(a) Single Family Detached - A building with one (1) dwelling unit, and
having no party wall in common with an adjacent building.
(b) Single Family Attached (Townhouse or Row House) - A building on
a single lot which has two (2) party walls in common with adjacent
buildings, on adjacent lots, except for end buildings in a row, which
have only one (1) party wall.
(c) Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling - A one (1) family building on
a single lot having one (1) party wall in common with an adjacent
one-family building on an adjoining lot.
(d) Two Family - A building used for two (2) dwelling units or two (2)
buildings separated by a common wall, each used for one (1)
dwelling unit.
(e) Two Family Semi-Detached - A two (2) family building on a single lot
having one (1) party wall in common with an adjacent two-family
building on an adjoining lot, with one (1) living over the other, the two
buildings together, however, accommodating but four (4) families,
two (2) families living on either side of the party wall.
(f) Multi-Family - A building used for three (3) or more dwelling units
provided the multiple family dwelling or dwellings are in one (1)
ownership.
(1) Garden Apartment - A multi-family dwelling located on a
landscaped lot which provides off-street parking, common
open space, and other services to its tenants. Garden
Apartments shall not exceed three and one-half (3 1/2)
stories in height.
(2) Elevator (High-Rise) Apartment - A multi-family dwelling
more than three and one-half (3 1/2) stories in height and in
one (1) ownership.
(3) Condominium - A multi-family dwelling in which the individual
units of the multi-dwelling unit structure are separately
owned. The grounds, however, shall be owned and
maintained and the structures shall be maintained by a
single corporation or management.
1302.30 Dwelling Unit
One (1) or more rooms with provision for cooking, living, sleeping and
sanitary facilities arranged for the use of one (1) family.
1302.31 Family
One (1) or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit and using
cooking facilities and certain rooms in common.
1302.32 Fence
An artificially constructed barrier of manufactured material or combination of
materials erected for enclosure of yard areas, storage areas, parking areas
and for screening.
1302.33 Filling or Service Station
A building or a lot or part thereof having pumps and storage tanks for the
retail sale of motor fuels, petroleum products and other accessories for
motor vehicles, including facilities for polishing, lubricating, washing,
cleaning and minor repairs, but not including storage or parking space
offered for rent, except in an industrial district.
1302.34 Flood - A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
(a) Flood Plain
(1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete
inundation.
(2) An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source. For the purpose of
this Ordinance, the 100-Year Flood Plain as defined in the
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Bethlehem prepared by
the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(b) Floodway
The designated area of a flood plain required to carry and discharge
flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood
of the one hundred (100) year magnitude without raising the 100-
year flood elevation more than one (1) foot. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, the floodway and approximated flood plains, as defined
in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and Floodway Data Table
prepared by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
(c) Flood Fringe
That portion of the flood plain outside the floodway.
(d) One Hundred Year Flood
A flood that has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
(e) Regulatory Flood
The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which
the flood plain management provisions of this and other ordinances
have been prepared; for purposes of this Ordinance, the One
Hundred Year Flood.
(f) Regulatory Flood Elevation
For purposes of this Ordinance, the 100-Year Flood Elevation.
(g) Floodproofing
Any combination of structural and non-structural additional,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
1302.35 Floor Area
The sum of the gross areas of the floors of every story of a building
measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of
common or party walls separating two (2) buildings. Regardless of the
internal arrangement of a building, it shall be deemed to have at least one
(1) story for each twenty (20) feet of height or fraction thereof.
1302.36 Floor Area Ratio
The total floor area of a building divided by the area of the lot on which it is
located.
1302.37 Garage
A building or part thereof used for the storage of one (1) or more vehicles.
(a) Community or Public Garage. One (1) or more garages other than a
private garage used for compensation. Only facilities for washing
tenant's cars may be permitted.
(b) Private Garage. A garage owned and used by the owner or tenant
of the premises.
(c) Repair Garage. Any garage other than a private garage, available
to the public, operated for gain, and which is used for the storage,
servicing and repair of automobiles or other motor vehicles,
including painting and body work and the supply of gasoline or oil
products, but not including the sale of motor vehicles.
1302.38 Height of a Structure
The vertical distance derived from the average finished grade at the
foundation corners of the building or structure, to the highest point of the
building or structure excluding a chimney or other similar structure listed in
Section 1318.20.
1302.39 Home Occupation
A personal service customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling solely by
members of the resident family, and clearly incidental and accessory to the
main use; provided that the occupation is limited to the main building and
shall occupy not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of
said building; that there shall be no exterior evidence of such secondary use
other than a small nameplate and no display of products shall be visible
from the exterior; and that no mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
used except customary household equipment. Beauty parlors, barber
shops, hairdressing and manicuring establishments, tea rooms, mortuary
establishments, lessons in voice or instrumental music for more than one (1)
pupil at a time, and retail business or trade, shall not be considered home
occupations.
1302.40 Home Professional Office
The office of a resident physician, dentist, lawyer, architect, engineer,
accountant or studio of an artist.
1302.41 Hospital
A building used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human
ailments, unless otherwise specified. A hospital shall be deemed to include
a sanitarium, clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, rest home, or other
building with an equivalent appellation.

1302.42 Impervious Coverage
The impervious coverage is the percentage of the lot area of a lot that is
covered by building roofs, gravel, concrete or asphalt, and/or other manmade
surfaces having a coefficient of runoff of 0.8 or greater. The City
Engineer shall determine whether a surface would meet this definition.
1302.43 Hotel
A building or part thereof which has a common entrance and common
dining room, and which contains seven (7) or more living and sleeping
rooms designed to be occupied by individuals or groups of individuals for
compensation.
1302.44 Industry, Non-Nuisance
Any industry which is not detrimental to the environment in which it is
located by reason of the emission of smoke, noise, odor, dust, vibration or
excessive light, beyond the limits of its lots, or by reason of generating
excessive traffic with attendant hazards, and which does not include any
open storage yards or outdoor processing of materials.
1302.45 Industrial Park
One (1) or more non-nuisance industrial plant on a single parcel of land, or
on separate parcels contiguously arranged, so as to form a planned
development of industrial sites, or buildings.
1302.46 Institution
Church, school, college, medical center, hospital, society or organization of
a public character and/or the building or buildings used by such
organizations.
1302.47 Junkyard
A lot or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage or
sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded material;
or for the collection, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of machinery or
vehicles not in running condition, and for the sale of parts thereof.
1302.48 Lot
Lot means a parcel of land fronting on a street used or designed to be used
by one (1) use or structure or by a related group of uses or structures, and
the accessory uses or structures customarily incident thereto, including such
open spaces as are arranged or designed and required in connection with
such structure or group of structures.
(a) Lot Area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
(b) Lot Corner. A lot whose lot lines form an interior angle of less than
135 degrees at the intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting
on a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the
curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street
lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
(c) Lot Coverage. The building area divided by the lot area expressed
as a percent.
(d) Lot, Depth of. The distance along a straight line drawn from the midpoint
of the front line to the mid-point of the rear lot line.
(e) Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
(f) Lot Line. Any boundary of a lot. (See property Line 1302.69).
(g) Lot Line, Front. The street line at the front of a lot. In the case of a
corner lot, the owner may designate either street line as the front lot
line.
(h) Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite to the front lot line.
(i) Lot Line, Side. Any lot line not a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
(j) Recorded Lot. A registered lot designated as a separate and
distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat, or in a
legally recorded deed filed among the land records of Lehigh or
Northampton Counties, on or before September 25, 1970, and as
shown on an official map of the City in its Real Estate Registry as
required by law. After September 25, 1970, a recorded lot shall be
any lot thereafter legally subdivided and kept on file by the City
following approval of a subdivision or re-subdivision plan by the City
Planning Commission.
(k) Lot, Through. A lot having its front and rear yards each abutting on
a street as herein defined.
(l) Lot, Width. The distance between straight lines connecting the ends
of the front and rear lot lines measured at the required building
setback lines.
1302.49 Main Use of Building
The principal or most important use of building on a lot.
1302.50 Manufacturing
The treatment or processing of raw materials, the production of products
from raw or prepared materials by giving them new forms of qualities.
1302.51 Medical Office Building
A building used exclusively by physicians and dentists for treatment and
examination of patients, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on
the premises.
1302.52 Membership Club
A building, structure, lot or land area used as a private club or social
organization not conducted for individual profit or gain.
1302.53 Motel
A building, or group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units,
used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, designed primarily for transient
travelers, and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities. The term
"motel" includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor lodges, auto
courts, and other similar uses.
1302.54 Motor Vehicle Sales and Service Agency
A retail establishment which offers motor vehicles for sale to the general
public. This business may also perform any repair service to motor vehicles
normally performed in a repair garage.
1302.55 Non-Conforming Lot
A lot of record existing at the date of passage of this Zoning Ordinance or
due to subsequent zoning changes, which does not have street frontage or
the minimum width or depth or contain the minimum area for the zone in
which it is located.
1302.56 Non-Conforming Structure
A structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or any
amendment thereto affecting such structure which does not conform to the
Building Regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which it is situated.
1302.57 Non-Conforming Use
Any use of a building, structure, lot or land, or part thereof, lawfully existing
at the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto affecting
such use, which does not conform to the regulations of this Ordinance
applicable to the use and the district in which it is situated.
1302.58 Non-Conforming Sign
Signs which do not conform to the controls regulating signs in Article 1320.
1302.59 Overnight Shelter
A facility operated by a non-profit agency providing single-night, temporary
lodging, with or without meals, for indigent adults with no ordinary or regular
home or residence address.
1302.60 Open Area
An unoccupied area open to the sky, usually in a natural state but including
squares, plazas and formal gardens. Also the unoccupied area open to the
sky on the same lot with a principal and/or accessory building.
1302.61 Parking Area
A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles with or
without the payment of rent or charges in money or other consideration.
1302.62 Parking Space
A stall or berth used for parking motor vehicles, the length of which shall be
no less than nineteen (19) feet and the width of which shall be no less than
nine (9) feet, exclusive of and to which there is access from a street or alley.
1302.63 Planned Industrial Development
Land under single ownership or agreement developed according to a
detailed plan to provide serviced sites for manufacturing plants, distribution
warehouses and similar industrial uses, providing adequate overall intensity
of land use, access and amounts of light, air and open space, while
permitting flexibility in placement and bulk, and adequate safeguards
protecting the neighborhood from any adverse effects.
1302.64 Planned Office Development
Land under single ownership or agreement developed according to a
detailed plan to provide one (1) or more sites for the office structure
providing adequate overall intensity of land use, access or amount of light,
air and open space, while permitting flexibility in placement and bulk and
adequate safeguards protecting the neighborhood from any adverse effects.
1302.65 Planned Unit Development
A tract of land under single ownership or agreement, planned and
developed as a permanent, year-round residential unit, utilizing a
reasonable degree of flexibility in the placement, bulk, and interrelationship
of buildings and uses, while at the same time maintaining adequate overall
intensity of land use, density of population, and amounts of light, air, access,
and open space.
1302.66 Portable Structure
A structure or building, whether above or below grade level, designed or
intended for seasonal rather than year-round use, and not attached to a
principal building.
1302.67 Private Power Generation Facility
A facility owned and operated by an entity, other than a governmental body
or public utility, which generates, transmits and/or distributes electrical
energy for sale.
1302.68 Professional Office
The office of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of said
profession. Such professions shall be limited to those of medicine, law,
architecture, engineering, art, religion, music, insurance, real estate, and
accounting.
1302.69 Property Line
A line forming the front, rear or sides of lots or parcels of property as
described in the recorded title.
1302.70 Public Notice
Notice of the time and place of a hearing, meeting, or proceeding printed in
a newspaper of general circulation in a manner provided by law.
1302.71 Purveyance of Obscene Materials
The exhibition or dissemination by sale, loan, or otherwise of explicit sexual
materials of an obscene nature; if such use comprises more than twenty
(20) percent of the stock in trade of the premises or constitutes, from time to
time, the primary or major attraction to the premises.
(a) "Explicit Sexual Materials", as used herein, means:
( 1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture
film, or other similar visual representation of image of a
person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity,
sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse; or
( 2) Any book pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any manner
enumerated in sub-paragraph (1) above, or explicit and
detailed verbal excitement, sexual conduct, or
sadomasochistic abuse.
(b) "Obscene Nature" as used herein, means that:
(1) The average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the subject matter taken as a
whole appeals to the prurient interest;
(2) The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently
offensive way materials of the type described hereinabove;
and
(3) The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary
artistic, political, educational, or scientific value.
(c) Words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings given to
them under Title 18 PA C.P.S.A. Section 5903 and any
amendments, from time to time, thereto.
1302.72 Recreational Vehicle
A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; not more than 400 square feet,
measured at the largest horizontal projections; designed to be selfpropelled
or permanently towable by a light-duty truck and not designed
for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
1302.73 Rehabilitation Facility
A facility which provides treatment and rehabilitation services, which may
include room and board, personal care, and intensive supervision and
casework, or one which houses individuals, whether adult or juvenile,
receiving therapy and counseling under the supervision and constraints of
alternatives to imprisonment, but not limited to pre-release, work release,
restitution or probationary programs.
1302.74 Residential Retirement Complex
A planned residential development for persons of retirement age located on
ten (10) acres or more which is held in one (1) ownership and which
provides certain health care facilities for the residents. Additional communal
facilities may also include dining, recreation, open space, parking and
related facilities and services.
1302.75 Residential Treatment Facility
A facility whose primary function is to temporarily house individuals for the
purpose of receiving medical, psychological, or social treatment and/or
counseling. This shall only apply to those groupings covered as protective
classes under federal law.
1302.76 Restaurant
Any establishment, however designated, at which food is prepared and sold
for consumption on the premises within the principal building. However, a
concession stand at a public or a community playground, playfield, park or
swimming pool, operated by the same agency operating the recreational
facilities, and solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility, shall not be
deemed to be a restaurant.
1302.77 Restaurant, Drive-In
An establishment where food is prepared and sold primarily for consumption
outside the confines of the principal building or in automobiles parked upon
the premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, indoor or
outdoor seats or other accommodations are provided for the patrons.
1302.78 Satellite Earth Stations
A dish-shaped antenna designed to receive television broadcasts relayed
by microwave signals from earth orbiting communications satellites. (See
1318.28).
1302.79 Screen or Screening
A strip at least four (4) feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or trees at
least six (6) feet high at the time of planting of a type that will form a yearround
dense screen at least six (6) feet high, a solid wall or barrier, or
uniformly painted fence, at least six (6) feet high. Either shall be maintained
in good condition at all times, and may have normal entrances and exits, but
shall have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof
except the following: for each entrance, one (1) directional arrow and the
name of the establishment with "For Patrons Only" or like limitation, not over
two (2) square feet in area, which shall be non-illuminated. See also "Buffer
Yard", Section 1302.09.
1302.80 Shopping Center
Three (3) or more retail stores designed as an integrated unit served by
common parking and service facilities, and having architectural and
landscape unity.
1302.81 Single and Separate Ownership
The ownership of a lot by one (1) or more persons, partnerships or
corporations, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any
adjoining lot. Ownership of two (2) or more contiguous lots by one (1) or
more persons, partnerships, or corporations shall be construed to comprise
one (1) lot.
1302.82 Slope of Construction Area
The slope of the construction area shall be defined as the highest slope that
is present within the construction area prior to disturbance. See
"Exceptions" in Section 1318.29, and the definition of Construction Area in
Article 1302. The contours of land regulated by this section shall not be
altered prior to documentation, submission and regulation under this
section.
1302.83 Special Exception Uses
A use in one (1) or more districts for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant a permit, pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
1302.84 Steep Slope
Any area of land with a gradient in excess of 15%.
1302.85 Story
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor or roof above. (See Basement 1302.05).
1302.86 Street
Any road, highway, avenue, street, parkway, lane or other way, public or
private, set aside and commonly used by the public for street purposes, and
shown upon the Official Map or upon a filed plat. An alley shall not be
deemed a street.
(a) Street Curb Line. The official line with grade of an existing or
proposed curb on any street as approved by the Department of
Public Works.
(b) Street Line. The dividing line between a lot and the outside
boundary of a public street or street right-of-way, or between a lot
and a private street which serves two (2) or more separately owned
homes or buildings.
(c) Street Width. The perpendicular distance between street lines.
1302.87 Structures
Anything constructed or erected above or below the ground or upon another
structure.
1302.88 Substantial Damage
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty
(50) percent or more of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
1302.89 Substantial Improvement
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
either, (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure
has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of the definition 'substantial improvement' is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimension of the structure. The term does not, however, include
either (a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (b) any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or State Inventory of
Historic Places.
1302.90 Substation, Gas or Electric
An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or
utilization, through which electric or gas energy in bulk is passed for the
purposes of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet the needs of
the general public, provided that an electric or gas substation permitted in a
residence district shall not include rotating equipment, storage of materials,
trucks or repair facilities or housing of repair crews.
1302.91 Swimming Pool, Private
Any receptacle or artificially constructed container for water, whether
erected above or below ground level, having a wall depth of two (2) feet or
more at any point within its perimeter, intended or adapted for the purposes
of immersion or partial immersion of human beings therein, used in
connection with dwelling units, available only to the family of the dwelling
unit holder and his private guests, not open to the public, and not otherwise
regulated by any statutes or by rules and regulations other than those of the
City of Bethlehem.
1302.92 Swimming Pool, Public or Semi-Public
Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool, including publicly
and privately owned pools open to the general public and pools owned and
operated in conjunction with membership organizations, motels, hotels, and
other similar uses.
1302.93 Telephone Relay Office
A building and its equipment erected and used only for the purposes of the
transmission and exchange of telephone or radio-telephone messages.
1302.94 Temporary Shelter
A facility operated by a non-profit agency providing single-night, temporary
housing, with or without meals, for individuals and/or families displaced from
their habitual residences as a result of sudden catastrophe (e.g., fire, flood,
domestic violence, condemnation, court-ordered eviction or other urgent
event).
1302.95 Theaters, Drive-In
An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily
to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, on paid
admission basis, to patrons seated in automobile or on outdoor seats.
1302.96 Trailer, Including Automobile Trailer and Mobile Homes
Any vehicle or structure used as a dwelling or for commercial use, which
utilizes wheels and axles for its transportation or is designed to be
transported as a unit on separate wheels and axles.
1302.97 Trailer Camp
A lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, used primarily for the
parking of one (1) or more trailers utilized on such lot for living or sleeping
purposes.
1302.98 Variance
A modification of the regulations of this Ordinance, granted on grounds of
exceptional difficulties or unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed, pursuant
to the provisions of Article 1325 of this Zoning Ordinance, and the laws of
the State of Pennsylvania.
1302.99 Yard
Any open space located on the same lot with a principal building situated
between the nearest roofed portion of the principal buildings and a lot line.
(a) Yard, Front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot abutting
the front lot line.
(b) Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
abutting the rear lot line.
(c) Yard, Side. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard,
abutting the side lot line.
(d) Yard, Width. The minimum perpendicular distance between the lot
line and the nearest roofed portion of the principal building.
1302.100 Zoning Officer
The duly constituted municipal official designated to administer and enforce
the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem.
1302.101 Zoning and Building Permit
A permit stating that a building and/or the proposed use of a building and/or
land is in conformity with all applicable city building and zoning ordinances.
ARTICLE 1303
CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
1303.01 Establishment of Districts
The City of Bethlehem is hereby divided into zoning districts of different
types, each type being of such number, shape, kind and area, and of such
common units or purpose and adaptability of use that is deemed most
suitable to carry out the objectives of this Ordinance.
Each parcel of land and every building or other structure in the City, except
as otherwise provided by law or by the Ordinance, shall be subject to the
regulations, restrictions and requirements specified for the district in which it
is located.
1303.02 Classes of Districts
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the City is divided into
seventeen (17) classes of districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-R Residence District
R-S Residence District
R-G Residence District
R-T Residence District
R-M Residence District
R-RC Residential Retirement Complex
I Institutional District
C-B Commercial Business District
C-G General Commercial District
C-L Limited Commercial District
C-S Shopping Center District
C-R Commercial Recreation District
C-M Office - Research Center District
P-I Planned Industrial District
L-I Light Industrial District
H-I Heavy Industrial District
I-R Industrial Redevelopment District
1303.03 Zoning Map
The Bethlehem Zoning Map shall consist of maps prepared in two different
scales. A small scaled map depicting the zoning districts of the City
accompanies this text. This map is for use by the general public and does
not show the precise zoning district boundaries. The official map shall be
kept in the office of the Zoning Officer. This larger map shall be prepared at
a scale: 1" = 400'.
Said map and all notations, references and data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this Zoning Ordinance and shall be as much
a part of this Zoning Ordinance as if all were fully described herein.
1303.04 District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries between districts as
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply.
(a) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way, such center
lines shall be construed to be such boundaries unless otherwise
indicated in this Ordinance.
(b) Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines, and where they do not scale more
than ten (10) feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed
to be such boundaries unless otherwise indicated in this Ordinance.
(c) For unsubdivided land and where a district boundary divides a lot,
the location of such boundary shall be determined by the use of the
scale on the Zoning Map unless the boundaries are indicated by
dimensions.
(d) All areas of the City which are under water and are now shown as
included within any district shall be subject to all of the regulations of
the district which immediately adjoins the water area. If the water
area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each district
shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line
until they meet each other.
(e) Where land area has become a part of the City by annexation, the
same shall automatically be classed as being in the "R-R
Residential" district until such classification shall have been changed
by an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance as provided herein.
(f) Whenever any street, alley, or other public right-of-way is vacated,
the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public
right-of-way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation.
1303.05 Boundary Tolerances
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, the use regulations
applicable to the less restricted district shall extend over the portion of the lot
in the more restricted district, a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet
beyond the district boundary line.
1303.06 Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts
For the regulations pertaining to the floodway and flood fringe districts,
which are overlays to the existing districts as shown on the Zoning Map,
refer to Article 1327.

ARTICLE 1304
R-R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
1304.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to preserve and to provide low density
residential areas within the City, and to encourage the future development
of designated areas as predominately low density single family residential
areas.
1304.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318 "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Single family detached dwelling.
(2) Public park or playground.
( 3) Farming, including, but not limited to, truck gardening and
nursery (horticultural) use and stables, provided that such
use must be on a lot having an area of not less than one (1)
acre and any buildings or enclosure used for the keeping of
livestock, including, but not limited to poultry and rabbits,
shall be set back not less than one hundred (100) feet from
the front street line and not less than seventy-five (75) feet
from any other street and any property line.
(4) Roadside stand for the sale of farm and nursery products
produced on the property and offered for sale.
(5) Electric substation or automatic telephone exchange without
any rotary converter or generating machinery. Outdoor
storage and garaging of motor vehicles shall be prohibited
with said use.
(b) The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Community Center Building, public library, municipal
building, fire station, police station and similar municipal
uses.
(2) Single family detached dwelling fronting on a common
private driveway.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325:
(1) Public or private educational institution or use, including an
elementary or secondary school or kindergarten, but not a
business school, trade school, dance school or similar use.
(2) Church, rectory, parish house or similar religious institution.
(3) Cemetery [See Section 1325.08(a)].
(4) Conversions [See Section 1325.08(b)].
(5) Commercial greenhouse and nursery. [See Section
1325.08(d)].
(6) Residential Treatment Facility [See Sections 1325.08(j) and
(k)].
(d) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
permitted use are permitted by right. The term "accessory use" shall
not include a business (except as outlined in Section 1318.30) but
may include:
(1) Private parking space or private garage, private garden or
home swimming pool.
(2) Sign pursuant to Article 1320.
1304.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1304.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1304.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1304.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1305
R-S RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
1305.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide single family areas of
medium density with provisions for multi-family dwellings with densities
compatible with single family residential areas, thus providing a variety of
housing types.
1305.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provision of Article 1318, "General Regulations" and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in R-R Residential District.
(b) The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Any use permitted in R-R Residential District except single
family detached dwellings fronting on a common private
driveway.
(2) Multiple family dwellings [See Section 1322.04(f)].
(3) Planned Unit Development.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325.
(1) Any use permitted in R-R Residential District.
(2) Home Professional Office [See Section 1325.08(h)].
(d) The following accessory uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in R-R Residential District.
1305.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations.
(See Article 1318).
1304.06 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
(See Article 1319).
1305.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1305.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1306
R-G RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
1306.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide transition of single family
residential areas into medium density two (2) family and multiple family
residential areas.
1306.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in R-S Residential District.
(2) Boarding House.
(3) Single family attached dwelling.
(b) The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Any use permitted in R-S Residential District.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provision of Article 1325:
(1) Any use permitted in R-S Residential District.
(2) Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor [See Section
1325.08(g)].
(3) Child day care centers.
(4) Customary home occupations.
(5) Bed and Breakfast Home [See Section 1325.08(i)].
(d) The following accessory uses may be permitted:
(1) Any use permitted in R-S Residential District.
1306.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1306.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1306.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1306.06 Site Plan Review Requirements.
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1307
R-T RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
1307.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for a variety of high density
housing types.
1307.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in R-G Residential District.
(2) Single family semi-detached dwelling.
(3) Two (2) family detached dwelling.
(4) Two (2) family semi-detached dwelling.
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory uses may be
permitted following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322.
(1) Any use permitted in R-G Residential District.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325:
(1) Any use permitted in R-G Residential District.
(2) Community Garage or Parking Lot [See Sections 1325.08(c)
and (e) and 1319.03].
(d) The following accessory uses may be permitted:
(1) Any use permitted in R-G Residential District.
1307.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1307.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1307.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1307.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1308
R-M RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
1308.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for high density residential
uses and compatible residentially-oriented non-residential uses.
1308.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in R-T Residential District.
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory uses may be
permitted following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Any use permitted in R-T Residential District.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also the provisions of Article 1325:
(1) Any use permitted in R-T Residential District.
(2) Temporary or Overnight Shelter.
(d) The following accessory uses may be permitted:
(1) Any use permitted in R-T Residential District.
1308.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1308.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1308.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1308.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1308A
R-RC RESIDENTIAL RETIREMENT COMPLEX
1308A.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide an area for a planned
residential development for persons of retirement age including communal
dining, recreation, open space, parking and related facilities. Ancillary
health care facilities shall also be provided for the primary use of the
residents of the complex.
1308A.02 Use Regulations
A building or group of buildings may be erected or use, and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", the
conditional approval regulations as stated in Articles 1321 and 1322, and
other applicable provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted following site plan review and
approval by the City Planning Commission:
(1) Multi-family dwelling units.
(2) Health care facility.
(3) Open space.
(4) Community building, including dining and recreational
facilities, and the sale of food and drugs.
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325.
(1) Residential Treatment Facility
[See Sections 1325.08(j) and (k)].
1308A.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1308A.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1308A.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1308A.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1309
I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
1309.01 Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for large educational, medical
and health, and public institutions within which facilities to meet their needs
may be developed.
1309.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318 "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following use is permitted by right:
(1) Public park, playground or recreation area.
(2) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory uses may be
permitted following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Public or parochial school, college, seminary or similar nonprofit
educational institution.
(2) Hospital, nursing or convalescent home, medical or health
center or similar health facility.
(3) Church, rectory, parish house or similar religious institution.
(4) Housing for faculty, students and/or staff of the institution.
(5) Professional office building, provided that seventy-five
percent (75%) or more of the office space in such building be
used for medical or para-medical offices.
(6) Theater, auditorium, museum, and library.
(c) The following use and any customary accessory use when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to Section 1325.08(a):
(1) Cemetery.
(d) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1309.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1309.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1309.05 Sign Regulations.
(See Article 1320).
1309.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
1309.07 Zoning Map
For the purpose of mapping the Institutional District, this district has been
subdivided into two (2) categories: I equaling City or School District owned
properties and I' equaling privately owned properties.
1309.08 INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
(a) Where a college campus, in an Institutional District, borders a CB
Commercial Zoning District, the City Planning Commission may
designate a commercial overlay district for that portion of the
campus which borders the commercial district under the following
conditions:
(1) The overlay district shall be identified on the City Zoning
Map.
(2) In addition to the uses previously listed under this Article, the
following uses may be included in the overlay district:
(i) Multiple family dwelling;
(ii) Pharmacy and drugstore;
(iii) Food and convenience store;
(iv) Newsstand, magazine and bookstore;
(v) Barber shop;
(vi) Beauty parlor, salon and spa;
(vii) Restaurant, coffee shop and retail bakery;
(viii) Laundromat and dry cleaning shop;
(ix) Copy center;
(x) Bicycle sales and service shop enclosed within a
building;
(xi) Video store;
(xii) Music store;
(xiii) Post office;
(xiv) Computer sales and repair store;
(xv) Bank or credit union.
(3) The total floor area of the commercial uses within the overlay
district shall not exceed 20% of the total floor area within the
overlay district.
(4) Although the commercial uses shall be open to the public,
each building and use shall be designed as part of the
college and intended to serve the college community
including students, employees and visitors.
(5) Setbacks and building facade designs shall match and/or
provide an orderly transition between the college and
adjacent commercial properties.
(6) Pedestrian access to the commercial uses shall be provided
in a safe, attractive, and convenient manner including such
features as parks, plazas, atriums or courtyards.
(Added by Ordinance #4100 on 11/20/01).
ARTICLE 1310
C-B COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
1310.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for an orderly coordinated
development of varied commercial business and office uses in combination
with limited intensive residential development in the central business area
and to encourage excellence of design in the development of properties.
1310.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Multiple family dwelling (maximum height of 3-1/2 stories).
(2) Single family attached dwelling.
(3) Hotel, motor lodge and motel.
(4) Retail and service use. Use must be enclosed within a
building.
(5) Bank, brokerage firm, insurance agency and other financial
institutions.
(6) Business or professional office.
(7) Theater, auditorium, museum, library and other civic and
cultural facility including an amusement and recreational
facility. Use must be enclosed within a building.
(8) Restaurant for the sale and consumption of food and
beverage without drive-in service.
(9) Radio and television broadcasting studio and transmission
towers.
(10) Printing, newspaper publishing and bookbinding.
(11) Governmental use and public utility installation.
(12) Church and related uses, school and educational institution.
(13) Funeral home.
(14) Club organized for fraternal or social purposes and
philanthropic institutions.
(15) Meeting and banquet halls.
(16) Office and studio, including wholesale office and showrooms
with storage limited to samples.
(17) Passenger terminal facility, including taxi stand, bus and rail
passenger station and shelter.
(18) The following uses, provided that all processing activities,
including testing located on the ground floor, be located not
less than twenty (20) feet from the front of the building and
be effectively screened by a wall or partition from the front of
the building:
Blueprinting and photostatic establishment.
Confectionery and bakery for making products only for retail
sale on the premises.
Dry cleaning and clothes pressing establishment operated
without the use of inflammable cleaning agents.
Frozen food locker.
Job printing shop.
Laboratory, research, testing and experimental use not
involving any danger of fire or explosion or any offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or other
objectionable influence.
Photographic developing and printing establishment.
Taxidermist.
(19) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory uses may be
permitted following a review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Multiple family dwelling (over 3-1/2 stories in height).
(2) Department store.
(3) Parking lot and structure.

(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses, when
authorized by a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325:
(1) Motor vehicle sales and service agency, provided the use is
enclosed within a building.
(2) Conversions [See Section 1325.08(b)].
(3) Temporary shelter, overnight shelter, or rehabilitation facility.
(d) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the
aforementioned uses in this Article are permitted, including:
(1) Private garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles.
(2) Dwelling units incidental to the principal structure and use.
1310.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1310.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(a) No off-street parking shall be required of the applicant for uses in the
C-B District.
(b) Although off-street parking shall not be required of an applicant,
should such be nonetheless provided by him, it shall conform to
Section 1319.03.
(c) The off-street loading requirement shall in no way be affected by
paragraph (a) of this Section and shall be provided in accordance
with Section 1319.04 and 1319.05.
1310.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1310.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1311
C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
1311.01 Purpose
The purpose of this district is to encourage the proper development of future
commercial areas in newly developed, undeveloped or redeveloped areas
by individually or corporately owned and operated retail trade service,
professional, financial and recreational enterprises which serve the
manifested and foreseeable needs of adjacent and surrounding districts and
to prevent traffic and parking congestion.
1311.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) All residential uses, including apartments or dwellings above
commercial uses.
(2) Retail and service use. Use must be enclosed within a
building.
(3) Bank, Saving and Loan Association.
(4) Restaurant and drive-in restaurant.
(5) Business or professional office.
(6) Dry cleaning, pressing and clothes dyeing shop, limited to a
dry cleaning operation of a retail nature where the work
handled comes directly from the customer to the shop. The
cleaning and drying processes shall be carried on in a
building or portion thereof having no more than 250 square
feet of area and located at least fifty (50) feet from any
Residential District.
(7) Kennel, pet shop and veterinary establishment. Entire use
must be enclosed within a building.
(8) Membership clubs, meeting, banquet, and dance halls.
(9) Business, trade, or dance school, or similar use.
(10) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) None of the permitted uses for this district are required to have
conditional approval.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325:
(1) Motor vehicle sales and service agencies.
(2) Conversions [See Section 1325.08(b)].
(3) Any use not specified in Section 1311.02(a) or 1311.02(c)
shall require approval by special exception from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
(4) Temporary shelter, overnight shelter, or rehabilitation facility.
(d) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1311.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1311.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
(See Article 1319).
1311.05 Sign Regulations.
(See Article 1320).
1311.06 Site Plan Review Requirements.
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1312
C-L LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
1312.01 Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide for the continued commercial use of
certain areas where many of the original residential structures and lots have
been converted to commercial use and for limited new commercial uses.
The permitted uses are restricted to those providing for the day to day
needs of the immediate neighborhood.
1312.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances. Each non-residential use shall
be enclosed within a building and shall have a maximum floor area of 2,500
square feet.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in R-M Residential District.
(2) Food store.
(3) Drugstore.
(4) Restaurant without drive-in facilities.
(5) Bar.
(6) Barber shop.
(7) Beauty parlor.
(8) Shoe repair shop.
(9) Tailor.
(10) Florist.
(11) Hardware store.
(12) Magazine store.
(13) Candy store.
(14) Bakery store.
(15) Doctor's office.
(16) Dentist's office.
(17) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) None of the permitted uses for this district are required to have
conditional approval.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted, subject also to the provisions of Article 1325:
(1) Conversions [See Section 1325.08(b)].
(d) Accessory use customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use in
this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1312.03 Area, Yard, and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1312.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
(See Article 1319).
1312.05 Sign Regulations.
(See Article 1320).
1312.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1313
C-S SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
1313.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to encourage and ensure the
development of modern, well-planned, integrated community shopping
centers, in appropriate locations and, on large tract sizes, to provide for a
variety of compatible business and related uses including office buildings
and apartments. The district regulations require that the district be
developed as a group of properly related business and compatible facilities
comprising a single architectural scheme with appropriate landscaping, offstreet
parking, screening and vehicular access. This district shall be
developed only in accordance with the provisions relating to site plan review
in Article 1321.
1313.02 Use Regulations
A building or group of buildings may be erected or used, and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", the
conditional approval regulations as stated in Articles 1321 and 1322, and
other applicable provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted following City Planning
Commission approval:
(1) Retail and personal service use.
(2) Bank, Saving and Loan Association.
(3) Office, agency or studio.
(4) Restaurant and drive-in restaurant.
(5) Community center, library and child day care center.
(6) Theater, meeting hall and recreation establishment.
(7) Service stations.
(8) Kennel, pet shop and veterinary establishment.
(9) Car wash.
(10) Motor vehicle sales and service agency.
(11) Electric substation and utility lines.
(12) Any other use permitted by right in C-G General
Commercial.
(13) The following additional uses, I through V, when specifically
authorized in conjunction with the total development of a
Shopping Center District not less than ten (10) acres in size
for any use or combination of uses permitted in the district,
provided the uses and overall development of the tract
approved in accordance with the provisions of Article 1321:
( I) Medical or Health Center.
( II) Office building.
( III) Motel, provided such use is clearly designed to
constitute a logical and harmonious element of the
overall plan for the district. The operational and retail
business portion of the motel shall include only the
following: office, lobby, restaurant, bar, coffee shop
or grill, gift shop, and manager's apartment. Other
accessory uses shall be limited to swimming pools,
tennis courts, and other recreational uses to serve
only transient guests and their friends and not to be
operated as commercial enterprises. Each rental
unit shall have at least two hundred (200) square feet
of floor space and there shall be at least sixty (60)
square feet of floor area for each person that it
accommodates. No guest shall occupy any rental
unit for a continuous period of more than one (1)
month.
( IV) Multiple family dwelling, designed as a single
architectural project or unit, where such use shall
constitute a logical transitional use in locations
adjacent to the district boundary and provided that
the area devoted to apartments shall in no case be
greater than ten (10) percent of the total area of the
tract.
( V) Any use of the same general character as any of the
above permitted uses, provided that such use shall
be permitted, subject to such reasonable restrictions
as the City may determine.
(14) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 13.18.28A]
(15) B.Y.O.B. [added by Ordinance #3958, July 1999].
(b) Accessory uses customarily with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article may be permitted by the City Planning Commission
unless otherwise excluded by these regulations.
1313.03 Area, Yard, and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1313.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1313.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1313.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1313A
C-R COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT
1313A.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to designate those areas in the City
where commercial recreation facilities are appropriate and to insure that
these facilities are properly designed, landscaped, screened, and
maintained so that adjacent properties will be properly protected against any
possible noise, light, parking, or other excessive intrusion caused by the
Commercial Recreation development.
1313A.02 Use Regulations
A building or group of buildings may be erected or used, and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes, and not other, subject to
the applicable provisions of Article 1318 "General Regulations", and
conditional approval regulations as stated in Article 1321 and 1322, and
other applicable provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses may be permitted at the discretion of the City
Planning Commission following review of the site plan and a
description of all uses contemplated for a C-R development:
(1) Playgrounds, including apparatus for: swings, slides,
seesaws and various climbing structures.
(2) Play fields.
(3) Court games such as: tennis, basketball, handball, etc.
(4) Gymnasium, bowling alley, swimming pool, roller rink, and
pool hall.
(5) Skating rink.
(6) Archery range.
(7) Indoor stadium or auditorium.
(8) Outdoor stadium.
(9) Miniature golf course.
Golf driving range.
(10) Steam bath and massage parlor.
(11) Dance hall.
(12) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) The following accessory uses may be permitted at the discretion of
the City Planning Commission provided they are clearly incidental to
the overall C-R development:
(1) Pro shop - Restricted to sale or rental of sports equipment
pertinent to the proposed permitted uses in the C-R
development.
(2) Bar.
(3) Restaurant.
1313A.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1313A.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1313A.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
ARTICLE 1314
C-M OFFICE RESEARCH CENTER DISTRICT
1314.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide for large-scale integrally
planned and designed office facilities, research and similar uses including
testing and experimental laboratories and their necessary accessory
facilities.
1314.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Laboratory and appurtenant structures.
(2) Building for lecture rooms and offices in connection
therewith.
(3) Library.
(4) Structure erected for experimental or testing purposes.
(5) Pilot plant and appurtenant structures.
(6) Warehouse and storage facilities appurtenant to the
foregoing.
(7) Garage for movable equipment, trucks and cars operated in
connection with the foregoing.
(8) Living quarters for personnel and their families.
(9) Catering, cafeteria and restaurant equipment and facilities.
(10) Experimental agricultural operation and the buildings
necessary therefor.
(11) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory use may be
permitted following a review and recommendation by the City
Planning Commission in accord with the provisions of Article 1322:
(1) Planned office commercial development.
(c) None of the permitted uses for this district require approval by
special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board.
(d) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1314.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1314.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1314.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1314.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1315
P-I PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1315.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to permit and encourage modern
industrial development in a park-like setting. Among other things, the P-I
District is established to provide a desirable location for those types of
industry which are harmonious with, and do not constitute a hazard or
nuisance to surrounding areas. Development standards for the P-I District
are set forth to not only help form this harmonious relationship, but to
maintain open areas, to encourage architectural harmony, and to create an
aesthetically pleasing and functional industrial park.
1315.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318 "General Regulations", Article 1322, and other
applicable provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Tilling of the soil and the keeping or raising of livestock or
poultry.
(2) Research laboratory or similar experimental, testing, or
scientific establishment.
( 3) Headquarters or similar office building, including data
processing and record storage, and with offices involving
only limited contact with the general public.
(4) Publishing, printing, lithographing or similar establishment.
(5) Warehouse, wholesale, storage or distribution use.
( 6) Manufacture, assembly or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: Plastics, bone, canvas, cellophane, cork,
feathers, fiber, glass, horn, leather and fur (excluding
tanning, curing and dyeing); precious or semi-precious
metals or stones, shell, textiles and tobacco.
( 7) Manufacture of: Ceramic products (using only previously
pulverized clay), novelty or small products from previously
prepared paper or cardboard (not including bulk processing),
jewelry, clocks and watches, medical, drafting, optical and
other professional and scientific instruments and equipment,
musical instruments, small rubber products and synthetic
treated fabrics (excluding all rubber
and synthetic processing); textiles (including spinning and
weaving,
but not including wool scouring and pulling, or jute or burlap
processing or reconditioning), toys, wood products
(excluding planing mills and bulk processing of wood and
lumber).
(8) Processing, packaging and treatment or compounding of
such products as cosmetics and toiletries, drugs, perfumes
and pharmaceuticals.
(9) Manufacture and assembly of electrical or electronic devices,
home commercial and industrial appliances and instruments,
and electrical supplies, including such equipment and
supplies as: lighting fixtures, fans, home radio and television
receivers, electric switches, lamps, washing machines,
refrigerators and air conditioners.
(10) Light metal processes such as: metal machining, finishing,
grinding and polishing, metal stamping and extrusion of
small products (such as costume jewelry and kitchen
utensils), and the manufacture of light metal products, tools
and hardware (such as hand tools, bolts, nuts).
(11) Bottling, packing, or packaging establishment.
(12) Central heating plant.
(13) Manufacture of paper or cardboard boxes, envelopes,
containers and novelties from previously prepared paper or
cardboard.
(14) Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on
premises, provided the quarters are located within the main
building.
(15) Personal service, convenience and indoor recreational
facilities planned for the use of the employees of the district
and only incidentally for the general public, such as branch
bank, branch post office, drugstore, restaurant, variety store,
barber shop, beauty parlor, offices and bowling alley, if
developed as an integrated service center.
(16) Outdoor recreational facilities for the primary use of
employees of the P-I District.
(17) Public park or public recreation facility.
(18) Public utility installation.
(19) Day care center.
(20) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted in accord with Article 1325:
(1) An industrial use of the same general character as the uses
permitted, or an industrial use normally considered to create
nuisances provided that the application for special exception
shall include evidence satisfactory to the Zoning Hearing
Board that the use will be conducted without creating
nuisance conditions beyond the limits of its lot by reason of
the emission of smoke, dust, odor, or other air pollutants,
noise, vibration, light, electrical disturbance, or water
pollutants. Such evidence may include the proposed use of
proven special structural or technological innovations. In no
case, however, shall any of the following uses or any uses
substantially similar thereto be permitted: Abattoir,
incineration or reduction of garbage (except by city
government agencies); leather processing, the
manufacture of asphalt, cement, explosives, ferrous and
non-ferrous metal or wood smelting or reduction, oil cloth,
paint, paper, soap, cinder block and petroleum refining
storage or distribution.
(c) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1315.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1315.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1315.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1315.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1316
L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1316.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to permit and encourage modern light
industrial development that will be so located and designed as to constitute
a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical development of the City
and to contribute to the soundness of the economic base of the City.
1316.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Tilling of the soil and the keeping or raising of livestock or
poultry.
(2) Research laboratory or similar experimental, testing, or
scientific establishment.
( 3) Headquarters or similar office building, including data
processing and record storage, and with offices involving
only limited contact with the general public.
(4) Publishing, printing, lithographing or similar establishment.
(5) Warehouse, wholesale, storage or distribution use.
( 6) Manufacture, assembly or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: plastics, bone, canvas, cellophane, cork, feathers,
fiber, glass, horn, leather and fur (excluding tanning, curing
and dyeing); precious or semi-precious metals or stones,
shell, textiles and tobacco.
( 7) Manufacture of: ceramic products (using only previously
pulverized clay); novelty or small products from previously
prepared paper or cardboard (not including bulk processing);
jewelry, clocks and watches, medical, drafting, optical and
other professional and scientific instruments and equipment;
musical instruments; small rubber products and synthetic
treated fabrics (excluding all rubber and synthetic
processing); textiles (including spinning and weaving, but not
including wool scouring and pulling, or jute or burlap
processing or reconditioning); toys; wood products
(excluding planing mills and bulk processing of wood and
lumber).
(8) Processing, packaging and treatment or compounding of
such products as cosmetics and toiletries, drugs, perfumes
and pharmaceuticals.
( 9) Manufacture and assembly of electrical or electronic devices;
home, commercial and industrial appliances and
instruments, and electrical supplies, including such
equipment and supplies as: lighting fixtures, fans, home
radio and television receivers, electric switches, lamps,
washing machines, refrigerators and air conditioners.
(10) Processing and combining of food products (except meat
and fish), including baking, canning, cooking, freezing, and
mixing, but not including manufacture of basic products from
the raw state or such processes as: drying, preserving or
curing meats, manufacturing sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast,
fish, milling flour, roasting coffee or spices.
(11) Light metal processes, such as: metal machining, finishing,
grinding, and polishing, metal stamping and extrusion of
small products, (such as costume jewelry and kitchen
utensils); and the manufacture of light metal products, tools
and hardware, (such as hand tools, bolts, nuts).
(12) Bottling, packing or packaging establishment.
(13) Central heating plant.
(14) Manufacture of paper or cardboard boxes, envelopes,
containers and novelties from previously prepared paper or
cardboard.
(15) Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on
the premises, provided the quarters are located within the
main building.
(16) Personal service, convenience and indoor recreational
facilities planned for the use of the employees of the district,
and only incidentally for the general public, such as branch
bank, branch post office, drugstore, restaurant, variety store,
barber shop, beauty parlor, offices and bowling alley, if
developed as an integrated service center.
(17) Outdoor recreational facilities for the primary use of
employees of the L-I District.
(18) Public park or public recreation facility.
(19) Public utility installation.
(20) Repair garage.
(21) Service station.
(22) Motor vehicle sales and service agency.
(23) Municipal uses such as, but not limited to, municipal
buildings, municipal garages, municipal storage areas, fire
stations, and police stations.
(24) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) None of the permitted uses for this district are required to have
conditional approval.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses, when
authorized by special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, may
be permitted in accord with Article 1325:
(1) An industrial use of the same general character as the uses
permitted, or an industrial use normally considered to create
nuisances provided that the application for special exception
shall include evidence satisfactory to the Zoning Hearing
Board that the use will be conducted without creating
nuisance conditions beyond the limits of its lot by reason of
the emission of smoke, dust, odor, and other air pollutants,
noise, vibration, light, electrical disturbance, or water
pollutants. Such evidence may include the proposed use of
proven special structural or technological innovations. In no
case, however, shall any of the following uses or any uses
substantially similar thereto be permitted: abattoir,
incineration or reduction of garbage (except by City
government agencies); leather processing; the manufacture
of asphalt, cement, explosives, ferrous and non-ferrous
metal or wood smelting or reduction; oilcloth, paint, paper,
soap; cinder block and petroleum refining, storage or
distribution.
(d) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1316.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1316.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).

1316.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1316.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1317
H-I HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1317.01 Purpose
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide suitable areas for the use of
heavy industry and related uses with controls which will insure sound
industrial land development.
1317.02 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other, subject to the applicable
provisions of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable
provisions of this and other City Ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Any use permitted in L-I Light Industrial District.
(2) Municipal incineration facilities.
(3) Manufacture of asphalt, cement, ferrous and non-ferrous
metal or wood smelting or reduction, paint, cinder block and
petroleum refining storage or distribution.
( 4) Open space, junk and/or scrap, provided this use is
enclosed within an opaque fence or dense planting which
shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. Provided further
that said use shall be no less than fifty (50) feet from any
street line and surrounded by a minimum fifteen (15) foot
buffer yard which shall be placed with evergreen trees or
other suitable planting which shall completely screen the use
from outside view.
(5) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) None of the permitted uses for this district are required to have
conditional approval.
(c) The following uses and their customary accessory uses when
authorized by special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board may
be permitted in accord with Article 1325.
(1) An industrial use of the same general character as the uses
permitted. For any industrial use applying for an application,
evidence shall be shown to indicate compliance with the
performance standards listed in Section 1318.22. In no
case, however, shall any of the following uses or any uses
substantially similar thereto be permitted: abattoir,
manufacture of animal fertilizer, manufacture of gunpowder,
fireworks or other explosives, manufacture of plastic
pyroxylin, or of articles made therefrom or stockyards.
(d) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use
in this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
1317.03 Area, Yard, and Building Regulations
(See Article 1318).
1317.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
(See Article 1319).
1317.05 Sign Regulations
(See Article 1320).
1317.06 Site Plan Review Requirements
(See Article 1321).
ARTICLE 1317A
I-R INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
1317A.01 Purpose
The purpose of this district is to promote the economic revitalization of
underutilized heavy industrial properties. In order to accomplish this
purpose a variety of land uses will be permitted within this district and
flexible design standards will be applied during the site plan approval
process.
1317A.02 Special Requirements
(a) The property owner shall submit the following to the City Planning
Commission for approval:
(1) A boundary plan of the property owned by the applicant;
and,
(2) A report describing:
( i) The existing general site conditions for the property
of the IR District including:
(a) Existing public easements, public rights of
way, and major waterways;
(b) Existing public utilities including storm drains,
sanitary sewers, and water lines; and
(c) Existing topography, major building locations,
soil and subsoil conditions, location and
character of surface water, and areas subject
to flooding (100 year floodplains), steep
slopes, wooded areas, and recorded
historical and archeological sites.
(ii) The general character of the proposed development
including:
(a) Goals and objectives for development;
(b) Potential future uses;
(c) Anticipated demand on existing utilities
including storm drains, stormwater
management, sanitary sewer, and water
lines; and,
(d) Potential site access points.

1317A.03 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes, and no other subject to applicable provisions
of Article 1318, "General Regulations", and other applicable provisions of
this and other city ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Commercial recreation facilities and sports facilities.
(2) Public or parochial school, college, seminary, or similar nonprofit
educational institution.
(3) Hospital, medical or health center or similar health facility.
(4) Hotel, motel lodge, and motel.
(5) Retail and service use.
(6) Banks, brokerage firm, insurance agency, and other financial
institutions.
(7) Business or professional offices.
(8) Theater, auditorium, museum, library, and other civic and
cultural facility including an amusement and recreational
facility.
(9) Any facility whose purpose is dedicated to historic
preservation.
(10) Restaurant for the sale and consumption of food and
beverage.
(11) Bar.
(12) Visitor Center.
(13) Radio and television broadcasting, studio and transmission
towers.
(14) Printing, newspaper publishing and bookbinding.
(15) City Government uses.
(16) Meeting and banquet halls, conference and convention
centers.
(17) Office and studio.
(18) Passenger terminal facility including taxi stand, bus and rail
passenger station, and shelter.
(19) Laboratory, research, testing, and experimental use not
involving danger of fire or explosion or any offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, glare, heat, or other objectionable
influence.
(20) Photographic developing and printing establishment.
(21) Parking lots and structures.
(22) Barber and beauty shops.
(23) Tailor.
(24) Florists.
(25) Hardware store.
(26) Food store.
(27) Magazine store.
(28) Candy store.
(29) Bakery store.
(30) Doctor's office.
(31) Dentist's office.
(32) Warehousing.
(33) Manufacture, assembly or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: plastics, bone, canvas, cellophane, cork, feathers,
fiber, glass, horn, leather, and fur (excluding tanning, curing,
and dyeing); precious or semi-precious metals or stones,
shell, textiles and tobacco.
(34) Manufacture of: ceramic products (using only previously
pulverized clay); novelty or small products from previously
prepared paper or cardboard (not including bulk processing);
jewelry, clocks and watches, medical, drafting, optical and
other professional and scientific instruments and equipment,
musical instruments, small rubber products and synthetic
treated fabrics (excluding all rubber and synthetic
processing); textiles (including spinning and weaving, but not
including wool scouring and pulling, or jute or burlap
processing or reconditioning); toys, wood products
(excluding planning mills and bulk processing of wood and
lumber).

(35) Processing, packaging and treatment or compounding of
such products as cosmetics and toiletries, drugs, perfumes,
and pharmaceutical.
(36) Manufacture and assembly of electrical or electronic devices;
home, commercial and industrial appliances and
instruments, and electrical supplies, including such
equipment and supplies as: lighting fixtures, fans, home
radios and television receivers, electrical switches, lamps,
washing machines, refrigerators and air conditioners.
(37) Processing and combining of food or candy products (except
meat and fish), including baking, canning, cooking, freezing,
and mixing, but not including manufacture of basic products
from the raw state or such processes as: drying, preserving
or curing meats, manufacturing sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast,
fish, milling flour, roasting coffee or spices.
(38) Light metal processes, such as: metal machining, finishing,
grinding, and polishing, metal stamping and extrusion of
small products, (such as costume jewelry and kitchen
utensils); and the manufacture of light metal products, tools
and hardware, (such as sculptures, hand tools, bolts, nuts).
(39) Bottling, packing or packaging establishment.
(40) Central heating plant.
(41) Manufacture of paper or cardboard boxes, envelopes,
containers and novelties from previously prepared paper or
cardboard.
(42) Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on
the premises, provided the quarters are located within the
main building.
(43) Personal service, convenience and indoor recreational
facilities planned for the use of the employees of the district,
and only incidentally for the general public, such as branch
bank, branch post office, drugstore, restaurant, variety store,
barber shop, beauty parlor, offices and bowling alley, if
developed as an integrated service center.
(44) Manufacture of ferrous and non-ferrous metal.
(45) Private power generation facilities.
(46) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(b) Additional uses that are compatible with uses that are permitted by
right may be permitted as special exception uses.
(c) The following uses shall not be permitted:
(1) Prison facility.
(2) Trash or Waste Incinerator Facility.
(3) Storage of Used or Discarded Motor Vehicle Tires.
(4) Junkyard.
(5) Landfill.
(6) Cement Manufacturing Plant.
(7) Manufacture of Asphalt.
(8) Manufacture of Paint.
(9) Petroleum Refining Storage or Distribution.
1317A.04 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
The area, yard, and building regulations for each proposed use shall be
governed by the most intense applicable zoning district in which the use is
permitted by right.
The applicant and City Planning Commission shall consider modifications to
these standards in accordance with the terms or Article 1351.03 of the
Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
1317A.05 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Off street parking and loading regulations shall be governed by Article 1319.
Off street parking shall be permitted on a lot other than the proposed
development site, provided adequate assurances are given that such
parking will not be eliminated by future development. The applicant and
City Planning Commission shall consider modifications to these standards
based on existing site conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or
innovations in technology in accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of
the Subdivision and Development Ordinance and such modifications shall
include but not be limited to:
(a) Shared parking pursuant to Section 1319.02(e);
(b) Providing for up to 30% of the total parking required as compact
spaces; compact spaces shall have a minimum dimension of 8 feet
in width and 16 feet in length;

(c) Credit for other methods of transportation to the site, including bus
and rail service; and
(d) Recent authoritative standards information regarding parking
standards for individual uses will be employed.
1317A.06 Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be governed by Article 1320. The applicant and City
Planning Commission shall consider modifications to the standards based
on the existing site conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or innovations
in technology in accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of the
Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
1317A.07 Site Plan Review Requirements
Property owners within this zoning district must submit site plans in
accordance with this Article or in accordance with Article 1317, except as
modified by Section 1317A.03(c). If the property owner elects to proceed
under this Article, it shall submit plans in accordance with Article 1321 for
each proposed development project. If there is a substantial deviation in the
development submission from what is described in 1317A.03(ii), the City
Planning Commission may require additional information to approve the
proposed modification.
ARTICLE 1318
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Purpose
This Article contains general regulations which apply to several or all districts and which do
not require special action by City Planning Commission (except for subdivisions) or special
exceptions or variances by the Zoning Hearing Board.
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1318.01 District Dimensional Requirements
The dimensional requirements for each district pertaining to minimum lot
area, minimum lot width, minimum yards, maximum height and maximum
building coverage are specified in the Section "Table of Area, Yard, and
Building Regulations", subject to the further applicable provisions of Articles
1304 through 1318. (See Appendix A, Pages A-1 through A-7).
1318.02 Lot Area or Yard Required
The lot area and yards required for any new building or use shall not include
any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply with
the requirements of this Ordinance. No required lot shall include any
property, the ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to the
effective date of this Ordinance if such property was a part of the area
required for compliance with the dimensional requirements applicable to the
lot from which such transfer was made.
1318.03 Minimum Lot Width
Where a minimum lot width is specified no principal building shall be erected
on any part of a lot which has a width of less than is specified, except as
may be permitted by Section 1318.04.
1318.04 Exceptions to Minimum Lot Areas and Yards
Buildings located on corner lots that are re-subdivided shall conform to the
front yard requirements of the street on which they originally face, in addition
to the front yard on the street on which they face after re-subdivision.
However, buildings on a corner lot may be faced at an angle perpendicular
to the intersection of two (2) streets, and the corners of such building may
project into the front and side yards to a total amount equal in areas to the
triangle formed by the intersection of the front of the building with the front
and side yard lines. Further, any such projections of the ends of the building
shall not extend into either the front or side yard more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the depth of such yards.
1318.05 Accessory Private Garage Structures within Required Side and Rear Yards
Required side and rear yards, except the side yard adjacent to a street of a
corner lot, may be occupied by an accessory garage use provided that:
(a) Such accessory garage structure, or uses shall be situated not less
than two (2) feet from any lot line, except when the lot is adjacent to
a rear alley, the building shall be not less than five (5) feet from the
rear lot line.
(b) That such accessory garage structure, or use shall not exceed
twenty (20) feet in height.
1318.06 Traffic Visibility Across Corners
(a) In any district, no structure, fence, planting, or other structure shall
be maintained between a plane two and one-half (2 1/2) feet above
curb level and a plane ten (10) feet above curb level so as to
interfere with traffic visibility across the corner within that part of the
required front or side yard which is within a triangle bounded by the
street lot line twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of said lot
lines or extensions thereof. On any corner lot in a commercial
district, the above requirements shall apply, except that the sight
triangle may be reduced from twenty-five (25) feet to eight (8) feet.
(b) At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or
road, a clear-sight triangle of eight (8) feet measured from the point
of intersection of the street line and the edge of the accessway, shall
be maintained, within which vegetation and other visual obstructions
shall be limited to a height of not more than two and one (2 1/2) feet
above the street grade.
1318.07 Front and Side Yards of Corner Lot
On a corner lot the street side yard shall equal the required front yard of the
most restrictive district within the block and fronting on the side street.
1318.08 Spacing of Non-Residential Buildings on the Same Lot
Where two (2) or more main buildings for other than residential uses are
proposed to be built upon property in one (1) ownership, front, side and rear
yards are required only at lot lines abutting other property.
1318.09 Front Yard Regulations
Where a minimum depth of front yard is specified in Section 1318.01, an
open space of at least the specified depth shall be provided between the
street line or lines and the nearest point of any building or structure except
as may be permitted in Section 1318.04 and hereafter.
1318.10 Establishment of Front Yard Setbacks
Front yard setbacks shall be measured from the legal right-of-way lines
established for roads and highways shown on the City of Bethlehem Official
Map.
1318.11 Projections Into Front Yards
Ground story bays and porches not over half the length of the front wall may
project into any front yard five (5) feet. Chimneys, flues, columns, sills, and
ornamental features may project not more than one (1) foot and cornices
and gutters not more than two (2) feet.
1318.12 Fences and Terraces in Front Yards
Subject to Section 1318.06 the provisions of Section 1318.09 shall not apply
to front fences, hedges, or walls less than seven (7) feet high above the
natural grade in the required front yard nor to terraces, steps, uncovered
porches, or other similar features not over three (3) feet high above the level
of the floor of the ground story.
1318.13 Front Yard Reduction
(a) When there is an existing building on each of two (2) lots adjacent
on either side to a lot on which a proposed building is to be erected,
where both such existing buildings have an alignment nearer to the
street than the required front depth elsewhere specified in this
Ordinance, and when both such existing buildings are within one
hundred (100) feet of the proposed building, the average of the
existing front yard depths of such adjacent lots shall be the minimum
required front yard depth of the lot on which the proposed building is
to be erected.
(b) In a development consisting of three (3) or more lots in single
ownership, whether or not abutting, on the same side of a street
within a single block, the front yard setback requirements may be
reduced by no more than ten (10) feet provided that the average
setback for the development lots shall comply with the district
requirement.
1318.14 Side Yard Requirements
Where a minimum width of side yard is specified in Section 1318.01 no
building or structure shall be erected within the specified distance from
either side lot line, except as permitted in Section 1318.04.
1318.15 Projections Into Side Yards
Bays, balconies, chimneys, flues, and fire escapes may project into a
required side yard not more than one-third of its width and not more than
four (4) feet in any case. Ground story bays and porches not over half the
length of the side wall may project into any side yard three (3) feet.
1318.16 Fences and Terraces in Side Yards
Subject to Section 1318.06, the provisions of Section 1318.14 shall not
apply to fences, hedges, or walls not over seven (7) feet high above the
natural grade nor to terraces, steps, uncovered porches, or other similar
features not over three (3) feet high above the floor of the ground story.
1318.17 Rear Yard Requirements
No building or structure shall be built within the minimum depth from the
rear lot line specified in Section 1318.01, except as permitted in Section
1318.04. Subject to Section 1318.06, this regulation shall not apply to
fences, hedges, or walls not over seven (7) feet high above the natural
grade nor to terraces, steps, uncovered porches or similar features not over
three (3) feet high above the floor of the ground story.
1318.18 Rear Yard Requirements for Triangular Lots
There shall be no rear yard requirements for triangular lots.
1318.19 Maximum Height of Buildings
(a) No building shall exceed the maximum height of buildings specified
in Section 1318.01 except as specified in Section 1318.20.
(b) Height shall be measured from the mean elevation of the proposed
finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the
roof for flat roofs, to the deck lines of mansard roofs, and to the
mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel
roofs.
1318.20 Height Exceptions of Maximum Regulations
Height limitations specified in Section 1318.01 shall not apply to barns and
silos, nor to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, radio or television
aerials, electric utility towers and poles, observation, transmission or radio
towers, flagstaffs, chimneys, parapet walls which extend not more than four
(4) feet above the limiting height, bulkheads, water tanks and water towers,
elevator shafts, elevator and/or machinery penthouses, provided that any
such structures shall not have a horizontal area greater than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the roof area of the building.
Municipal buildings and municipal uses, including civic centers, library,
museum, memorial building or gallery and community center buildings
and/or civic service agencies buildings may be increased in height up to but
not exceeding eight (8) stories or one hundred (100) feet, provided that such
buildings shall not be closer to any street than twice the depth of the
required front yard for the respective residential district in which such
building is located and such setback from any street shall be increased by
not less than one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in height of the building over
thirty-five (35) feet, except in R-M Districts such setback from any street
shall be increased by not less than one (1) foot for each six (6) feet or
portion thereof in height of the building over thirty-five (35) feet.
1318.21 Coverage
For any building or group of buildings on a lot, the building coverage shall
not exceed the maximum percentiles specified in Section 1318.01.
GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1318.22 Compliance
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this Ordinance,
unless otherwise indicated, shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Noise - Excessive levels of sound and vibration are detrimental and
harmful to the health, comfort, living conditions, welfare and safety of
citizens and injurious to their property. Noise disturbances that
constitute a nuisance are considered in Section 717 of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
(1) Definitions -The following words, terms and phrases when
used in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed to them
below, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning. All terminology and sound measurements referred
to in this Section shall be in conformance with the applicable
publications of the American National Standards Institute
(See ANSI S1.1 -1960 (R. 1971), S1.13 - 1971, S1.2 - 1962
(R. 1971), or the latest revisions thereto), or its successor
body.
( I) Noise - Noise is any undesired sound.
( II) Decibels (dB) - A unit of measurement of the sound
pressure level equal to twenty (20) times the
logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference
pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (that is,
20 Micro-newtons per square meter). Sound
pressure is the instantaneous difference between the
actual pressure and the average or barometric
pressure at a given point as produced by sound
energy.
( III) Sound Level - The quantity in decibels obtained by
the use of a sound level meter which is an instrument
that includes a microphone, amplifier, output meter,
and frequency weighing networks used for the
measurement of noise and sound levels in a
specified manner.
( IV) A-Weighted Sound Level (dBA) - The frequency
weighing network that shall be used for the
measurement of noises applicable to this Section is
that designated as "A" by the American National
Standards Institute (see ANSI S1.4 - 1971 or the
latest revision thereto). The A-weighted sound level
denoted by dBA is the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured by a sound level meter using
the A-weighing network.
( V) Pure Tone - Any sound that can be heard essentially
as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the
purposes of this Section, a pure tone shall exist if the
one-third octave bank sound pressure level for the
band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of
the sound pressure levels of the two (2) contiguous
octave bands by five (5) dB for center frequencies of
500 Hz (that is, 500 cycles per second) and above,
and 8 dB for center frequencies between 160 and
400 Hz, and by 15 dB for center frequencies less
than or equal to 125 Hz.
(2) Noise Prohibitions
( I) A person shall not cause or permit noise levels to
emanate that exceed those specified in the following
table, including Paragraphs (II) and (III), except as
exempted by Paragraph (IV).
MAXIMUM ALLOWED NOISE LEVEL
FOR LAND USE AT A RECEIVING PROPERTY BOUNDARY
EXPRESSED AS dBA
Land Use Daytime(a) Nighttime(b)
Industrial 75 dBA 75 dBA
Commercial 67 dBA 62 dBA
Institutional 60 dBA 55 dBA
Residential 60 dBA 55 dBA
a. A-weighted Sound Level maximum allowed for the period 7:00 am to
10:00 pm.
b. A-weighted Sound Level maximum allowed for the period 10:00 pm
to 7:00 am.
( II) A person shall not cause or permit the emission of a
pure tone that exceeds an A-weighted sound level 5
dBA lower than the applicable maximum given in the
above table.
( III) A person shall not cause or permit an A-weighted
sound level to emanate from construction or
demolition activities that exceeds during daytime
hours 90 dBA or during nighttime hours the
maximum stated in the above table for the applicable
land use.
( IV) Exemptions
The provisions of the Section do not apply to:
( i) Devices used only for the purpose of
warning, protecting, or alerting the
public, or some segment thereof, of
the existence of an emergency or
emergency work.
( ii) Motor vehicle on public right-of-ways,
aircraft, trains, and emergency, utility
or public operations, including snow
removal.
(iii) Sounds, other than those
electronically amplified, created by
sporting, amusement, entertainment,
and other public gatherings
conducted pursuant to other City
permits or Ordinances. This
exception includes, but is not limited
to, public athletic contests, carnivals,
fairs, parades, celebrations, and
concerts.
(b) Smoke, dust, fumes, gases, odors, mists, vapors and pollens. The
emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gases, odors, mists, vapors,
pollens and similar matter, or any combination thereof, which can
cause any damage to human or animal health or vegetation, or to
other forms of property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of
persons or property at the point beyond the lot line of the use
creating the emission is prohibited. Standards concerning such
emission shall be in accord with the rules and regulations of the
following sources: The Air Pollution Control Act, the Act of January
8, 1960, P.L. 2119, as amended 35 P.S., Article 4001, et seq.
(c) Heat and Glare. Any operation producing glare and/or heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building or in such a manner as not to
be visible or to produce any effect beyond the property line of the lot
on which the operation is located.
(d) Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions
detectable beyond its lot lines without the aid of instruments with the
exception of that vibration produced as a result of construction
activity.
(e) Electric, Diesel, Gas, or Other Power. Every use requiring power
shall be so operated that the service lines, substation or other
facilities shall conform to the highest safety requirements, and shall
be so constructed and installed as to be an integral part of the
architectural features of the plant and, except for essential poles and
wires, shall not extend into any yard and shall be suitably screened
from streets or any adjacent property which would be deleteriously
affected by such installations.
(f) Storage and Waste Disposal. The following general regulations shall
apply to the storage of materials and the disposal of materials:
( 1) No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases
shall be stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums
of fuel directly connecting with energy devices, heating
devices, or appliances, located and operated on the same lot
as the tanks or drums of fuel.
( 2) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and
products; and all fuel, raw materials and products stored
outdoors shall be enclosed by an approved safety fence.
( 3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such
form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by
natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can
contaminate a stream or water course or otherwise render
such stream or water course undesirable as a source of
water supply or recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life,
be allowed to enter any stream or water course.
( 4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors only if enclosed in containers which are adequate
to eliminate such hazards.
1318.23 Buffer Yards
Buffer yards are required in all office-research, commercial and industrial
districts along the district boundaries between themselves and residential
and institutional districts as shown in Section 1318.01, except that in a C-B
District such buffer yards shall be required between the C-B District and the
residential or institutional districts only where such districts abut at other
than within the area of ordained City streets. Buffer yards are also required
for specific land uses as indicated in Article 1325. Buffer yards shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary line or
from the near street line where a street serves as the district
boundary line.
(b) The buffer yard shall be required in the C-B, C-G, C-L, C-S, C-R, CM,
P-I, L-I, and H-I Districts along the district boundaries between
themselves and all residential district boundary lines in adjoining
municipalities.
(c) The buffer yard may be coterminous with required front, side, and
rear yards, and in case of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall
apply.
(d) All buffer yards shall be planted with grass seed, and/or ground
cover, and shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds and tall grass in conformance with existing regulations.
(e) No structure, manufacturing or processing activity, or storage of
materials shall be permitted in the buffer yard.
(f) All buffer yards shall include a dense screen planting of trees,
shrubs or other plant material, or both, to the full length of the lot line
to serve as a barrier to visibility, air-born particles, glare and noise.
Such screen planting shall be located within the buffer yard, and
shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
( 1) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be at least
four (4) feet in height when planted and be of such species
as will produce, within two (2) years, a complete visual
screen of at least six (6) feet in height.
( 2) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently and
any plant material which does not live shall be replaced
within one (1) year.
( 3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will
not be closer than three (3) feet from any street or property
line.
( 4) In accordance with the provisions of Section 1318.06, a
clear-sight triangle shall be maintained at all street
intersections and at all points where private accessways
intersect public streets.
( 5) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of
vehicular or pedestrian access.
(g) No screen planting shall be required along streets which form district
boundary lines, provided that:
( 1) No outdoor processing or manufacturing activity and no
outdoor storage of materials shall be so located as to be
visible from the adjacent Residential District.
( 2) Only the front of any proposed building shall be visible from
the adjacent Residential District.
(h) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, complete plans showing
the arrangement of all buffer yards and the placement, species and
size of all plant materials and the placement, size, materials, and
type of all fences to be placed in such buffer yard shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission, in accordance with Article 1321, Site
Plan Review, to insure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.
REGULATIONS APPLYING TO CERTAIN USES AND DISTRICTS
1318.24 Planned Unit Development
(a) The Planned Unit Development concept is
intended to permit flexibility in lot layout, lot sizes,
housing types, and the placement and bulk of
buildings planned and developed as a unit. It is
also intended to provide for developments
incorporating a variety of residential and related
uses which are planned and developed as a unit.
Such development may
consist of individual lots or it may have common
building sites. The purpose of this Section is to
permit such flexibility and provide performance
criteria which can result in planned residential
developments with:
( 1) A maximum choice in the type of environment and living
units available to the public;
( 2) Common open space and recreation areas;
( 3) A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding
natural topography and geologic features and prevents soil
erosion;
( 4) A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development;
( 5) An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of
utilities and streets and thereby lower development costs;
( 6) An environment of stable character in harmony with
surrounding development;
( 7) An opportunity to create a different type of living environment
than may be possible through the strict application of other
sections of this Ordinance.
(b) Location. A Planned Unit Development may be established in the
R-S, R-G, R-T, and R-M Districts.
(c) Procedure:
( 1) Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application for
tentative approval of a Planned Unit Development, a public
hearing, pursuant to public notice, shall be had by the
Planning Commission.
( 2) All testimony shall be taken under oath and every party of
record shall have the right to cross-examine the witnesses.
A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made
by the Planning Commission whenever such records are
requested by any party to the proceedings; but the cost of
making and transcribing such a record shall be borne by the
party requesting it and the expense of copies of such record
shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such copies.
( 3) The public hearing shall be concluded not more than sixty
(60) days after the date of the first public hearing.
( 4) Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public
hearing, the Planning Commission, by official written
communication, shall:
( I) Grant tentative approval of the plan as submitted;
( II) Grant tentative approval, subject to conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
( III) Deny tentative approval to the plan as submitted.
Failure to so act shall be deemed a grant of tentative
approval.
( 5) A building permit for any structure in a planned unit
development shall be issued only after the plans for such
development have been finally approved by the Planning
Commission. The site plans, reports and related information
submitted shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Planning
Commission to evaluate the proposed development in
accordance with the conditions of Section 1318.24(d). Said
plans shall also be referred to the County Planning
Commission for study and recommendation. A
recommendation shall be forthcoming to the City or the
Commission shall forfeit the right to review. All structures in
a planned unit development shall be constructed as shown
on the approved plans. Any changes to the approved plans
shall be resubmitted for Planning Commission approval.
Final approval shall be granted by the Commission no earlier
than the meeting following the grant of tentative approval.
(d) Plan Review. The Planning Commission shall investigate and
ascertain that the plans for a planned unit development meet the
following conditions:
( 1) The density for the development shall not exceed the
maximum density standards for multiple family dwellings for
the district as stated in Article 1318. Thus, the following
table shows the maximum density standard for a planned
unit development in each of the City's residential districts:
R-S - One (1) dwelling unit for each 6,000 sq. ft.
R-G - One (1) dwelling unit for each 4,000 sq. ft.
R-T - One (1) dwelling unit for each 3,000 sq. ft.
R-M - One (1) dwelling unit for each 2,000 sq. ft.
( 2) In R-S, R-G, and R-T Residence Districts, at least 20% of
the development shall consist of single family detached
dwellings. The remaining portion of the development shall
consist of two (2) family, single family attached, and/or
multiple family dwellings. No development shall consist of
more than 50% of any one (1) type of dwelling unit.
In R-M Residence Districts, at least 10% of the development
shall consist of either single family detached or two (2) family
dwellings. The remainder of the development may consist of
single family detached, two (2) family, single family attached
or multiple family dwellings, with a minimum of three (3)
dwelling types represented, and a maximum of fifty percent
(50%) of any of these dwelling types.
( 3) The net development acreage shall be determined by
subtracting from the total tract size the area set aside for
churches and schools, subtracting all water courses and
flood plains, and deducting fifteen percent (15%) of the
remainder for streets, regardless of the amount of land used
for streets. The area of land set aside for common open
space or recreational use shall be included in determining
the number of dwelling units permitted. The land set aside
for common open space or recreation use shall constitute at
least twenty percent (20%) of the total tract area.
( 4) The proposed development shall be served by public water
supply and public sewage disposal systems.
(e) There shall be no maximum building height, no minimum lot area, no
minimum lot width. However, no single-family dwelling (except in an
attached or semi-detached dwelling) and no addition to any single
family dwelling shall be erected within a distance of less than sixteen
(16) feet from any other single family dwelling.
(f) There shall be no non-residential uses within the development
except that certain commercial, business and services activities,
identified as a use permitted by right in C-L, Limited Commercial,
may be included in planned unit developments, provided:
( 1) The planned unit development contains two hundred (200)
or more dwelling units.
( 2) Not more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of
commercial floor area be provided for every two hundred
(200) units.
( 3) Separate commercial buildings or commercial parts of
residential buildings and commercial activities to be
conducted therein be intended, planned, and designed to
primarily serve the inhabitants of the Planned Unit
Development in which they are located.
( 4) Commercial activities, whether in separate buildings or
incorporated as parts of residential buildings, shall be of an
architectural design compatible with the residential buildings.
( 5) Parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with
applicable provisions of Article 1319.
( 6) Signs, if provided, shall be limited to an identification sign for
each point of access, shall not exceed two (2) square feet in
area and shall be attached flat against the face of the
buildings.
(g) Open space and recreation land for common use shall be an
essential and major element of the plan.
(h) The location and size of the proposed use or uses, the nature and
density of the principal use and all accessory uses, the site layout
and its relation to streets giving access to it, shall be such that traffic
to and from the use or uses, and the assembly or persons in
connection therewith, will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the
neighborhood. In applying this standard the Planning Commission
shall consider, among other things: convenient routes for pedestrian
traffic, particularly of children; the relationship of the proposed
project to main traffic thoroughfares and to street and road
intersections; and, the general character and intensity of the existing
and potential development of the neighborhood.
(i) The location and height of buildings, the location and nature and
height of walls and fences, and the nature and extent of landscaping
of the site shall be such that they will not hinder or discourage the
proper development and use of adjacent land and buildings nor
impair the value thereof.
(j) Off-street parking shall be provided according to the applicable
minimum requirements of Article 1319. Design, arrangement, and
improvement of streets and driveways, shall conform with the
officially adopted City of Bethlehem Subdivision Ordinance. Also,
every structure containing dwelling units shall have access to a
public street directly or via a court, walkway or other area devoted to
public use but need not front on a road.
(k) Maintenance of Common Facilities. The Planning Commission shall
be provided with sufficient information to enable it to determine the
agreements and procedures through which land and facilities for
common use will be maintained. A Homes Association will be
required if other satisfactory arrangements have not been made for
improving, operating and maintaining common facilities including
streets, drives, service and parking areas, and open space and
recreation areas. When required, the owner(s) must establish a
Homes Association in accordance with the requirements and
procedures outlined by FHA in Sections 7 and 8.2 of the Land
Planning Bulletin No. 6 entitled "Planned Unit Development With a
Homes Association", dated December, 1963.
1318.25 Highway Frontage Development
In order to encourage the sound development of highway frontage and to
minimize traffic congestion and hazard, the following special provisions shall
apply:
(a) All areas for off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and
the storage or movement of motor vehicles shall be physically
separated from the highway or street by a raised curb, planting strip,
wall, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle
entrance or exit, except for
necessary accessways or access roads which supply entrance to
and egress from such parking, loading or storage area. All parking
areas or lots shall be designed to prohibit vehicles from backing out
on the street, and the capacity of each lot shall provide adequate
storage area and distribution facilities upon the lot to prevent backup
vehicles on a public street while awaiting entry to the lot.
(b) Each use with less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a
public street shall have not more than one (1) accessway to each
such street, and no business or other use with one hundred (100)
feet or more of frontage on a public street shall have more than two
(2) accessways to any one (1) street for each three hundred (300)
feet of frontage. Where practicable, access to parking areas shall
be provided by a common service driveway or minor street in order
to avoid direct access to a major street.
(c) In the case of a shopping center, group of multiple family dwellings
or similar grouping of buildings on a lot, and in any other case where
practicable:
( 1) All buildings shall front upon a marginal street, service road,
common parking lot or similar area and not directly upon a
public street;
( 2) All points of vehicular access to and from a public street shall
be located not less than two hundred (200) feet from the
intersection of any public street lines with each other,
provided, however, that such a point of vehicular access,
which in effect, converts a "T" intersection into an
intersection of two (2) streets which cross one another, shall
be permitted;
( 3) Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the
center, or other unified development, without undue
congestion to, or interference with normal traffic flow within
the City; and
( 4) All streets and accessways shall conform to the
specifications determined by the City Engineer and the
requirements of the City of Bethlehem Subdivision
Ordinance. Provision shall be made for adequate
signalization, turn, standby and deceleration lanes, and
similar facilities where desirable.
(d) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas
or spaces between or about buildings, other than those related to a
dwelling shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of use.
1318.26 Purveyance of Obscene Materials
The following development standards shall apply:
(a) No such use shall be established within a one thousand (1,000) foot
radius of any other such use.
(b) No such use shall be established within five hundred (500) feet from
the closest district boundary line of any residential district, or the
property line of any school, church, park or playground.
(c) No such use shall adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of properties in the neighborhood, be contrary to any
program of neighborhood conservation, or detrimental to the general
character of the neighborhood.
(d) No signs or other structures shall be placed, erected, or used on the
exterior of the premises except a sign which identifies, as opposed
to advertises, the use therein. This sign shall not include any logo or
other graphic display, suggestive language or display of any
merchandise or material sold on the premises. The premises shall
not be painted in garish colors or such other fashion as will
effectuate the same purpose as such prohibited signs or structures.
1318.27 Notice to Adjoining Municipalities
Where a property is located within five hundred (500) feet of a municipal
boundary, the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, or officer
having jurisdiction shall refer any subdivision plan, development plan,
variance petition or special exception application to the neighboring
municipality for its comments.
1318.28 Requirements for Satellite Earth Stations
(a) The maximum size of a satellite earth station shall be twelve (12)
feet in diameter.
(b) In a Residential District, no satellite earth station may be located in
the front yard of a lot or in the street side yard of a corner lot.
(c) Any satellite earth station located in a side or rear yard in a
Residential District or in any yard in a Commercial, Industrial, or
Institutional District must be set back from the nearest property line a
distance equal to the overall height of the antenna which may not
exceed fifteen (15) feet.
(d) No satellite earth station located on a roof may exceed an overall
height of ten (10) feet above the highest point of the roof.
(e) No satellite earth station may be used for commercial purposes if
located in a Residential District

1318.28A Regulations for Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas
(a) Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to minimize the number of new
commercial communication towers through encouraging co-location
of commercial communication antennas, to ensure that new towers
will be safe and be placed in suitable locations, and to help ensure
that municipal land use regulations are in compliance with the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
(b) Definitions
(1) Cellular Telephone - A system providing portable telephone
service to specific subscribers. A cellular telephone may
also be referred to as a wireless telephone.
(2) Commercial Communications Antenna - Any device used for
the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless
telephone, pacer, commercial mobile radio service or any
other wireless communications signals, including without
limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas, and directional
or panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or
entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) to operate such device. This definition shall not
include private residence mounted satellite dishes or
television antennas or amateur radio equipment including
without limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.
(3) Commercial Communications Tower - A structure other than
a building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed
tower, designed and used to support commercial
communication antennas.
(4) Fall Zone - The area on the ground within a prescribed
radius from the base of a commercial communications tower.
The fall zone is the area within which there is a potential
hazard from falling debris or the collapsing of the commercial
communications tower. The fall zone shall be determined by
the applicant's engineer and subject to the review and
approval of the City Engineer.
(5) Height of Tower - The overall height of the tower from the
base of the tower to the highest point of the tower, including,
but not limited to, antennas, transmitters, satellite dishes or
any other structures affixed to or otherwise placed on the
tower. If the base of the tower is not on ground level, the
height of the tower shall include the base of the building or
structure to which the tower is attached.
(6) Public Utility Transmission Tower - A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, designed and used
to support overhead electricity transmission lines.
(c) District Requirements
(1) Commercial communication towers shall not be permitted in
any residential zoning district.
(2) Commercial communication towers shall not be permitted
within 100' of any residential zoning district.
(3) After review and approval of a site plan by the City Planning
Commission, commercial communication towers may be
permitted in any commercial, institutional or industrial district.
(4) After approval by the Chief Building Inspector commercial
communication antennas shall be permitted by right in any
zoning district if placed on an existing commercial
communications tower, public utility transmission tower or
any other structure at least sixty (60) feet high.
(5) Commercial communication antennas that are located within
an existing structure shall be excluded from the heights
requirements of paragraph (4) above.
(d) Special Requirements
(1) Site Plan - A site plan for any proposed commercial
communications tower shall be prepared by the applicant
and submitted to the City Planning Commission for review in
accordance with all applicable zoning and subdivision and
development ordinance regulations.
(2) Setback - A commercial communications tower shall be set
back from all property lines the most restrictive of the
following: a minimum distance equal to 1/2 (one-half) its
height or a distance equal to the commercial
communications tower fall zone.
(3) Fence - The base of a commercial
communications tower shall be surrounded by a secure
fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet.
(4) Landscaping - Evergreen plantings shall be required to
screen the fence surrounding the tower and any other
ground level features such as a building or parking area.
The evergreen screen shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high
at planting with an expectation to grow to a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet high at maturity.
At the discretion of the City Planning Commission, the
landscaping requirement may be altered or waived in an
Industrial District.
(5) Parking - A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces
shall be provided for a commercial communications tower.
(6) Wind Resistance - For any commercial communications
tower or antenna higher than fifty (50) feet, the applicant
shall provide, at the time of applying for a building permit,
certification from a registered professional engineer as to the
overall structural integrity of the tower and that the tower or
antenna meets the wind resistance requirements stated in
the latest version of the BOCA National Building Code.
(7) Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
( I) The applicant shall provide documentation of FAA
approval for commercial communication towers or
antennas exceeding two (2) hundred feet in height.
Commercial communication towers or antennas less
than two (2) hundred feet in height shall meet the
requirements of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part
77.13(a), as amended (copy attached).
(II) No commercial communications tower or antenna
shall be artificially lighted except when required and
approved by the FAA.
(8) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (Aviation)
( I) The applicant shall provide documentation of
PennDOT Bureau of Aviation approval for
commercial communication towers or antennas in
accordance with P.L. 837, No. 164 and Title 67 PA
Code Chapter 479, Section 479.4.
(II) No commercial communications tower or antenna
shall be artificially lighted except when required and
approved by PennDOT Bureau of Aviation.
(9) Airport Coordination - The applicant for a proposed
commercial communications tower or antenna, located
within a five (5) mile radius of an existing or planned airport,
will notify the airport manager in writing of its intent to place
such structures. If, in the judgement of the airport manager,
the proposed structure should be marked and/or lighted, the
applicant will comply with the finding of the airport manager.
Such findings will supersede findings issued by the FAA or
PennDOT that do not require marking or lighting. Any
marking or lighting required by the airport manager shall be
consistent with FAA advisory circulars in effect at the time.
(10) Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
( I) The commercial communications company shall
provide documentation that it is licensed by the FCC.
( II) Whenever applicable, the applicant shall provide
documentation that the FCC has approved the
proposed commercial communications tower or
antenna.
( III) Whenever applicable, the applicant shall provide
documentation that the proposed commercial
communications tower or antenna complies with all
applicable standards established by the FCC
governing human exposure to electromagnetic
radiation.
(11) Documentation of Need - The commercial communications
company shall demonstrate, using technological evidence,
that in order to satisfy its functional requirements, the tower
and/or antenna must go where it is proposed. Also, if a
tower is proposed, that there are no existing structures within
1/4 mile of the site on which to place the antenna.
(12) Removal of Commercial Communication Towers and
Antennas - If a commercial communications tower and/or
antenna remains unused for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle
and remove the tower and/or antenna within six (6) months
of notice to do so by the City. In addition, all portions of the
base that are at or above the existing grade shall be
demolished and removed from the site. Prior to the issuance
of a building permit by the City, the applicant shall post
security in a form acceptable to the City Solicitor favoring the
City in an amount to cover the costs of tower and/or antenna
removal and site clean-up. The security shall be utilized by
the City in the event that the owner or operator of the facility
fails to remove the tower and/or antenna within six (6)
months of notification by the City.
1318.29 Development Standards For Steep Slopes
For the purpose of these regulations, any land with a gradient in excess of
15% shall be deemed subject to these regulations.
(a) Intent
This section is intended to serve the following purposes, to avoid
problems that typically accompany development of steeply sloped
and adjacent areas:
( 1) To avoid severe soil erosion and sedimentation, especially
considering many steep areas are highly vulnerable to
erosion.
( 2) To avoid severely increased stormwater flow rates and
velocities.
( 3) To recognize the recommendations of the Joint Planning
Commission's Comprehensive Plan for Lehigh and
Northampton Counties (which identifies the majority of the
areas affected by this Section as "Environmental Hazard
Areas").
( 4) To steer development to those areas that are more
physically suited for it, and where the City has allowed for
intense development.
( 5) To avoid construction of steep roads that are difficult, timeconsuming
and expensive to maintain.
( 6) To avoid increased use of steep roads and driveways that
are dangerous to drive upon in snow and ice, and that are
difficult for fire trucks to access.
( 7) To seek to conserve forested areas that are important parts
of the ecological cycle, providing for groundwater recharge,
air pollution reduction and wildlife habitats, especially along
the Monocacy Creek.
( 8) To recognize that many of the areas
affected by this section include natural springs, wetlands and
major drainage channels that are important parts of the
hydrological cycle, affecting water quality, water quantity,
aquatic habitats and public water supplies.
(b) Exceptions
( 1) Small Areas Of Slope.
If the total areas of over 15% slope within the construction
area are less than five hundred (500) square feet, the City
Engineer may waive the requirements related to
development of steep slopes.
( 2) Existing Streets.
The disturbance of sloped areas for widening, alignment
improvement, sight distance improvement or similar
improvement of an existing street for public safety reasons or
that is required by, approved by or accomplished by the City
or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
( 3) Man-Made Slopes.
The alteration of slopes that were clearly lawfully man-made
(such as walls of a detention basin or quarry or excavated
banks along a street) shall be regulated by a reasonable
estimate of the natural slope of such land.
( 4) Building Expansion.
An expansion of a building that existed and for which a valid
building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this
Section (1318.29) shall not by itself cause the requirements
of this Section (1328.29) to apply.
( 5) Public Open Space.
The development of public open space uses by a
governmental agency or an established nature conservation
organization shall not by itself cause the requirements of this
Section (1318.29) to apply.
( 6) Municipal Uses.
Uses owned by the City of Bethlehem or its authorized
municipal authorities for legitimate governmental purposes
shall not be bound by the requirements of this Section
(1318.29).
( 7) Utilities.
Grading necessary for the installation of public water or
public sewer line extensions of other underground utilities
shall not by itself cause the requirements of this Section
(1318.29) to apply.
( 8) HI DISTRICT.
Land located in the HI Heavy Industrial Zoning District (which
is more than five hundred (500) feet from an open
waterway).
(c) Minimum Lot Area And Maximum Impervious Coverage
In Steep Areas.
( 1) The following shall apply whenever one or both of the
following, together with the related "construction area", would
involve the alteration or disturbance of slopes over 15%:
( I) The development of a new principal
building or
( II) The expansion by over 1,000 square feet in building
coverage of an existing principal building which did
not exist or have a valid building permit at the time of
the effective date of this Section (1318.29):
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If the maximum slope The minimum lot The maximum impervious
within the construction area shall be: coverage of the lot
area is: shall be:
-------------------------------- ----------------------- --------------------------------------------
Over 15% and up to 25% 1 Acre 25%
Over 25% and up to 35% 4 Acres 10%
Over 35% 10 Acres 5%
(d) Maximum Slope Of Driveways
No driveway shall have a maximum slope greater than 15%. The
initial twenty (20) feet of a driveway from the cartway of a public
street which the driveway enters into shall not exceed 6%.
(e) Maximum Vertical Drop Of Terraces
When terraces or retaining walls are utilized to cope with steep
slopes, the maximum vertical drop per terrace shall be five (5) feet.
Furthermore, at the discretion of the City Planning Commission, an
appropriate fence may be required.
(f) Submittal Requirements
Applicants proposing uses affected by this Section shall provide the
following information to the City as part of preliminary subdivision
plans for a proposed lot, or on a separate plot plan for an existing
lot. Such designated construction area shall be binding upon future
owners of each lot unless such applicant then provides a revised
site plan that proves to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that a
revised construction area location would not cause a larger lot area
to be required and would meet all other requirements of this
Ordinance.
( I) Mapping of slopes within areas proposed to be disturbed,
with identification of the following slope intervals, based upon
two (2) feet contours, unless the City Engineer pre-approves
a different contour interval:
( i) Over 15% and up to 25%.
(ii) Over 25%.
( II) Location of proposed construction area.
( III) Locations of areas where healthy trees of over six (6) inches
in trunk width measured at a height of three (3) feet above
the average surrounding ground level and heavy brush
growth are to be removed or preserved as a result of the
development of the proposed use or structure.
(g) Non-Impervious Areas
Areas used to meet the non-impervious area requirements of this
Section (1318.29) shall be permanently set aside by deed
restrictions which will run with the land and be placed in the Deeds
of Conveyance by the applicant to its grantees. The language of
such deed restriction shall be in a form acceptable to the City
Solicitor.
1318.30 Regulations Applying to Office or Business Related Activities Conducted
Wholly Within a Residential Structure in a Residential Zoned District.
(a) Intent
It is the intent of this section to permit, on a limited basis, the
conduct of home office or business type activities within a
residential structure in a residentially zoned district subject to the
following regulations:
(1) No persons other than the owner occupant shall work at or
use the property as a meeting place for the purpose of
traveling to a work site. There shall be no parking of trailers,
construction or landscaping equipment, cement mixers or
other similar equipment on the property.
(2) No signage shall be permitted on the property.
(3) The residential character of the structure and lot shall be
maintained.
(4) The owner/occupant may not engage in retail sales or
conduct scheduled client/customer visits on the premises.
(5) No structural changes may be made to the dwelling or
driveway for the purpose of conducting business or storage
of materials related to the business. This shall not prohibit
modifications that are solely for residential purposes.
1318.31 Pool Regulations
(a) All pools placed in a residential zoning district shall meet the front
yard setback regulations for a structure; except in the RM and RT
districts, where a minimum setback requirement from any street
shall be twenty (20’) feet.
(b) All pools shall be located at least six (6’) feet from any side or rear
property line.
(c) Any deck over three (3’) feet high and placed adjacent to a pool shall
meet the normal building setback requirements of the zoning district
in which the pool is placed.
ARTICLE 1319
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
1319.01 Required Off-Street Parking Space
(a) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained in accordance with the following provisions for each
building which, after the effective date of this Ordinance, is erected,
enlarged or altered for any of the following purposes in any district:
( 1) Residences. Except as authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board, the requirements are as follows:
( I) Single family dwellings, two (2) family dwellings,
apartments with three (3) or more bedrooms - two (2)
parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
( II) Apartments with one or two bedrooms - one and
three-quarter (1-3/4) parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
( III) Efficiency apartments - one and one-half (1-1/2)
parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
( 2) Hotels. Two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) sleeping
rooms or suites, plus one (1) additional space for each five
(5) employees, plus such additional space as required by
this parking schedule because of any supplementary parking
- generating activities of some hotels, such as bars,
ballrooms, night club facilities and the like.
( 3) Cabins or Motels. One (1) parking space for each sleeping
room or suite, plus one (1) additional space for the owner or
manager if resident on the premises, plus additional space
necessary as in (2) above.
( 4) Bed and Breakfast Home. Two (2) parking spaces for the
single family dwelling and one (1) additional space for each
room to be rented.
( 5) Rooming and Boarding Houses. One (1) parking space for
each sleeping room to be occupied by roomers or boarders,
plus one (1) space for each dwelling unit on the premises,
and plus one (1) additional space for every two (2) persons
regularly employed on the premises.
( 6) Clubhouses and Permanent Meeting Places of Veterans,
Business, Civic, Fraternal, Labor and Similar Organizations.
One (1) parking space for every fifty (50) square feet of
aggregate floor area in the auditorium, assembly hall and
dining room of such building, plus one (1) additional space
for every two (2) persons regularly employed on the
premises.
( 7) Dormitories, Fraternity Houses and Sorority Houses. One
(1) parking space for every four (4) beds, plus one (1)
additional space for each two (2) employees thereof.
( 8) Hospitals. One (1) parking space for every four (4) patient
beds (excluding bassinets), plus three (3) additional spaces
for every four (4) staff members or visiting doctors, plus one
(1) space for each two (2) employees including nurses
normally employed during any shift; loading and unloading
space for hospital ambulances and similar vehicles are not
included in the spaces required.
( 9) Nursing and Convalescent Homes. One (1) parking space
for every four (4) beds.
(10) Medical and Dental Clinics. Three (3) parking spaces for
each doctor plus one (1) additional space for every two (2)
regular employees.
(11) Mortuaries or Funeral Parlors. One (1) parking space for
each "official" vehicle plus one (1) space for each family
resident on the premises plus one (1) additional space
for each two (2) employees (other than resident on the
premises), plus one (1) space for each fifty (50) square feet
of floor area in the viewing rooms, slumber rooms, parlors, or
individual funeral service rooms.
(12) Welfare Institutions, Such as Asylums, Elderly Housing,
Orphanages. Three (3) parking spaces for every four (4)
staff members or visiting doctors, plus one (1) space for
every three (3) employees normally employed during any
shift, plus (a) one (1) space for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area in asylums or orphanages, or
(b) one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces for every ten (10)
dwelling units in elderly housing.
(13) Libraries, Museum, Post Offices,
Civic Centers and Similar Establishments. Parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly in the operation
of such establishment plus four (4) parking spaces for the
first one thousand (1,000) square feet of total floor area and
one (1) additional space for every additional two hundred fifty
(250) square feet of floor area.
(14) Convention Halls, Gymnasiums, Race Tracks, Skating
Rinks, Stadiums, Sports Arenas, Auditoriums, Theaters,
Churches and Similar Uses. One (1) parking space for
every four (4) persons who may legally be admitted therein
at one time under the State Fire Prevention Laws.
(15) Bowling Alleys. Three (3) parking spaces for each alley, plus
additional spaces equal in number to at least sixty (60)
percent of the number of employees.
(16) Schools. One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees
including teachers and administrators, plus off-street space
for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of
students, plus additional facilities for student parking at the
high school level of one hundred (100) spaces.
(17) Universities, Colleges, Academies, and Similar Institutions of
Higher Learning. One (1) parking space for every two (2)
persons regularly employed at the institution, plus one (1)
space for each ten (10) classroom seats, plus additional
space as required by this parking schedule because of any
supplementary parking generating activities at the institution.
(18) Office, Professional or Public Buildings. One (1) parking
space for each two (2) employees.
(19) Transportation Terminals. One (1) parking space for every
one hundred (100) square feet of waiting room space plus
one (1) additional space for every two (2) persons regularly
employed on the premises.
(20) Restaurants, Night Clubs, Tea Rooms, Lunch Counters or
the Like. One (1) parking space for each three (3)
employees, plus one (1) space for every four (4) seats for
customers.
(21) Roadside Stands, Car Washes, or other Roadside Service
Establishments. One (1) parking space for each employee
plus additional spaces or equivalent standing area for
customer-motorists in the ratio of one (1) space for every fifty
(50) lineal feet of road frontage.
(22) Indoor Retail Businesses. Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business plus
four (4) parking spaces for the first one thousand (1,000)
square feet of total floor area and one (1) additional space
for every additional two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of
floor area.
(23)Shopping Centers. Five and one-half (5-1/2) parking spaces for
every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. In
an enclosed shopping mall, however, that floor area which is
used exclusively for pedestrian traffic and which is not within the
area specifically assigned to a particular store, may be excluded
from the gross floor area computation.
(24) Repair Shops, Plumbing Shops, Electrical Shops, Roofing
Shops, Public Garages, and Other Service Establishments.
Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the
conduct of the business plus two (2) parking spaces for each
person regularly employed on the premises.
(25) Self-Service Laundries. One (1) parking space for every four
(4) washing machines.
(26) Outdoor Retail Businesses. Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business plus
two (2) parking spaces for each person employed.
(27) Service Stations. Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the business plus one (1)
service space for each gas pump, three (3) spaces for each
grease rack or similar facility and one (1) space for every two
(2) persons employed on the premises at maximum
employment on a single shift.
(28) General Business, Commercial, and Personal Service
Establishments Not Specifically Covered Herein. One (1)
parking space for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of sales area, or two (2) parking spaces for each employee,
whichever is greater.
(29) Industrial or Manufacturing Establishment. One (1) parking
space for each four (4) employees (based upon the
maximum number employed at any one shift), plus one (1)
parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area in the buildings for use by visitors to the
building or buildings.
(30) Warehouses, Freight Terminals and Trucking Terminals.
Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the
conduct of such business, plus two (2) parking spaces for
each person regularly employed on the premises.
(31) Wholesale Businesses. Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus
two (2) parking spaces for each person employed on the
premises based on maximum seasonal employment.
(32) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in the front of a line
fifty (50) feet back from the property line. This restriction
shall be applicable to Planned Industrial Districts only.
(33) Residential Retirement Complex. One-half (.5) parking
space for each dwelling unit and one (1) space per
employee of the complex during a maximum shift.
1319.02 General Regulations Applying to Required Off-Street Parking Facilities
(a) Existing Parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of
adoption of this Ordinance shall not be subject to the requirements
of this Article so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed,
and provided that any parking facility now serving such structures or
uses shall not in the future be reduced below such requirements.
(b) Change in Requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a
structure or a change or extension of a use which increases the
parking requirements according to the standards of Section 1319.01,
the total additional parking required for the alteration, change or
extension shall be provided within 120 days in accordance with the
requirements of that section.
(c) Conflict with other Uses. No parking area shall be used for any use
that interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
(d) Continuing Character of Obligation. All required parking facilities
shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which
the facilities were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities
shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision except upon
the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board and then only after proof
that, by reason of diminution in floor area, seating area, the number
of employees, or change in other factors, controlling the regulation of
the number of parking spaces, such reduction is in conformity with
the requirements of this Article.
Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of
particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
employees or other persons whom the facilities are designed to
serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner
as to at no time constitute a nuisance, or hazard, or unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
(e) Joint Use.
( 1) Two (2) or more uses may provide for required parking in a
common parking lot if the total space provided is not less
than the sum of the spaces required for each use
individually. However, the number of spaces required in a
common parking facility may be reduced below this total by
approval by the Planning Commission if it can be
demonstrated to the Commission that the hours or days of
peak parking needed for the uses are so different that a
lower total will provide adequately for all uses served by the
facility.
(f) Fractional Spaces. Where the computation of required parking
space results in a fractional number, any fraction of the next higher
number shall be counted as one (1).
(g) Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces
shall be on the same lot or premises with the principal use served.
(h) Maintenance of Parking Area. For parking areas of three (3) or
more vehicles, the area not landscaped and so maintained,
including driveways, shall be graded, surfaced with a dustless,
durable, all-weather pavement parking surface, and drained to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent
dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining
property. All off-street parking spaces shall be marked so as to
indicate their location.
(i) Lighting. All parking areas and driveways serving commercial uses
shall be adequately illuminated during the hours of use between
sunset and sunrise.
(j) Shade Trees. Off-street parking areas which provide parking for
twenty (20) or more vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a
type and size approved by the Shade Tree Commission. The shade
trees shall be located in a planned manner within the parking lot
area.
(k) Access to a non-residential use and its related off-street parking
shall be from a street where over fifty (50) percent of the frontage on
both sides of a street is non-residential in use.
1319.03 Design Standards
The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street
parking facilities with a capacity of five (5) or more vehicles built after the
effective date of this Ordinance.
(a) The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be as follows:
( 1) Stall width shall be at least nine (9) feet.
( 2) Stall depth shall be at least nineteen (19) feet with said
dimensions measured on the angle for all angle parking and
twenty-two (22) feet for parallel parking.
( 3) Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for oneway
traffic only, varying with the angle of the parking shall
be:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width
Parallel 12 feet
30 Degree 12 feet
45 Degree 14 feet
60 Degree 18 feet
90 Degree 20 feet
( 4) Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for twoway
traffic shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(b) Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle.
(c) The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
( 1) A maximum of fifteen (15) feet at the curb line for one-way
use only.
( 2) A maximum of twenty-five (25) feet at the curb line for twoway
use.
(d) Where there is an intersection of two (2) streets, an entrance or exit
drive shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the
intersection of the street line as defined by this Code.
(e) In no case shall parking areas for five (5) or more vehicles be
designed to require or encourage cars to back into a public street in
order to leave the lot.
(f) All parking spaces and access drives placed on or adjacent to a
property located in any Residential, Institutional, Limited
Commercial, or Planned Industrial Zoning District, shall be located at
least ten (10) feet from any property line which is not also a street
line.
(g) All parking spaces shall be separated from the street curb line by a
concrete curb, planting strip (where appropriate) and sidewalk all
built to City Specifications. Properties located in or across the street
from a Residential, Institutional, Limited Commercial or Planned
Industrial Zoning District shall add a three (3) foot buffer yard
between the street line and parking area, except that, if approved by
the Department of Public Works, the buffer yard may protrude into
the street right-of-way. Parking areas shall be equipped with
adequate barriers, such as tire bumpers, to prevent vehicles from
projecting beyond the designated parking area.
(h) In any parking area of five (5) or more spaces in a Residential
District or abutting a Residential District, all spaces not within a
building shall be provided with a suitable fence, wall or evergreen
planting at least four (4) feet in height, designed to screen noise,
odors, visibility and headlight glare, and located between such
parking spaces and any lot in a Residential District that abuts
directly or across a street.
(i) All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces
shall be so arranged that no direct rays from such lighting shall fall
upon any neighboring property.
(j) No commercial vehicle exceeding two (2) tons may be stored on a
residential lot. Only one (1) commercial vehicle of less than two (2)
tons capacity may be stored on a residential lot.
1319.04 Off-Street Loading
Every building or structure having over one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area used for the retail sale, display, storage, manufacture,
preparation, and/or distribution of foods, merchandise, or materials or any
other uses involved in large volume receipt and distribution by vehicles of
merchandise and materials shall provide space as herein indicated for the
loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space
shall have access to a public alley, or if there is no alley, to a street.
Off-street loading and unloading space shall be in addition to and not
considered as meeting a part of the requirements for off-street parking
space. Off-street loading and unloading space shall not be used or
designed, intended or constructed to be used in a manner to obstruct or
interfere with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining property. At least
the following off-street loading and unloading space requirements for
specific uses shall be provided:
(a) Retail Business and Service Establishments. One (1) off-street
loading and unloading space at least twelve (12) feet by thirty-five
(35) feet for the first three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area,
provided that in computing said area requirements contiguous
establishments may be considered as a single unit.
Additional floor area shall require at least one (1) additional space.
More than two (2) spaces shall be required at the discretion of the
proper authority having jurisdiction (Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing
Board, or the City Planning Commission) at the time of site plan
review.
(b) Industrial Plants. One (1) off-street loading and unloading space at
least twelve (12) feet by fifty (50) feet for the first ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of floor area. Fourteen thousand (14,000) or
more square feet of floor area shall require two (2) spaces. More
than two (2) spaces shall be required at the discretion of the proper
authority having jurisdiction (Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board,
or the City Planning Commission) at the time of site plan review.
(c) Warehouses and Wholesale Storage Facilities. One (1) off-street
loading and unloading space at least twelve (12) feet by fifty (50)
feet for the first seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet of floor
area. Twelve thousand (12,000) or more square feet of floor area
shall require two (2) spaces. More than two (2) spaces shall be
required at the discretion of the proper authority having jurisdiction
(Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, or the City Planning
Commission) at the time of site plan review.
(d) Freight Terminals and Trucking Terminals. One (1) off-street
loading and unloading space at least twelve (12) feet by fifty (50)
feet for the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of building area.
Eight thousand (8,000) or more square feet of building area shall
require two (2) spaces. More than two (2) spaces shall be required
at the discretion of the proper authority having jurisdiction (Zoning
Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, or the City Planning Commission) at
the time of site plan review.
1319.05 Design and Layout of Off-Street Loading Facilities
(a) Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to conform to the
following specifications:
( 1) Each required space shall be no less than twelve (12) feet in
width, thirty (30) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in
height, exclusive of drives and maneuvering space, and
located entirely on the lot being served.
( 2) There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or
alley as well as adequate maneuvering space.
( 3) The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings
measured at the street lot line shall be thirty-five (35) feet;
the minimum width shall be twenty (20) feet.
( 4) All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded,
surfaced and drained to the satisfaction of the City Engineer,
to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of dust,
erosion, or excessive water flow across public ways.
( 5) Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner
as to at no time constitute a nuisance, or a hazard or
unreasonable impediment to traffic.
( 6) The screening and lighting requirements of Section
1319.03(h) and (i) shall be met when applicable.
(b) All required loading facilities shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
( 1) They shall be provided and maintained so long as the use
exists which the facilities were designed to serve.
( 2) They shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision,
except when such reduction is in conformity with the
requirements of this Article.
( 3) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or
sponsor of particular uses to assure the availability of
required facilities to the delivery and pick-up vehicles that
they are designed to serve.
ARTICLE 1320
SIGNS
1320.01 Purpose
This Article recognizes that although signs perform an important function by
identifying residences and businesses, minimum control of signs is
necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare: by lessening
hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic; by preserving property values;
by preventing unsightly and detrimental development which has a blighting
influence upon residential, business and industrial uses; by preventing signs
from reaching such excessive size that they obscure one another to the
detriment of all concerned; and by securing certain fundamentals of design
for the City.
1320.02 Definition of Sign
Sign shall mean and include any permanent or temporary structure or part
thereof, or any device attached, painted, or represented directly or indirectly
on a structure or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word
insignia, flag, or representation used as, or which is the nature of, an
advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction, or is
designed to attract the eye, or bring the subject to the attention of the public.
Flags of any governmental unit or branch or of any charitable or religious
organizations, interior signs not visible from a public right-of-way or
adjoining property, and cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a
building are excluded.
1320.03 Location of Signs
(a) On-Premises Sign - A sign which directs attention to a person,
business, profession, occupation or activity conducted on the same
lot.
(b) Off-Premises Sign - A sign which directs attention to a person,
business, profession, product, home occupation or activity not
conducted on the same lot.
1320.04 Types of Signs
(a) Free Standing Signs - A self-supporting sign resting or supported by
means of poles or standards on the ground.
(b) Parallel Sign - A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other vertical
building surface.
(c) Window Sign - A temporary or permanent sign which is oriented to
the public right-of-way, is legible to persons in vehicles, and is
located on the outside or inside of a window to direct attention to an
activity conducted on the same lot.
(d) Projecting Sign - Any sign mounted to a wall or other vertical
building surface other than a parallel sign.
(e) Roof Sign - A sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet of a
building.
(f) Animated Sign - A sign with action or motion with moving characters
or changing colors which require electrical energy, but not including
wind actuated elements, such as flags or banners. This definition
does not include public service signs, such as time and temperature
signs.
(g) Directly Illuminated Sign - A sign designed to give forth artificial light
directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a
source of light within such sign, including, but not limited to, neon
and exposed lamp signs.
(h) Indirectly Illuminated Sign - A sign illuminated with a light so
shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the
lot where said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is
defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated
sign.
(i) Flashing and Moving Sign - An illuminated sign on which the artificial
light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color
at all times when in use. Illuminated signs which indicate the time,
temperature, date or other public service information shall not be
considered flashing signs, but shall be subject to site plan approval
by the Planning Commission and review by the Traffic Bureau.
(j) Portable Sidewalk Sign - A sign which is located on a sidewalk,
which is not permanently attached to the ground, a structure, or any
other sign.
1320.05 Area of Signs
(a) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, working,
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or closed, on which they are displayed,
but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are
incidental to the display itself.
(b) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface, building, wall, or window, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses
all of the letters and symbols.
(c) In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one side
shall be considered provided both faces are identical. If the interior
angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is greater
than forty-five (45) degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be
considered in calculating the sign area.
1320.06 Permit Requirements for Signs
All on-premises signs over six (6) square feet in area and all off-premises
signs regardless of size shall require the issuance of a zoning and building
permit before erection or replacement. All signs must comply with all of the
regulations contained herein, regardless of whether a permit is required. No
permit shall be required for a mere change of copy on a sign, the customary
use of which involves frequent and periodic changes of copy.
1320.07 General Sign Regulations
The following requirements shall apply to all signs:
(a) Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have such
lighting shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or
in the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or
sidewalks. No floor or spot lights shall be mounted higher than
twenty-five (25) feet above ground level.
(b) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic
through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets,
sidewalks, or driveway, through confusion with a traffic control
device (by reason of color, location, shape or other characteristic), or
through any other means. No sign shall violate the corner visibility
restrictions in Section 1318.06.
(c) All signs except temporary signs shall be constructed of durable
material and kept in good condition and repair. Electrical signs shall
be subject to the performance criteria of the Underwriters
Laboratory, Incorporated and to annual inspection by the City
Electrical Inspector.
(d) Signs existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance which do not
conform to the requirements of the Ordinance shall be considered
non-conforming signs. However, non-conforming signs may be
repainted, repaired (including lighting) or replaced provided such
repainted, repaired or replaced signs do not exceed the dimensions
of the existing sign. Copy may also be changed. Non-conforming
signs, once removed for a period of ninety (90) days, may be
replaced only with signs which conform to provisions of this
Ordinance.
(e) If an establishment has walls fronting on two (2) or more streets, the
sign area for each street may be computed separately.
(f) No signs except those of a duly constituted governmental body,
including traffic signs and similar regulatory notices shall be allowed
within street lines unless specifically authorized by other ordinances
and regulations of the City.
(g) No sign except such directional devices as may be required by the
Federal Aviation Authority, shall be placed, inscribed or supported
upon the roof or upon any structure which extends above the roof of
any building.
(h) Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the
carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle’s
primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall be
considered a free-standing sign and as such be subject to the
provisions regarding free-standing signs in the district in which such
vehicle is located.
(i) No sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered only elsewhere than upon
the premises where it is displayed shall be established nearer than
one hundred (100) feet to a Residential District unless the
advertisement surface of such sign is not visible therefrom.
(j) No sign in other than a Residential or Institutional District shall be
located so as to face any Residential or Institutional District on the
same side of the street on which the property bearing the sign fronts.
This provision shall not apply to signs at right angles to the street
line of such street.
(k) Flashing signs, flood lights, flags, banners, twirling, "A" type,
sandwich type, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or other air or
gas-filled figures and special promotional devices shall only be
permitted for a new business in a Commercial or Industrial District
for a period of not more than fifteen (15) days after the opening of
such new business. At no other time shall such devices be
permitted except as provided for in Section 1320.10.
(l) All free-standing signs shall conform to the setbacks required for
other buildings and structures. No free-standing sign in other than a
Residential or Institutional District shall extend within twenty-five (25)
feet of any Residential or Institutional District boundary line. The
location of signs for service stations shall not be located within any
street right-of-way.
(m) Only one (1) on-premises sign with a maximum area of one hundred
(100) square feet may be erected which faces or is primarily
intended to be visible from an Interstate Highway, Limited Access
Highway, Parkway or Expressway. No off-premises signs shall be
erected which face or are primarily intended to be visible from an
Interstate Highway, Limited Access Highway, Parkway or
Expressway.
(n) The office of the Bureau of Inspections shall issue a permit for all
temporary signs for all temporary uses which shall be considered as
uses which operate for a period of four (4) months out of a year.
Said temporary signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet and shall be removed one hundred and twenty (120) days after
erected.
(o) Parallel signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other
surface to which they are mounted, and shall not project more than
fifteen (15) inches from its surface.
(p) Projecting signs shall not project more than three and one-half (3
1/2) feet from the wall or surface to which they are mounted nor in
any way shall they interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
1320.08 Signs Permitted in Residential and Institutional Districts
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) On-Premises Signs.
( 1) Official traffic signs and other official Federal, State, County
and City governmental signs.
( 2) Signs displaying only the name and address of the occupant
of the premises provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed one (1) square foot and not more than one (1)
such sign shall be erected for each occupant of a premises,
unless such property fronts on more than one (1) street, in
which case one (1) such sign may be erected on each street
frontage.
( 3) Signs for bulletin or announcement boards for identification
of permitted non-residential buildings provided that the area
of any such sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. In
the R-T Residential District, signs which shall not exceed
four (4) square feet for a tourist home and boarding house
and six (6) square feet for motor vehicle parking lots may be
erected on any lot where such use exists. Not more than
one (1) such sign shall be placed on each street frontage.
( 4) Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of property,
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed six
(6) square feet and not more than one (1) such sign shall be
placed on property held in single and separate ownership
unless such property fronts on more than one (1) street, in
which case, one (1) such sign may be erected on each street
frontage. All signs shall be removed within seven (7) days
after an agreement of sale or rental has been entered into.
In addition to the foregoing, one (1) open house sign shall be
permitted subject to the five (5) conditions listed under
1320.08(b)(3). Two (2) off premises signs shall also be
permitted as stated in 1320.08(b)(3).
( 5) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway, or premises, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
( 6) Temporary signs erected in connection with the development
or proposed development of the premises by a builder,
contractor, developer or other persons interested in such
sale or development, provided that the aggregate area of the
signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. Such
signs shall be removed within
twenty (20) days after the last structure has been initially
occupied. Where a real estate developer is engaged in
selling lots only, then temporary signs advertising the sale of
lots in the subdivision shall be permitted during the initial
period of the development project, which period shall
commence with the recording date of the subdivision map
and shall end twelve (12) months thereafter. The permit for
such signs may be renewed at the end of each twelve (12)
month period.
( 7) Temporary signs of mechanics or artisans may be erected
and maintained during the period such persons are
performing work on the premises on which such signs are
erected, provided that such signs shall be removed upon
completion of work by the mechanic or artisan, and the total
areas of all such signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square
feet.
( 8) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive, or event of
a civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organization
shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the campaign,
drive, or event.
( 9) Signs for identification of permitted home occupation or
home professional office uses, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet. However,
the aggregate square footage of signs erected under
1320.08(a)(2) and this Section shall not exceed two (2)
square feet. Such signs exceeding a total of one (1) square
foot in size shall have to meet the front yard setback
requirements of this Ordinance.
(10) Apartment developments may have one (1) sign, one (1)
square foot in area, for each dwelling unit in the development
up to a maximum of twenty (20) square feet. If the
development fronts on more than one (1) street, there may
be one (1) such sign for each street frontage.
(11) Parallel and projecting signs for non-conforming uses, also
subject to the provisions of Section 1320.07.
( I) Signs attached to the main wall of a principal building
shall not project more than three and one-half (3-1/2)
feet therefrom and no portion shall be less than ten
(10) feet above the basic grade and no more than
twenty-five (25) feet above grade. Such signs shall
not exceed twenty-two and one-half (22-1/2) square
feet.
( II) The total area of all signs shall not exceed twelve
and one-half (12-1/2) percent of the area of the
building face (including window and door area and
cornices) to which they are attached. In no case,
however, shall the total area of all signs exceed fifty
(50) square feet.
( III) Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel
signs and included in this computation, but shall
nevertheless not exceed twenty (20) percent of the
total window area on each street.
( IV) Such signs shall conform to the setback regulations
for a non-residential use in the district.
(12) No sign identifying a home professional office shall be
illuminated between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 9:00 A.M.
(13) Signs for any use specified in Article 1309 (I-Institutional
District) but located in a Residential District, may contain one
(1) square foot in area for each ten (10) feet of lot frontage in
a City street of at least forty (40) feet in width. The total area
of all signs for such uses shall not exceed forty (40) square
feet. All such signs over eight (8) square feet in size shall be
non-illuminated; smaller signs may be illuminated but only
internally. Both sides of a double-faced sign shall be
considered when computing the area of such signs for the
above uses.
(14) Signs for institutional uses in an Institutional District may
contain one (1) square foot in area for each ten (10) feet of
lot frontage on a City street of at least forty (40) feet in width.
The total area of all signs for such uses shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet.
(b) Off-Premises Signs.
( 1) Signs directing patrons, members, or audiences to
temporary exhibits, shows, or events located in the City and
signs erected in conjunction with a political election, subject
to the following requirements:
( I) No such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in
area.
( II) Signs shall be removed within one (1) week after the
date of the exhibit, show or election.
( III) No permit shall be issued for the erection of such
signs until a deposit shall be made with the Zoning
Officer in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by
City Council to guarantee removal within the time
prescribed. Failure to remove such signs within the
time prescribed shall result in forfeiture of the
deposit.
( IV) No such sign shall be posted earlier than three (3)
weeks before the occurrence of the event to which it
relates with the exception of political signs which
shall be posted not earlier than one (1) month prior to
an election.
( V) No such sign shall impede the safety of traffic or
pedestrians.
( 2) Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of
traffic, street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad
crossings, and other official signs which are similarly
authorized or erected by a duly constituted governmental
body.
( 3) The placement of signs directing persons to the sale, lease,
or rental of property shall be permitted, with the written
approval of the owner of the property on which the sign is to
be placed, subject to the following conditions:
( I) The signs shall only be permitted on Saturdays,
Sundays, and Holidays.
( II) No sign shall exceed six (6) square feet.
( III) No sign shall be posted earlier than 8:00 A.M. on the
day that it is displayed.
( IV) Signs shall be removed before 7:00 P.M. each day.
( V) No sign shall impede the safety of traffic or
pedestrians.
1320.09 Signs Permitted in the Commercial Districts
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) On-Premises Signs.
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.08(a) at the standards
prescribed therein except as otherwise provided in this
Section and in Section 1320.07.
( 2) Parallel and projecting signs, providing:
( I) Signs attached to a main wall of a principal building
shall not project more than three and one-half (3-1/2)
feet therefrom and that no portion shall be less than
ten (10) feet above the basic grade and no more
than twenty-five (25) feet above grade. If not
projecting more than three (3) inches from a wall of a
building, the sign need not conform to the height
limits.
( II) The total area of all signs shall not exceed twentyfive
(25) percent of the area of the exterior building
face (including window and door area and cornices)
to which they are attached. In no case, however,
shall the total area of all signs exceed one hundred
(100) square feet.
( III) Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel
signs and included in this computation but shall
nevertheless not exceed forty (40) percent of the
total window area on each street.
( IV) In the case of a Shopping Center or Commercial
Recreation District the provisions of this Section
relating to the total area of signs permitted on a
premise shall apply with respect to each building,
separate store, or similar use in percentage of
exterior building face, but not in square feet. All
signs shall conform to an overall scheme or
arrangement design which shall be subject to
approval or disapproval by the City Planning
Commission. Sign materials, lighting, position on the
building, and size, shall all be specified in such
approval. If the Shopping Center or Commercial
Recreation District shall contain a mall area, each
entrance to the mall may be designated by a sign no
wider than the entrance, and at a height to be
determined by the City Planning Commission.
( 3) Free Standing Signs.
( I) Shall be limited to one (1) except for an
establishment which fronts on two (2) or more
streets, in which case a sign may be erected in each
yard fronting on a street.
( II) No portion of any such sign shall be less than ten
(10) or more than twenty-five (25) feet above the
ground, except such signs described in (IV) and (V)
below.
( III) The area of any free standing sign except such signs
as described in (IV) and (V) below, shall not exceed
one (1) square foot for each two (2) feet of lineal lot
frontage or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is
smaller.
( IV) No sign shall be located beyond the rear or side wall
of the main building when the rear or side property
line on which it is situated abuts a Residential or
Institutional District, except signs that convey
information such as parking, entrances and traffic
flow directions. The area of one (1) side of any such
sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. The
name of the business located on the premises may
appear on such signs.
( V) No portion of a Shopping Center or Commercial
Recreation Center free standing sign shall be less
than twenty (20) or more than forty (40) feet above
the ground. The area of any one side of such sign
shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
The location or orientation of such sign shall be
shown on the development plan.
( VI) In the case of a Shopping Center or Commercial
Recreation District, the number of its free standing
signs shall be according to the following schedule:
Parking facilities from 100 to 500 cars - one free
standing signs shall be allowed. For every additional
increment of 500 parking spaces, one (1) additional
free standing sign is permitted. At no time shall there
be more than four (4) free standing signs per
Shopping Center or Recreation Center.
(VII) In the case of a group of business uses other than a
Shopping Center, on a lot held in single and separate
ownership, a single free standing sign including
individual signs identifying different establishments,
may be erected on a common backing provided that
the total area of one (1) side of the sign does not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet. The
structural backing for all such signs shall be uniform
and no sign may extend, in any direction, beyond the
outside edge of the backing. No portion of any such
backing shall be less than five (5) feet or more than
twelve (12) feet above the ground.
(b) Off-Premises Signs
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.08(b) at the standards
prescribed therein except as otherwise provided in this
Section.
( 2) Only such directional devices as may be required by the
Federal Aviation Authority shall be placed, inscribed, or
supported upon the roof or upon any structure which extends
above the roof of any building.
( 3) Signs for permitted non-residential uses provided:
( I) All parallel and projecting signs shall not exceed two
(2) square feet for each foot of length of that portion
of such wall which is devoted to such establishment
or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is
smaller. Said signs are permitted on a side or rear
wall only if such wall abuts a street, driveway, or
parking area. No sign shall be more than twenty-five
(25) feet above the basic grade.
( II) Free standing signs shall not exceed one (1) square
foot of sign area for each two (2) feet of lot frontage
or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is
smaller. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be
placed on property in single and separate ownership
unless such property fronts on more than one (1)
street, in which case one (1) such sign may be
erected on each street frontage. No sign shall be
more than twenty-five (25) feet above the basic
grade. No sign shall be located beyond the side
property line upon which it is situated where it abuts
a Residential District.
1320.10 Signs Permitted by Special Exception in Commercial Districts
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) Portable sidewalk signs may be approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board in CB Districts based on the following requirements:
( 1) Proof by the applicant that the location of the business or the
configuration of the store front and fenestration is such that it
cannot be adequately identified through the signage
provided otherwise in Article 1320 of the Zoning Ordinance.
( 2) No more than one (1) sign may be permitted per building no
matter how many businesses are located in the building
except where the building has rear access onto a sidewalk
or other public way, then two (2) signs are permitted. This
also applies to corner buildings fronting on two (2) streets.
( 3) The following general requirements apply to all portable
sidewalk signs:
( I) Signs may be displayed only during business hours,
otherwise sign must be removed from sidewalk area.
( II) Signs may not have any moving parts, flags,
banners, balloons or other attachments.
( III) Signs may not be illuminated directly or indirectly.
( IV) If approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, the
applicant must supply a Certificate of Insurance
naming the City of Bethlehem as an additional
insured and comprehensive general liability
insurance with a minimum of $1,000,000 per
individual and aggregate of $1,000,000.
( V) If such sign is proposed to be located in the Historic
Area it must be reviewed by the Board of Historic and
Architectural Review and a Certificate of
Appropriateness granted by City Council.
( 4) The following design and location requirements apply to
portable sidewalk signs:
( I) All signs shall be a maximum of five (5) feet high,
three (3) feet wide and three (3) feet deep (spread at
the base).
( II) The maximum signage area per face shall be fifteen
(15) square feet and a total of two (2) faces are
permitted for each sign, totaling a maximum of thirty
(30) square feet.
( III) Signs shall be constructed of durable material and be
appropriately weighted to provide stability.
( IV) When located in the Historic District, the design,
character, configuration, and coloring shall be
compatible with Section 11 of Article 1713 of the
Ordinance creating the Historic District and the
Review Board.
( V) The location of a portable sidewalk sign shall be a
minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2) feet back from
the face of curb and a maximum of four and one-half
(4-1/2) feet back from the face of curb.
( VI) All signs shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
from the street intersection of two (2) curb lines.
1320.11 Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts
(a) On-Premises Signs
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.09 at the standards
prescribed therein except as otherwise provided in this
Section and in Section 1320.07.
( 2) Signs for permitted uses provided:
( I) All parallel and projecting signs shall not exceed two
(2) square feet for each foot of length of the front
building wall or length of that portion of such wall
which is devoted to such establishment or three
hundred seventy-five (375) square feet, whichever is
smaller. Said signs are permitted on a side or rear
wall only if such wall abuts a street, driveway or
parking area. No sign shall be more than twenty-five
(25) feet above the basic grade nor shall be closer
than one hundred (100) feet to a residential area.
( II) Free standing signs shall not exceed one (1) square
foot of sign area for each two (2) feet of lot frontage
or three hundred seventy-five (375) square feet,
whichever is smaller. Not more than one (1) such
sign shall be placed on a property unless it fronts on
more than one (1) street, in which case one (1) such
sign may be erected on each street frontage. In
addition one (1) free standing sign, indicating the
name of an industrial park and the industries within
may be erected along each highway on which the
park fronts. The location and design of such signs
shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
( 3) No sign shall project higher than the roof line. No sign shall
be located beyond the rear or side wall of the main building
when the rear or side property line upon which it is situated
abuts a Residential District.
(b) Off-Premises Signs
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.09(b) at the standards
prescribed therein.
(c) The following requirements shall apply in the case of
the Planned Industrial District:
( 1) One sign indicating the name of the industrial park and the
industries therein may be erected along each highway on
which the P-I District fronts. Such sign may be free standing
or attached to a wall or fence. Plans showing the proposed
location and design of such sign shall be subject to approval
by the Planning Commission.
( 2) Identification signs for individual industries shall be
permanently attached to the building and shall preferably be
part of the architectural design of a building. One (1) sign
may be placed on the front, sides, or rear of a building or on
all sides, provided the
area conforms with the formula established in (a)(2)(I)
above. One (1) free standing sign may be used only when
an industry comprises a group of buildings. Such sign shall
neither extend into any minimum required yard nor rise
above the roof line of adjacent buildings. The sign shall not
exceed the area derived from the formula established in
(a)(2)(II) above.
( 3) A temporary sign not to exceed one hundred fifty (150)
square feet may be erected during construction within the
rear half of required yards facing upon streets. The purpose
of such a sign is to identify the industry which will occupy the
lot and the organizations or persons concerned with its
construction. A temporary use permit shall be obtained from
the office of the Bureau of Inspections. Temporary signs
shall be removed within thirty (30) days following completion
of construction.
ARTICLE 1321
SITE PLAN REVIEW
1321.01 Purpose
This Article requires that the issuance of any zoning-building permit for any
building or use of land specified in Article 1322 or 1325 shall be subject to
site plan review and approval or disapproval by the Planning Commission or
the Zoning Board as appropriate. This provision is set forth because of the
aesthetic, traffic and overall land use impact that these land uses make on a
community. The following requirements shall be adhered to in carrying out
the purpose of this Article.
1321.02 Procedure
(a) All applicants shall submit eight (8) sets of schematic or final site
plans to the Zoning Officer when making application for a zoning
permit. The following information shall be included:
( 1) A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
( 2) A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals fifty (50) feet showing the location, dimensions, and
height of proposed buildings, structures, or uses and any
existing buildings in relation to property and street lines. If
the application relates to property which is scheduled to be
developed in successive stages, such plans shall show the
relationship of the portion scheduled for initial development
to the proposed layout of the entire property.
( 3) The location, dimensions, and arrangements of all open
spaces and yards and buffer yards including methods to be
employed for screening.
( 4) The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to
be used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading, and provisions to be made for
lighting such areas.
( 5) The dimensions, location, and methods of illumination for
signs if applicable.
( 6) The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other
areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.
( 7) Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage
and industrial wastes, water supply and storm drainage.
( 8) The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the
proposed density in terms of number of dwelling units per
square foot of land.
( 9) A description of any proposed industrial or commercial
operations in sufficient detail to indicate effects of those
operations in producing noise, glare, air pollution, fire
hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards.
(10) Description of methods to be employed in controlling any
excess noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution,
fire hazards or other safety hazards.
(11) Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to
enable him to determine the compliance of the proposed
development with the terms of this Ordinance.
(b) For proposals which fall under the categories in Article 1322, the
Zoning Officer shall, within five (5) working days of site plan
submission, submit eight (8) copies of said plans, together with his
preliminary written report thereon to the City Planning Commission.
The City Planning Commission shall review the plans submitted
under this Section for overall conformance to the Site Plan Review
criteria of Section 1321.03.
(c) The City Planning Commission, shall, within thirty (30) days of
receipt of said site plans and report from the Zoning Officer, approve
or disapprove the proposed development. If disapproved, the
reasons for disapproval shall be clearly stated on one copy of the
submission and returned to the applicant. The Zoning Officer shall
deny a zoning permit for the proposed development until written
approval of the City Planning Commission is obtained. Approval
may be made conditional upon the applicant's adoption of specified
changes in the submission.
(d) The absence of action on the part of the City Planning Commission
within the specified time shall constitute approval of the site plan,
and the Zoning Officer shall proceed on the basis of such approval
provided all other requirements of this Ordinance are met.
(e) For proposals which fall under the categories in Article 1325, the
Zoning Officer shall, within thirty (30) days of site plan submission,
submit the plan to the Zoning Hearing Board for review and approval
or disapproval.
(f) The Zoning Hearing Board shall, within sixty (60) days of receipt of
said site plans and report from the Zoning Officer, approve or
disapprove the proposed development. If disapproved, the reasons
for disapproval shall be clearly stated on one copy of the submission
and returned to the applicant. The Zoning Officer shall deny a
zoning permit for the proposed development until written approval of
the Zoning Hearing Board is obtained. Approval may be made
conditional upon the applicant's adoption of specified changes in the
submission.
(g) The absence of action on the part of the Zoning Hearing Board
within the specified time shall constitute approval of the site plan,
and the Zoning Officer shall proceed on the basis of such approval
provided all other requirements of this Ordinance are met.
(h) Site plan approval shall not relieve the applicant from any other
provision of this Ordinance, nor shall such approval constitute a
recommendation of any zoning variance or other relief that the
applicant may thereafter seek from the Zoning Hearing Board.
1321.03 Site Plan Review Criteria
The Zoning Hearing Board or City Planning Commission shall use the
following criteria when reviewing all site plans:
(a) Preservation of Natural Features. Insofar as practicable, natural
features on the site shall be preserved.
(b) Building Arrangement. Elements of the site plan shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to existing
desirable trees, topography, views within and beyond the site, the
size and shape of the site, the character of adjoining property and
the size of the buildings.
(c) Access, Parking and Circulation. With respect to vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, special attention shall be given to location and
number of access points to public streets, width of interior drives and
access points, on-site circulation, separation of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, and arrangement and location of parking areas.
The need for adequate signalization, channelization, and other traffic
control measures shall be given consideration.
(d) Storm Water Drainage. Requirements under this section shall be as
stipulated under Article 925.
(e) Utilities. Electric and telephone lines shall be underground where
practicable. Any utility installations remaining above ground shall be
located so as to have a harmonious relation to neighboring
properties and the site.
(f) Special Features. Setbacks, buffer yard and other screening
methods shall be carefully considered to minimize the visual effect of
exposed storage area, exposed machinery installations, service
areas, truck loading area, utility buildings and structures, and similar
accessory areas and structures.
ARTICLE 1322
USES GRANTED UNDER SPECIAL CONDITIONS
1322.01 Purpose
This Article requires that the issuance of any zoning-building permit for any
building or use of land requiring review by the City Planning Commission, as
listed elsewhere in this Ordinance or below, shall be subject to site plan
review and approval or disapproval by the City Planning Commission. This
provision is set forth because of the considerable aesthetic, traffic, and
overall land use impact that these land uses make on a community. The
following requirements shall be adhered to in carrying out the purpose of
this Article.
1322.02 Procedure
(a) The site plan review procedure set forth in Section 1321.02 shall be
followed.
1322.03 Court Appeals
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the
City Planning Commission may present to the Court of Common Pleas of
Lehigh County and Northampton County, a petition duly verified, setting
forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the
grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented to the Court within
thirty (30) days after the decision by the City Planning Commission.
1322.04 Special Conditions for Conditional Uses
The City Planning Commission shall approve any conditional use proposed
if it finds adequate evidence that the use meets all the applicable
requirements indicated below, complies with the Site Plan Review Criteria
set forth in Section 1321.03 and complies with other applicable provisions of
this Ordinance.
(a) Airport. All airport construction shall be subject to review and
approval by appropriate Federal and State agencies.
(b) Community Center. The following minimum requirements shall be
met:
( 1) There shall be a one (1) acre minimum lot size.
( 2) The Community Center shall be located on a major street
and primary vehicular access shall be taken onto a major
street from the Community Center.
( 3) A ten (10) foot buffer yard, in accordance with the provisions
of Section 1318.23, shall be provided along the side and rear
lot lines.
(c) Department Store. The provisions of Section 1321, Site Plan
Review Criteria, and Section 1318, shall be met.
(d) Hospital, Nursing or Convalescent Home. The following minimum
requirements shall be met:
( 1) Lot area shall be not less than two (2) acres.
( 2) Yards shall be at least twice the distance of the largest
required yard space for the district in which it is located.
(e) Industrial Park. In addition to the other regulations for this District,
the following requirements shall apply:
( 1) Each building shall be designed, insofar as practicable, so as
to harmonize with, and not detract from the character of the
surrounding area. The area surrounding each building shall
be suitable and attractively landscaped. Particular emphasis
shall be given to screening, parking and loading area.
( 2) Each permitted use, other than a parking lot or an off-street
parking facility, shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building. Any outdoor storage shall be enclosed by
a dense planting, solid wall or fence so designed and
constructed to be in architectural harmony with the main
building. Said screen shall be not less than four (4) feet high
and shall, in all cases, be of greater height than anything
stored inside said screen. No storage area shall extend into
any required yard nor be placed on that side of a building
facing a street. The area of all outdoor storage shall be
considered as floor area in computing lot coverage.
( 3) Buffer yards, as required in Section 1318.23, shall be at least
twenty (20) feet in width.
( 4) Satisfactory provisions shall be made for storm drainage,
sanitary sewerage, domestic water supply and for power and
telephone services, the latter to be provided for by utility
easements along rear and side lot lines and not along lot
frontages.
( 5) Vehicular access to a highway or street shall be controlled to
maximize public safety and to avoid traffic congestion.
vehicular access shall be limited to interior streets of the P-I
District and not connect directly with expressways or arterial
highways unless approved by the Planning Commission due
to exceptional circumstances. Except for a lot or parcel
comprising two (2) or more lots which occupy a combined
frontage on all abutting streets of over five hundred (500)
feet, there shall be not more than two (2) access points
serving any one (1) industry or ownership; one (1) additional
access road shall be allowed for each additional five
hundred (500) feet. No access road, excluding the entrance
radius, shall be located at its intersection with the property
line, less than one hundred (100) feet from the curb line
extended paralleling such access road.
(f) Multiple Family Dwellings. The following minimum requirements
shall be met:
( 1) Minimum horizontal distance between facing walls of any
two (2) buildings or one (1) building with facing walls shall be
fifty (50) feet where two (2) facing walls both contain a
window or windows and twenty-five (25) feet between two
(2) facing walls only one (1) of which contains a window or
windows. No two (2) buildings shall be closer than twenty
(20) feet to one another.
( 2) The proposed development shall be served by a public
sanitary sewer system.
( 3) The proposed use shall be designed as a single architectural
project with approved landscaping as determined by the City
Forester's Office and shall not materially detract from the
character of the neighborhood.
( 4) No building shall exceed one hundred sixty (160) feet in
length, except in R-M Districts, where the maximum length
permitted shall be one hundred eighty (180) feet, measured
at ground level or any floor level, whether on one frontage, or
on the combined frontages of the main frontage and that of
any wings of the same building.
( 5) In addition to the off-street parking provisions of Article 1319,
the following additional requirements shall be required:
( I) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least
fifteen (15) feet from any multiple family dwelling on
the lot.
( II) No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles
shall exceed forty (40) cars in capacity. Separate
parking areas on a parcel shall be physically
separated from one another by a six (6) foot wide
planting strip.
( 6) In multiple dwellings two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or less
in height, maximum building size shall be restricted to not
more than sixteen (16) dwelling units in one (1) continuous
structure and no portion of the building below the first story
or above the second story shall be used for dwelling
purposes.
(7) In multiple dwellings over two and one-half (2-1/2) stories in
height, the following additional minimum requirements shall
be met:
( I) Front Yard - No building shall be closer to any street
line than twice the depth of the required front yard for
the respective residential district in which such
buildings is located, and such front yard shall be
increased by not less
than one (1) foot for each one (1) foot in height of the
building over thirty-five (35) feet, except that in R-M
Districts such front yard shall be increased by not
less than one (1) foot for each six (6) feet or portion
thereof in height of the building over thirty-five (35)
feet.
( II) Side and Rear Yards - In all districts except R-M
Districts, side and rear yards shall not be less than
twice the required minimum for the respective
residential district in which such building is located
and for each one (1) foot in height of the building
over thirty-five (35) feet, side and rear yards shall be
increased by not less than one-half (1/2) foot. In RM
Districts, side and rear yards shall not be less than
fifteen (15) feet and for each six (6) feet or portion
thereof in height of the building over thirty-five (35)
feet, side and rear yards shall be increased by not
less than one (1) foot.
(III) The distance at the closest point in all districts except
R-M Districts between any two (2) buildings of a
group of elevator-type multiple dwellings, shall not be
less than thirty-five (35) feet and for each two (2) feet
such height is increased beyond a height of thirty-five
(35) feet the distance between such buildings shall
be increased by not less than one (1) foot. In R-M
Districts, the distance at the closest point between
any two (2) buildings of a group of elevator-type
multiple dwellings shall not be less than twenty-five
(25) feet and for each two (2) feet such height is
increased beyond a height of the building over thirtyfive
(35) feet the distance between such buildings
shall be increased by not less than one (1) foot.
( IV) Local shopping facilities to serve the residents of the
building may be provided only on the ground floor
and basement, provided the total floor area of the
uses does not exceed ten (10) percent of the total
area of the principal building.
(Section 1322.04(f) revised by Ordinance #3963 - 9/1999)
(g) Planned Office Development. The following minimum requirements
shall be met:
( 1) Area and height regulations may be waived for any Planned
Office Development which involves not less than ten (10)
acres of land in a single tract, or in a tract in which adjacent
owners agree to pool their land for mutually advantageous
development, and which is to be developed within a
reasonable period of time, as a single project or related
projects.
( 2) Planned Office Development shall be integrally planned and
designed for a single occupant or as a single primary use
facility with numerous tenants in the Office Research District.
The permitted uses shall be limited to commercial and
business uses and such ancillary uses as may be required
by the primary commercial and business uses. A minimum
setback of fifty (50) feet shall be required around the entire
tract.
(h) Planned Unit Development. The provisions of Section 1318.24 shall
be met.
(i) Shopping Center. In addition to the other regulations of this District,
the following requirements shall apply:
( 1) The development shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan upon which this Ordinance is based.
( 2) The development shall consist of a harmonious selection of
uses, and groupings of buildings, service and parking area,
circulation and open spaces, planned and designed as an
integrated unit in such manner as to constitute a safe,
efficient and convenient retail shopping center or related
planned business development.
( 3) The appropriate use of property adjacent to the shopping
center or planned business development shall be
safeguarded. Along each side or rear property line which
directly abuts a Residential or Institutional District boundary
line, a twenty (20) foot buffer yard shall be required which
shall include a suitable and uninterrupted coniferous planting
screen not less than four (4) feet in height nor fifteen (15)
feet in width along each street line which directly abuts a
Residential or an Institutional District boundary line. A strip
of the required front yard area not less than ten (10) feet in
width, measured from the street line, shall be suitably
landscaped except for necessary sidewalks and accessways
and may include a wall not more than four (4) feet in height.
( 4) No storage of materials, equipment or goods shall be
permitted outside a building, and no merchandise shall be
displayed on the exterior of a building, except in
conformance with the following regulations.
( I) Only merchandise intended for immediate sale shall
be displayed on the sidewalk in front of any store. At
least eight (8) feet of sidewalk shall remain
unobstructed for pedestrian use between the
merchandise or display and the curb.
( II) Any other area of a shopping center property
proposed for storage or display purposes shall be
subject to site plan approval by the City Planning
Commission. All such areas shall be enclosed in a
suitable fence or plant screen, located adjacent to
the main building in such a manner as to prevent a
view of the stored items from any adjacent property
at ground level, and placed in such a manner as to
control pedestrian and vehicular movement in the
area.
( 5) Adequate provisions shall be made for safe and efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation within the
boundaries of the center or planned business development.
Such provisions shall include raised curbs or medial
walkways which shall prohibit vehicles from straying from
their designated circulation routes. Also, these walkways
shall be suitably planted to help reinforce the proper routing
of traffic and add to the overall appearance of the shopping
center.
( 6) All access roads, parking area, service and other areas for
vehicular use shall be paved with bituminous or other
concrete material to specifications determined by the City
Engineer.
( 7) The proposed development shall be served by public sewer
and water facilities.
( 8) Each multiple family development permitted in conjunction
with planned business development shall comply with the
provisions of Article 1308.
( 9) If the development of the center or planned business
development is to be carried out in progressive stages, each
stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements
and the intent of this Ordinance shall be fully complied with
at the completion of any stage. The initial stage of
development shall comprise a minimum total ground floor
area of 7,500 square feet, or a minimum of six (6) permitted
main uses.
(10) After the final development plan has been approved and
when, in the course of carrying out this plan, adjustments or
rearrangement of buildings, parking areas, entrances,
heights or yards are requested by the proponents, and such
requests conform to the standards established by the
approved final development plan for the area to be covered
by buildings, parking spaces, entrances, height setback and
lot area requirements, such adjustments may be approved
by the Planning Commission upon application which shall be
accompanied by a plan of the entire development with the
proposed changes indicated.
(11) Every applicant for development, when approved by the City,
either as submitted originally or as submitted or resubmitted
in modified form, shall constitute an agreement by the
applicant that (1) such installation shall be made, completed
and operated as shown on the plan as part of the project in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, and (2) the
City Council may at its discretion, rezone the area to its
former zoning classification in any of the following events:
( I) If construction of approved buildings and
improvements shall not be substantially undertaken
within eighteen (18) months of approval of the
application, or within such additional time as may be
authorized by the City.
( II) If there shall be a failure to complete construction, or
to comply, or to continue to comply with the
requirements of this Article, or with conditions
imposed by the City hereunder in the zoning or
development of the area.
( III) If, as a result of voluntary sale or conveyance or any
other transfer of ownership whatsoever, the area
shall cease to be held, in its entirety, in single or
common ownership.
(j) Commercial Recreation District.
( 1) All buildings and active recreation areas shall be set back
from adjacent residentially-zoned properties a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet.
( 2) All methods to be used for outdoor lighting shall be shown
on the development plan. Such lighting shall not intrude on
the privacy of adjacent residentially-zoned properties.
( 3) The location, height and size of all free-standing signs shall
be shown on the development plan.
( 4) Buffer yards shall contain screening materials which, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, are of adequate type,
height, and width to properly buffer adjacent residentiallyzoned
properties from the structures inside or any excessive
light or noise created by the C-R Development.
( 5) The hours of operation for all outside activities and outdoor
lighting shall be subject to approval or disapproval by the
City Planning Commission.
( 6) Parking requirements for uses not specified in Section
1319.01 shall be determined by the Planning Commission
during the Commercial Recreation Plan review.
( 7) In order to minimize impervious surfaces and encourage use
of existing parking areas during off-peak periods while
ensuring adequate parking, the Planning Commission may
permit a portion of the number of required parking spaces to
be provided off the site for commercial recreation facilities
such as convention halls, stadiums, and sports arenas.
Applications for a reduction must document to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission that (1) the use of
the recreation facility will be for short duration events such as
concerts, athletic contests, and similar activities; (2) the
hours or days of the peak parking needed for the events are
different from the hours or days of peak parking at the
existing off-site parking facilities to be used; (3) the applicant
has permission from the owners for the use of those off-site
parking facilities which are privately owned; (4) the total
number of parking spaces at the commercial recreation
facility and at the remote parking areas is equal to or greater
than the parking requirements set forth elsewhere in this
Ordinance; and (5) the applicant has an acceptable plan for
transportation of the spectators from the remote parking
areas to the commercial recreation facilities when distance
exceeds 2,000 yards from the closest perimeter of the site.
(k) Residential Retirement Complex.
( 1) All buildings and active recreation areas shall be set back
from adjacent residentially-zoned properties a minimum of
fifty (50) feet.
( 2) All methods to be used for outdoor lighting shall be shown
on the development plan. Such lighting shall not intrude on
the privacy of adjacent residentially-zoned properties.
( 3) Buffer yards shall contain screening materials which, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, are of adequate type,
height, and width to properly buffer adjacent residentiallyzoned
properties from any parking areas or structures within
the development.
( 4) Starting five (5) years after the completion of construction, all
health care and community building facilities shall be
designed and maintained solely for the use of the complex
residents.
( I) The health care facility shall be limited to a clinic
which may also provide nursing care and supervision
for extended periods of time. This facility shall not be
considered a hospital.
( II) Sales items shall be limited to foods, drugs, gifts,
toiletries and periodicals within an area of no greater
than five hundred (500) square feet.
( 5) The provisions contained in Subsection (f)(6) of this Section
1322.04 shall not be applicable to Residential Retirement
Complexes.
( l) Single Family Detached Dwellings Fronting only on a Common
Private Driveway. Single family detached dwellings fronting only on
a common private driveway shall be permitted when the following
conditions exist:
( 1) The minimum standards of the R-R District shall be met.
( 2) The lot shall be at least 43,560 square feet in area.
( 3) The lot shall be shown on a Subdivision Plan approved by
the City Planning Commission.
( 4) A subdivision of land into new lots of this nature will only be
approved by the City Planning Commission, if the City
Planning Commission finds that:
( I) The average slope and configuration of the tract to
be subdivided is such that in the opinion of the City
Engineer a standard city street, which meets the
street grade requirements of the City Subdivision and
the Development Ordinance, could not be built to
allow normal development of the property.
( II) The subdivision plan and associated proposed
supporting documents and protective agreements
provide notice to future lot owners of the rights and
responsibilities associated with owning land within
the subdivision tract.
( 5) In addition, any subdivision proposed with lots fronting only
on a common private driveway shall be presented to the City
with plans, supporting documents, and protective
agreements, meeting and demonstrating the following
special requirements:
( I) Each common driveway shall be specially laid out on
the plan with a metes and bounds description of its
location and designed to meet the following
specifications:
( i) The paved cartway width shall be a minimum
of eighteen (18) feet. A two (2) foot shoulder
shall be provided on both sides of the
cartway. This shoulder area shall be kept
clear of all vegetation and other obstructions
and shall be paved with materials suitable to
the City Engineer.
( ii) Easement width thirty (30) foot total, centered
around the cartway.
( iii) Serve no more than ten (10) nor less than
three (3) individual building lots.
( iv) Extend no more than thirteen hundred
(1,300) feet in length from a public road rightof-
way to the center of a turn-around cul-desac,
or extend no more than twenty-six
hundred (2,600) feet in total length from a
public road right-of-way, to a public road
right-of-way.
( v) Horizontal curves shall have a minimum
centerline radius of one hundred fifty (150)
feet. Horizontal curves may be reduced,
subject to approval of the City Engineer, to a
minimum centerline radius of one hundred
(100) feet if the width of the cartway is
increased to twenty-two (22) feet for the
curved area including a transition area.
( vi) Maximum slope shall be fifteen (15) percent.
( vii) Cul-de-sac turn-around areas shall be
designated with a minimum easement radius
of fifty-five (55) feet and a minimum outside
edge of a cartway radius of forty-five (45)
feet. The center of the cul-de-sac can remain
in vegetation, but if it does, the cartway
around the circle must be at least twenty (20)
feet wide.
(viii) The cartway paving shall consist of the same
materials as a standard fifty (50) foot City
street.
( ix) The design of the common driveway, any
associated utilities, including fire hydrants
and storm drainage facilities shall be subject
to the review and approval of the City
Engineer.
( x) The design, including horizontal and vertical
alignment, of the intersection of the driveway
with the public street must be approved by
the City Engineer to assure safety of access
and operation.
( II) An acceptable storm water management plan for the entire
tract shall be submitted to and approved by the City
Engineer prior to subdivision approval by the City Planning
Commission.
(III) The subdivision plan shall contain notations indicating that:
( i) All common utilities and driveways outside of
a City-owned public right-of-way shall always
be the responsibility of and maintained by a
Homeowner's Association which must be
created by the applicant.
( ii) The City shall not accept any responsibility
for the present or future ownership or
maintenance of any driveway or utility outside
of the existing public right-of-way. It shall be
the responsibility of the Homeowner's
Association to effectively maintain the private
streets in reasonably good condition, and to
carry out all snow removal and other
operations related to providing access to
these streets.
( iii) The City or its agents have the right to enter
upon the common private driveway area or
any common private easement area for
official business.
( iv) Each landowner shall belong to the
Homeowner's Association and the land in the
subdivision shall be subject to a separate
agreement of record, which agreement
further describes the rights and
responsibilities of the landowners within the
subdivision.
( IV) An Easement Agreement shall be provided, which
Agreement shall be subject to the City Solicitor's review and
approval, and shall provide the following features:
( i) It shall be in recordable form for recording
prior to any lot sales.
( ii) The City shall be a party.
( iii) It shall delineate the rights and responsibility
of the owners with regard to driveway and
utility maintenance.
( iv) It shall specifically state that the driveways
will not be publicly maintained.
( v) It shall grant the City or its agents the right to
enter upon the common private driveways or
common private easement areas, for official
business.
ARTICLE 1323
PROCEDURES AND CONTROLS GOVERNING NON-CONFORMING USES
1323.01 Purpose
The regulations governing existing non-conforming uses are set forth in this
Article and are intended to provide a gradual remedy for the incompatibilities
resulting from such non-conforming uses. While such uses are generally
permitted to continue, these regulations are designed to restrict further
investment in such uses, thereby keeping them from becoming more
permanent establishments in appropriate locations.
These regulations are thus designed to preserve the character of the
districts established in this Zoning Code in the light of their peculiar
suitability to particular uses, and thus to promote and protect health, safety,
and general welfare.
1323.02 Definitions
(a) Non-Conforming Structure or Lot. A structure or lot that does not
conform to a dimensional regulation prescribed by this Ordinance for
the district in which it is located or to regulations for signs, off-street
parking, off-street loading, or accessory buildings, but which
structure or lot was in existence at the effective date of this
Ordinance and was lawful at the time it was established.
(b) Non-Conforming Use. A use of a building or lot that does not
conform to a use regulation prescribed by this Ordinance for the
district in which it is located, but which was in existence at the
effective date of this Ordinance and was lawful at the time it was
established.
1323.03 Continuation
The lawful use of any building, any structure or the lawful use of any land
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued although
such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance except as
otherwise provided in this Article.
1323.04 Alteration or Extension
(a) Non-Conforming Structures. Non-conforming structures may be
altered, reconstructed, or enlarged provided that such alteration,
reconstruction or enlargement does not increase the extent of the
non-conformity existing on the effective date of this Ordinance.
In the case of a non-conforming structure which is used by a nonconforming
use, such alteration, extension or enlargement shall also
meet the requirements of paragraph (c) of this Section.
(b) Non-Conforming Lots. Non-conforming lots are subject to the
applicable provisions of Article 1318.
(c) Non-Conforming Uses. Non-conforming uses shall not be altered,
reconstructed, extended or enlarged, except in accordance with the
following provisions:
( 1) Such alteration, reconstruction, extension or enlargement
shall be permitted only by special exception under the
provisions of Article 1325, Zoning Hearing Board.
( 2) Such alteration, reconstruction, extension or enlargement
shall be only upon the same lot or any contiguous lot
purchased by the owner of the non-conformity in existence
within one (1) year of the date the uses become nonconforming.
( 3) Any increase in volume or area of the non-conforming use
shall not exceed an aggregate of more than fifty (50) percent
of such volume or area during the life of the non-conformity.
1323.05 Restoration
No building or structure which is legally condemned or damaged by fire or
other natural causes to the extent of more than sixty (60) percent of its then
fair market value, may be repaired, reconstructed, or used except in
conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. A structure or building
with damage to the extent of sixty (60) percent or less of its fair market value
may be reconstructed, repaired, or used for the same non-conforming use,
subject to the following provisions:
(a) The reconstructed structure shall not exceed the height, area or
volume of the damaged structure except as provided in Section
1323.04.
(b) Reconstruction shall begin within one (1) year from the date of
damage and shall be carried on without interruption.
1323.06 Abandonment
Whenever a non-conforming use of a building or land ceases and is
abandoned for a continuous period of one (1) year or more, any future use
of such building or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance. For purposes of this Ordinance, abandonment shall begin when
the Bureau of Inspections decides that reasonable efforts to re-establish a
non-conforming use have ceased. At this time, the Bureau of Inspections
shall send notification to the owner stating that the City considers the
property abandoned, or the use discontinued, and that the owner has one
(1) year in which to file a report with the City refuting the Bureau of
Inspections decision.
1323.07 Changes
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted
to revert to a non-conforming use. A non-conforming use may be changed
to another non-conforming use only under the following conditions:
(a) Such change shall be permitted only by special exception, under the
provisions of Article 1325, Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) The applicant shall show that a non-conforming use cannot
reasonably be changed to a permitted use.
(c) The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less
objectionable in external effects than the existing non-conforming
use with respect to:
( 1) Traffic generation and congestion including truck, passenger
car and pedestrian traffic.
( 2) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare,
and vibration.
( 3) Storage and waste disposal.
( 4) Appearance.
1323.08 Displacement
No non-conforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
1323.09 Applicability to Approved Non-Conforming Plans
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of a structure for which a building permit was
issued more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or
change in zoning district and the construction of which is begun within three
(3) months after such adoption of change and diligently carried on. The
approved plans shall not be altered in any way to increase the nonconformity.
1323.10 Prior Violations Continued
A non-conforming building altered or erected or a non-conforming use
created, in violation of any previous provision, shall be regarded as
continuing in such violation and shall not enjoy the privilege of legal
continuance conferred by this Article upon other non-conforming buildings
and uses.
1323.11 District Changes
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any non-conforming uses or
structures existing therein.
ARTICLE 1324
ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS AND PENALTIES
1324.01 Enforcement
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer who shall be appointed by the City Council.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer and he shall have power to:
(a) Review all applications for zoning-building permits, and issue
permits when there is compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and other applicable City regulations.
(b) Receive applications for special exceptions, variances, and special
use permits and forward these applications to the Zoning Hearing
Board for action thereon.
(c) Following disapproval of a zoning-building permit or certificate of
occupancy, to receive applications for appeals from the decision of
the Zoning Officer and forward these applications to the Zoning
Hearing Board for action thereon.
(d) Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance
with the terms of this Ordinance.
(e) Order in writing correction of all conditions found to be in violation of
the provisions of this Ordinance. Such written orders shall be
served personally or by certified mail upon persons, firms or
corporations deemed by the Zoning Officer to be violating the terms
of this Ordinance.
(f) Record and file all applications for certificates of occupancy with
accompanying plans and documents, and all certificates and permits
issued. All applications, plans, and documents shall be a public
record.
(g) Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of
all land in the City.
(h) Upon the request of City Council, the Planning Commission or the
Zoning Hearing Board, present facts, records or reports which they
may request to assist such body in making decisions.
(i) Review and approve or deny temporary permits which shall be
issued by the office of the Bureau of Inspections for a period not to
exceed one (1) year and which may be renewed annually for the
following two (2) years.
( 1) For non-conforming uses incidental to housing and
construction projects and including such structures and uses
as storage of building supplies and machinery, and a real
estate office located on the tract being offered for sale,
provided such permits are issued only upon agreement by
the owner to remove the structure upon expiration of permit.
( 2) For structures or uses which are deemed by the Zoning
Office to be beneficial to the public health and necessary to
the public welfare.
1324.02 Zoning-Building Permits
All requests for zoning-building permits shall be made in writing by the
owner or his authorized agent to the office of the Bureau of Inspections on
application forms furnished by the City.
Zoning-building permits shall be secured from the office of the Bureau of
Inspections prior to starting any construction, erection or alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof. Issuance of a zoning-building permit
shall be subject to review and approval by all City Departments noted on the
permit. The Inspections Office shall require that the application of a zoningbuilding
permit and any additional material requested by the various City
Departments shall contain all the information necessary to enable them to
ascertain whether the proposed structure complies with the provisions of
this Ordinance. A zoning-building permit shall be granted or denied within
thirty (30) days of receipt of written application, provided that the curb line
and grade have previously been established and no warrant of survey is
necessary.
No zoning-building permit for construction, erection or alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof, shall be valid for more than six (6)
months unless work at the site has commenced within such period.
The Building Inspector shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice by
the owner or applicant prior to commencement of work at the site under a
zoning-building permit.
1324.03 Fees
Fees for zoning-building permits shall be paid in accordance with the Fee
Schedule set forth in Ordinance No. 2999 which adopts for the City of
Bethlehem the Basic Building Code of the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc. Fees for appeals to the Zoning Hearing
Board shall be paid in accordance with the following:
Appeals for dimensional variances for single
family residences occupied by the owner------$ 75.00
Appeals for portable sidewalk signs-------------$ 50.00
Appeals for all other signs---------------------$150.00
All other appeals-------------------------------$300.00
Refunds shall be granted only if requested before legal ad is submitted to
the local newspaper.
1324.04 Violations and Penalties
For any and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance: The owner,
general agent, architect, contractor of a building or premises where such a
violation has been committed or shall exist, or any other person who
commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any
buildings or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be liable
on conviction thereof to a fine or penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00), which shall be paid over to the City Treasurer or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, if the fine is not paid.
(a) Such fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary
proceedings brought in the name of the City before any Magistrate.
(b) Whenever any such person specified above shall have been notified
by the Zoning Officer in writing that he is violating this Ordinance,
such person shall commence correction of all violations within five
(5) days after notice and correct all violations within thirty (30) days
of notice. If corrections are not commenced within five (5) days or
completed within thirty (30) days, each day that a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense punishable by the like fine.
1324.05 Cancellation of Permit
The Zoning Officer may cancel or revoke a permit previously granted for
violation of this Zoning Code or of any order of the Zoning Officer.
1324.06 One (1) Year Limitation on Approvals
(a) The holder of any approval by the City Planning Commission or
approval or variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board under the
provisions of Ordinance 1390 adopted November 22, 1955, shall be
required to commence and proceed with substantial construction of
the improvement authorized within a period of one (1) year from the
effective date of this Ordinance.
(b) If the holder of any approval by the City Planning Commission or
approval or variance granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment's
Ordinance 1390, adopted November 22, 1955, fails to commence
and proceed with substantial construction pursuant to such approval
or variance within one (1) year of the effective date of this
Ordinance, said approval or variance shall lapse and no construction
shall thereafter be commenced in reliance on such approvals or
variances.
ARTICLE 1325
ZONING HEARING BOARD
1325.01 Establishment of Board
The City Council shall create a Zoning Hearing Board which shall
supersede the existing Board of Adjustment. The three members and one
alternate of the existing Board of Adjustment shall become the members
and alternate of the Zoning Hearing Board and shall serve until their terms
expire.
1325.02 Membership, Terms of Office, Compensation
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three (3) members and two (2)
alternates appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council for three-year terms. The terms of office shall be so fixed that the
terms of office of one member shall expire each year. Members of the
Board shall hold no other office in the City. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant, and the
Mayor may remove any member for cause after public hearing. The
compensation of each member of said Zoning Hearing Board shall be
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per day for attendance at officially convened
public meetings of the Board. Compensation shall be paid monthly by the
City Treasurer, upon receipt of certificates from the Secretary of said
Hearing Board setting forth the date or dates the Board was in session,
including the names of those members of the Board actually present at the
times indicated in said certificates.
1325.03 Procedures
(a) Officers. The Board shall elect a chairman from its membership and
shall prescribe rules in accordance with State Statutes and this
Ordinance for the conduct of its officers.
(b) Public Hearings. Hearings shall be open to the public and shall be
held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board
shall specify in its rules of procedure. A hearing shall be held within
45 days after receipt by the Zoning Officer of an application for a
variance or a special exception. Each decision of the Board shall be
made within 45 days after the hearing or, if said hearing is continued
beyond this period by reason of the applicant's request for a
continuance, within 45 days after said continued hearing. If the
Board does not hold a hearing within 45 days after receiving an
application, or if the Board does not send a copy of the decision to
the applicant within 45 days after the hearing or continued hearing, it
shall be deemed that the Board has decided in favor of the
applicant. The Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting Chairman,
shall have power to administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
(c) Records and Decisions. The Board shall keep a record of all
proceedings which shall contain evidence and data relevant to every
case considered together with the votes of the members and the
final decision of each case. Each decision of the Board shall bear
the signature of the Zoning Officer on the original thereof. These
proceedings shall become public records and the Board shall submit
a report of its activities to City Council once a year.
1325.04 Notice of Hearings
(a) Upon filing with the Board an application for a special exception
variance or interpretation of this Ordinance, the Board shall
determine a place and a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60)
days from the date of application for a public hearing thereon and
give notice as follows:
( 1) At least seven (7) days prior to the date fixed for public
hearing, publish a public notice describing the location of the
building or lot and the general nature of the question
involved in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
( 2) Give written notice to parties in interest at least seven (7)
days in advance of such hearing. Such parties shall be at
least those persons whose properties adjoin and face on the
same street as the property in question, and the City
Planning Commission.
1325.05 Powers and Duties - Interpretation
Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Officer the Zoning Hearing
Board shall decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision
of this Ordinance, including determination of the exact location of any district
boundary line if uncertainty exists with respect thereto; where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
1325.06 Powers and Duties - Variances
(a) Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Officer, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall have the power to vary or adapt the strict
application of any of the requirements of this Ordinance in the case
of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow, or steep lots, or other
exceptional physical conditions whereby such strict applications
would result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship
depriving the owner of the reasonable use of land or building
involved, but in no other case.
(b) In general, the power to authorize a variance from the terms of this
Ordinance shall be sparingly exercised and only under peculiar and
exceptional circumstances.

(c) No variance in the strict application of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be granted by the Board unless the Board finds that
all the below requirements and standards are satisfied.
The applicant must prove that the variance will not be contrary to the
public interest and that practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship
will result if it is not granted. In particular, the applicant shall
establish and substantiate his appeal to prove that the appeal for the
variance is in conformance with the requirements and standards
listed below:
( 1) That the granting of the variance shall be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and shall
not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental
to the public welfare.
( 2) That the granting of the variance will not permit the
establishment within a District of any use which is not
permitted in that District.
( 3) There must be proof of unique circumstances: There are
special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the
findings, applying to the land or buildings for which the
variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are
peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally
to land or buildings in the neighborhood, and that said
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive
the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building.
( 4) There must be proof of unnecessary hardship: If the
hardship is general, that is, shared by neighboring property,
relief can be properly obtained only by legislative action or by
court review of an attack on the validity of the Ordinance.
( 5) That the granting of the variance is necessary for the
reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance
as granted by the Board is the minimum variance that will
accomplish this purpose. It is not sufficient proof of hardship
to show that greater profit would result if the variance were
awarded. Furthermore, hardship complained of cannot be
self-created; it cannot be claimed by one who purchases
with or without knowledge of restrictions, it must result from
the application of the Ordinance; it must be suffered directly
by the property in question; and evidence of variance
granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered.
The Board may prescribe any safeguard that it deems to be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the
regulation or provisions to which the variance applies.
1325.07 Powers and Duties - Special Exceptions
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to approve special
exceptions for any of the uses for which this Ordinance requires the
obtaining of such exceptions and for no other use or purpose.
(b) General Requirements and Standards Applicable to all Special
Exceptions: The Board shall grant a special exception only if it finds
adequate evidence that any proposed use submitted for a special
exception will meet all of the following general requirements, as well
as any specific requirements and standards listed for the proposed
use. The Board shall, among other things, require that any
proposed use and location be:
( 1) In accordance with the City of Bethlehem Comprehensive
Plan and consistent with the spirit, purposes, and intent of
this Ordinance.
( 2) In the best interest of Bethlehem, the convenience of the
community, the public welfare, and be a substantial
improvement to property in the immediate vicinity.
( 3) Suitable for the property in question, and designed,
constructed, operated and maintained so as to be in
harmony with and appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity.
( 4) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this
Ordinance.
( 5) Suitable in terms of permitting the logical, efficient and
economical extension of public services and facilities such
as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public
schools.
( 6) Suitable in terms of effects on street, traffic and safety with
adequate sidewalks and vehicular access arrangements to
protect major streets from undue congestion and hazard.
The Zoning Hearing Board may impose such conditions, in
addition to those required in the Ordinance, as are
necessary to insure that the general purpose and intent of
this Ordinance is complied with and that the use of the
property adjacent to the area included in the proposed
change or modification is adequately safeguarded, which
conditions may relate to, but are not limited to, harmonious
design of buildings, aesthetics, planting and its maintenance
as a sight or sound screen, hours of operation, lighting, allied
activities, ventilation, noise, sanitation, safety, smoke and
fume control, and the minimizing of noxious, offensive or
hazardous elements.
1325.08 Special Conditions and Safeguards for Special Exception Uses
In addition to the general requirements and standards specified in Section
1325.07, the following additional conditions and safeguards for certain uses
shall apply:
(a) Cemetery -- The following minimum requirements shall be met:
( 1) The cemetery shall have an area of not less than five (5)
acres.
( 2) A plan shall be submitted which, in general, shall conform to
all the requirements of a subdivision plat, except that
individual lots need not be shown. No plan shall be
acceptable which does not provide for the continuation of
existing streets or of streets already projected or shown on a
part of a comprehensive plan for all or a portion of the City,
unless a study by the City Planning Commission shows that
certain streets may be modified or eliminated. Land for
required streets shall be dedicated by such plan.
( 3) No structures, including fences, shall be built within any yard
and, for this purpose, yard requirements shall conform to the
regulations for the respective residential district in which the
cemetery may be located.
( 4) Additional setbacks and planting to screen the cemetery
from adjacent areas may be required by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(b) Conversion of any dwelling to a two (2) or multi-family dwelling --
The following requirements shall be met:
( 1) Each dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum gross
floor area as defined in the Bethlehem Housing Code.
( 2) For each person over eight (8) persons living in the building,
the lot area must be increased by twenty (20) percent over
the lot area requirement for a single family dwelling located
in the same district.
( 3) The yard, building area, and other applicable requirements
for the district shall not be reduced.
( 4) No exterior structural alteration of the building shall be made,
except as may be necessary for purposes of sanitation or
safety.
( 5) Such conversion shall be authorized only for a large building
which has relatively little economic value or usefulness as a
single-family dwelling or other conforming use.
( 6) Plans showing the proposed rearrangement of the interior of
the building and provisions for off-street parking space,
including the proposed entrance and exit to such parking
spaces shall be provided to the Zoning Hearing Board.
(c) Community or Public Garage (One Acre or Less in Area) -- The
following requirements shall be met:
( 1) A community garage shall be the main building on a lot
unless located as a part of a multiple family dwelling planned
as a complete unit.
( 2) Such garage shall preferably be arranged as a unit in which
no doors, except in the rear of a court, would face directly
upon a front street. Planting may be required to permit the
building to become an attractive element of the
neighborhood.
(d) Commercial Greenhouse and Nursery -- The following minimum
requirements shall be met:
( 1) All products for sale shall be kept enclosed within a building
except those plants which are planted in the earth and are
still alive.
( 2) This use shall necessitate a minimum lot size of two (2)
acres.
( 3) All front, side, and rear yard minimum setbacks shall be
double those of the district for single family detached
dwellings.
(e) Parking Lot in Residential District -- Land may be utilized for offstreet
parking facilities in certain residential districts providing the
requirements in Articles 1319 and 1321 and the following are met:
( 1) The applicant for such special use permit must be the owner
of both the property which is to be served by the parking lot
and the property in the residential district to be used as the
parking lot.
( 2) No repair, service, display, or storage of vehicles shall be
permitted on said parking lot.
( 3) Parking lot shall be used exclusively for customer and
employee parking.
(f) Medical Office Building -- (One [1] Acre or Less in Area). The
following requirements shall be met:
( 1) The use of the building and/or site, whether for new
construction, or by conversion of an existing building, shall
be exclusively for professional purposes. No dwelling units
whatsoever shall be permitted.
( 2) The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.5.
( 3) No parking shall be permitted to extend into any front or side
yard. On the line of any yard, a suitable wall, fence or hedge
shall be erected and/or planted, if deemed necessary, to
protect adjacent residential property. Other planting may be
required as deemed necessary to preserve the basic
residential character of the area.
( 4) Access ways shall be so placed as to provide safe ingress
and egress with the least increase in traffic hazards. Where
the development is on a corner lot, the access ways
preferably should be located on the street carrying the least
traffic, unless the paved roadway of such street is less than
thirty-four (34) feet in width. Any proposed development
which would require that cars back out from the parking area
into the street shall be disapproved.
(g) Undertaking Establishment and Funeral Parlor -- The following
requirements shall be met:
( 1) Signs shall be limited to one (1) identification sign for each
street frontage, provided that the area on either side of such
sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
( 2) A parking lot shall be permitted only in the rear of the main
building and shall not occupy front or side yard area.
(h) Home Professional Office -- The following requirements shall be
met:
( 1) Such office shall be in the main building on the lot and shall
not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor
area of said building. Should the spouse of a practitioner
also use the residence for a home professional office, the
total allowable floor area for both practitioners shall not
exceed forty (40) percent of the floor area of the building.
( 2) Accessory buildings shall not to be used in conjunction with
the home professional office use.
( 3) The residential character of the building and lot shall be
preserved.
( 4) No more than one (1) person who is not a member of the
resident family may be employed on the premises.
( 5) Signage on the property shall be regulated in accordance
with Sections 1320.08(a)(9) and (12).
( 6) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the lot in addition to the basic parking
requirements described in Section 1319.01(a)(1).
( 7) The nature of the services rendered shall be of that type
which are primarily and customarily provided to clients on an
individual basis and by appointment only.
( 8) No retail sales shall be allowed on the property.
( 9) Only minimum storage of supplies shall be allowed. No
outside storage of supplies shall be allowed on the property.
(10) A home professional office shall not include a biological or
other medical testing laboratory.
(i) Bed and Breakfast Home -- The following requirements shall be met:
( 1) No more than three (3) rooms may be offered for rent.
( 2) The bed and breakfast must be in an existing structure and
not a new structure or outbuilding.
( 3) The only meal to be served is breakfast and to lodgers of the
bed and breakfast exclusively.
( 4) Signs shall conform to Section 1320.08(a)(2).
( 5) No exterior structural alteration of the building shall be made
except as may be necessary for purposes of sanitation or
safety.
( 6) The bed and breakfast must meet all City requirements for
health, fire, and building safety.
( 7) The bed and breakfast must be in operation a minimum of
nine (9) months per year.
( 8) The maximum uninterrupted length of stay shall be fourteen
(14) days.
(j) Residential treatment facilities, temporary shelters, and overnight
shelters shall meet the following general requirements:
( 1) The site shall be convenient to those support facilities that
are essential to the functioning of the specific facility. These
may include mass transportation, medical, educational,
recreational, job training, social service, and/or other facilities
being necessary for the particular use.
( 2) Each site shall be:
( I) Approved for all applicable Federal, State, County
and City licenses and permits.
( II) Operated so that all medical counseling or other
services shall be provided for the sole benefit of
those persons residing in the facility.
( III) Subject to providing a minimum one (1) off-street
parking space per employee for the maximum
number of employees on any one (1) shift, plus
additional parking as required by the zoning Hearing
Board.
( 3) For Residential Treatment Facilities the occupant load shall
be determined by the applicable BOCA Property
Maintenance Code.
(k) Additional special requirements shall be met for all Residential
Treatment Facilities, Temporary Shelters, and Overnight Shelters as
follows:
( 1) Each residential treatment facility shall meet the following
requirement:
( I) No residential treatment facility shall be located
within 800 feet of another residential treatment
facility. The minimum distance between all such
facilities shall be a minimum of 800 feet.
( 2) Each Temporary Shelter, Overnight Shelter, or Residential
Treatment Facility shall meet the following requirements:
( I) Proof of adequate supervision by people qualified by
training and experience in the field for which the
facility is intended shall be provided.
( II) The facility must comply with all applicable Fire,
Housing, Building, Property Maintenance, and Health
Codes, and all regulations pertaining to transient
occupancy with respect to emergency lighting,
smoke detectors, exit lights, and other safety
devices.
( III) Any food preparation, service, or distribution shall be
licensed by the City and inspected by the Bureau of
Health.
( IV) All services provided on site shall be contained within
the structure and operated by a non-profit, charitable,
or for-profit organization.
( V) The applicant for these facilities shall submit with its
application to the Zoning Hearing Board a plan
outlining in detail the management of the facility.
This shall include information on personnel,
supervision, hours of operation, services provided,
rules and regulations, and any other information
pertinent to the operation of the facility.
1325.09 Actions of the Board on Exercising Powers
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have
all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
No decision of the Board permitting the use of a building or land shall be
valid for more than one (1) year unless such use is established within this
period. Where such use is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a
building, the Board's decision shall continue in force and effect if a building
permit for such work is obtained within such period, and such erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the
terms of the decision.
1325.10 Who May Appeal
Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the City
aggrieved or affected by any provision of this Ordinance or by any decision
issued by the Zoning Officer in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance.
The rules for filing such appeals are set forth in the next section.
1325.11 Rules and Procedures for Filing Interpretation and Variance Appeals and
Special Exception Applications
(a) General rules and procedures for appeals and applications:
( 1) All appeals and applications made to the Zoning Hearing
Board shall be in writing on standard forms prescribed by the
Board.
( 2) Any appeal shall be made by filing the same with the Zoning
Officer within thirty (30) days after the date of the Zoning
Officer's decision.
( 3) All appeals and applications shall refer to the specific
provisions of this Ordinance involved.
( 4) All appeals and applications shall set forth names and
addresses of all adjoining owners including those across
public roads from the subject property.
( 5) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Officer certified to the
Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board or by a Court of Record on
application, on notice to the Zoning Officer and on due cause
shown.
( 6) Once an appeal is filed, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a
date for a hearing and shall issue a decision within sixty (60)
days.
(b) Interpretation Appeals. Appeals concerning the interpretation of any
provisions of this Ordinance shall exactly set forth the interpretation
that is claimed.
(c) Variance Appeals.
( 1) Appeals for variance from the strict application of this
Ordinance shall include the Zoning Permit Application
denied by the Zoning Officer, together with a statement with
any supporting evidence regarding the requirements listed in
Section 1325.06.
(d) Special Exception Applications.
( 1) Applications for special exceptions shall include a Zoning
Permit Application with all information required therein and a
statement with any supporting evidence regarding the merits
of the proposed use at the proposed location and how the
proposal complies with the general and specific
requirements of this Ordinance.
1325.12 Court Appeals
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the
Board, or any taxpayer or any officer, Department, Board or Bureau of the
City may present to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County or
Northampton County a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision
is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition must be presented to the Court within thirty (30) days after the
decision of the Board.
ARTICLE 1326
AMENDMENTS
1326.01 Power of Amendment
City Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change, modify or
repeal this Ordinance, including the Zoning Map. When doing so, the
Council shall proceed in the manner prescribed in this Article.
1326.02 Who May Initiate
Proposals for amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal may
be initiated by City Council on its own motion, by the Planning Commission,
or by petition of one (1) or more residents of the City of Bethlehem, subject
to the following provisions:
(a) Proposals originated by City Council. The City Council shall refer
every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or
repeal originated by Council to the Planning Commission no less
than thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing before City Council.
Prior to the public hearing the Planning Commission shall submit to
City Council a report containing the Commission's
recommendations, including any additions or modifications of the
original proposal. Failure of the Planning Commission to submit
such report shall constitute an approval by the Planning
Commission.
Within thirty (30) days after its submission to the Planning
Commission, the Commission shall submit to City Council a report
containing the Commission's recommendation, including any
additions or modifications of the original proposal. Failure of the
Planning Commission to submit such report within thirty (30) days
shall constitute an approval by the Planning Commission.
(b) Proposals originated by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may, at any time, transmit to City Council, any
proposals for the amendment, supplement, change, modification or
repeal of this Ordinance.
(c) Proposals originated by a citizen's petition. Each petition of a
proposal for amendment, supplement, change or modification to the
zoning map by the citizenry must be signed and acknowledged by
the owners of fifty (50) percent or more of the land proposed to be
rezoned, and submitted in writing to the City Council together with a
fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). A written proposal or petition
for amendment of the Zoning Ordinance Text, together with a fee of
Fifty Dollars ($50.00), may be submitted to City Council by any
single resident. On receipt of said petition, Council shall transmit a
copy of the petition to the Planning Commission at least thirty (30)
days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment.
Within thirty (30) days after its submission to the Planning
Commission, the Commission shall submit to City Council a report
containing the Commission's recommendation, including any
additions or modifications of the original proposal. Failure of the
Planning commission to submit such report within thirty (30) days
shall constitute an approval by the Planning Commission.
(d) An applicant and/or interested party who requests a continuance of
a public hearing scheduled to consider a zoning amendment change
shall be responsible for the full cost of re-advertising the date of the
subsequent public hearing. In order for the subsequent public
hearing date to be established, the cost of the re-advertisement
must be deposited with the City Clerk's office.
1326.03 Notice of Hearings and Enactment
No such amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal shall
become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto at which
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice
shall be given as follows:
(a) Publish twice a notice of the time, place, and the general nature of
such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Notice shall be published once each week for two (2) successive
weeks. The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30) days
and the second publication shall be not less than seven (7) days
from the date of the hearing.
(b) When such hearing concerns a Zoning Map change, give at least
fifteen (15) days notice to abutting property owners, who shall be
those persons whose properties adjoin or are across the street from
the property in question.
(c) A copy of the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Joint
Planning Commission of Lehigh and Northampton Counties at least
thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing by City Council.
(d) If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice
of the public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the City at
points deemed sufficient by the City, along the perimeter of the tract
to be rezoned at least one week prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(e) The proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance or the title and a
brief summary thereof shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City not more than sixty (60) days nor less
than seven (7) days prior to passage.
1326.04 Amendment Change
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised, or further revised, to include land previously not
affected by it, the Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to
public notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
1326.05 Amendment Listing
All amendments made to this Ordinance as of the date of this publication
are listed beginning on Pages B-1 and C-1.
1326.06 Notice to County
Within thirty (30) days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance shall be forwarded to the Joint Planning Commission of
Lehigh and Northampton Counties.
ARTICLE 1327
FLOODWAY AND FLOOD-FRINGE DISTRICTS
1327.01 Purpose
The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of property and life,
the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and
governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of
public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax
base by:
(a) Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
(b) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(c) Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(d) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
1327.02 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams, and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not
imply that areas outside the flood plain districts, or that land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Bethlehem or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
1327.03 Establishment of the Floodway and Flood-Fringe Districts
The flood and flood-fringe districts shall include all areas subject to
inundation by waters of the one hundred (100) year flood (regulatory flood).
The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the Flood Insurance
Study for the City of Bethlehem, prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration, a division of the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
which is declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The floodway and floodfringe
districts shall be overlays to the
existing Zoning Map and, as such, the provisions for these
two (2) Districts shall serve as a supplement to the Zoning District
provisions. Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions
or requirements of either the floodway or flood fringe
district and those of any Zoning District, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply. Prior to any revision of the delineation of any flood plain districts,
approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration.
1327.04 District Provisions
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development reduce
the carrying capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse,
drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. Prior to any
proposed alteration or relocation of any stream, watercourse, or any other
drainage facility within the City of Bethlehem, a permit shall be obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection, Dams and Encroachment
Division. Further notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected
adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notification shall be forwarded to
both the Federal Insurance Administration and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development.
1327.05 Floodway District
In the Floodway District no development shall be permitted except where
the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements which have been approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Dams and
Encroachment Division.
(a) Permitted Uses. In the Floodway District the following uses and
activities are permitted provided that they are in compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning District and are not prohibited by any other
Ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or
storage of materials and equipment.
( 1) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry,
sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
( 2) Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as
parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat
launching and swimming areas, hiking, and horseback riding
trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, and fishing areas.
( 3) Miscellaneous uses such as yard areas, gardens, play
areas, and pervious parking areas.
(b) Uses Permitted by Special Exception. The following uses and
activities may be permitted by special exception provided that they
are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying Zoning
District and are not prohibited by any other Ordinance:
( 1) Structures accessory to the uses and activities in Section
1327.05(a).
( 2) Utilities and public facilities and improvements, such as
railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipe lines, and
other similar or related uses.
( 3) Water-related uses and activities, such as marinas, docks,
wharves, piers, etc.
( 4) Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials.
( 5) Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals, and similar
activities.
( 6) Temporary storage of materials and equipment, provided
that they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are
not subject to major damage by flooding, and can be readily
removed from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
( 7) Other similar uses and activities.
All uses, activities, and structural developments shall be undertaken
in strict compliance with the flood-proofing provisions contained in all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(c) Variances. A variance shall not be issued for development within
the floodway if any increase in the regulatory flood elevation would
result.
(d) Regulation of Hazardous Materials.
(1) The production, storage, or maintenance of a supply of any
of the following materials is prohibited within any Floodway
District except as noted in Section (2):
( I) Acetone
( II) Ammonia
( III) Benzene
( IV) Calcium Carbide
( V) Carbon Disulfide
( VI) Celluloid
( VII) Chlorine
( VIII) Hydrochloric Acid
( IX) Hydrocyanic Acid
( X) Magnesium
( XI) Nitric Acid and Oxides of Nitrogen
( XII) Petroleum Products (Gasoline, Fuel Oil, Etc.)
( XIII) Phosphorus
( XIV) Potassium
( XV) Sodium
( XVI) Sulphur and Sulphur Products
( XVII) Pesticides (including Insecticide, Fungicides,
and Rodenticides)
(XVIII) Radioactive Substances
( XIX) Other substances defined as hazardous
waste under Section 75.261, Chapter 75,
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
( 2) Except for radioactive substances, a supply of not more than
550 gallons or other comparable volume of the materials
listed in (1) above may be maintained if required for the
operation of a permitted use as specified in Section
1327.05(a) and (b). No radio- active substances shall be
permitted within the Floodway District.
1327.06 Flood Fringe District
In the Flood Fringe District the development and/or use of land shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying Zoning
District provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing and related
provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(a) Any structure, or substantial improvement to any structure which is
used for the production, storage, or maintenance of a supply of any
of the substances listed in Section 1327.05(d)(1) shall:
( 1) Be elevated or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry up to at least one and one-half (1-1/2') feet
above the one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
( 2) Be designed and constructed to prevent pollution from the
structure or activity during the course of a one hundred (100)
year flood.
( 3) Be prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(b) Except for a possible modification of the one and one-half (1-1/2)
foot freeboard requirement, no variance shall be granted for any of
the other requirements of this subsection (a).
1327.07 Special Exceptions
In passing upon applications for special exceptions, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of the
Ordinance and:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
those systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(f) The requirements of the facility for a water front location.
(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
(j) The safety of access to the property in times of flood of ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(l) Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
Ordinance.
1327.08 Non-Conformities
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before
the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these
provisions may be continued subject to the following conditions:
(a) Existing non-conformities (structures and/or uses) located in the
Floodway District shall not be expanded or enlarged (unless the
effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is
fully offset by accompanying stream improvements).
(b) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement
of any kind to a non-conformity (structure and/or use) regardless of
location, to an extent or amount of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of the City Building Code.
1327.09 Activities and Uses Requiring a Special Permit
(a) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act
(Act 1978-166) and regulations adopted by the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development as required
by the Act, the following obstructions and activities are permitted
only by Special Permit, if located partially or entirely within any
established Flood-Fringe District:
( 1) Any new hospital, nursing home, jail, or mobile home park.
( 2) Any construction, enlargement, or alteration of a structure
used, or intended to be used, for a hospital, nursing home, or
jail.
( 3) Any substantial improvement to an existing mobile home
park.
(b) Application Requirements:
Applicants for Special Permits shall provide copies of the following
items:
( 1) A written request including a completed Building Permit
Application Form.
( 2) Ten (10) copies of complete development final plan(s) as
described in Section 202 F.2 of the Subdivision and
Development Ordinance, including the following additional
information:
( I) Topography based upon the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929, showing existing and
proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals.
( II) Information concerning the flow of water in the Flood
Plain including direction and velocities.
( 3) Five (5) copies of plans of all proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at
suitable scale showing the following:
( I) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering
drawings including floor plans, sections, and exterior
building elevations, as appropriate;
( II) For any proposed building, the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) and, as required,
the elevation of any other floor;
( III) Complete information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and
other factors associated with the one hundred (100)
year flood;
( IV) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
( V) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets,
drives, other accessways, and parking areas
showing all right-of-way and pavement widths;
( VI) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and
vehicular accessways including existing and
proposed grades; and
( VII) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm
sewer systems, water supply systems, and any other
utilities and facilities.
( 4) Three (3) copies of the following data and documentation:
( I) Certification from the applicant that the site upon
which the activity or development is proposed is an
existing separate and single parcel, owned by the
applicant or the client he represents;
( II) Certification from a Registered Professional
Engineer, Architect, or Landscape Architect that the
proposed construction has been adequately
designed to protect against damage from the one
hundred (100) year flood;
( III) A statement, certified by a Registered Professional
Engineer, Architect, Landscape Architect, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the
nature and extent of pollution that might possibly
occur from the development during the course of a
one hundred (100) year flood, including a statement
concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life;
( IV) A statement certified by a Registered Professional
Engineer, which contains a complete and accurate
description of the effects the proposed development
will have on one hundred (100) year flood elevations
and flows;
( V) A statement, certified by a Registered Professional
Engineer, Architect, or Landscape Architect, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the
kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant materials or
debris that may possibly exist or be located on the
site below the one hundred (100) year flood elevation
and the effects such materials and debris may have
on one hundred (100) year flood elevations and
flows;
( VI) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection "Planning Module for Land
Development;"
( VII) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control;
(VIII) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited
to, a permit for any activity regulated by the
Department of Environmental Protection under
Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
( IX) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner
in which the site will be safely evacuated before or
during the course of a one hundred (100) year flood.
(c) Application Review Procedures
Upon receipt of an application for a Special Permit by the City
Planning Office, the following procedures shall apply in addition to all
other applicable permit procedures which are already established:
( 1) Within three (3) working days following receipt of the
application, a complete copy of the application and all
accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the
County Planning Commission by registered or certified mail
for its review and recommendations.
Copies of the application as necessary shall also be
forwarded to the City Building Inspector, Zoning Officer,
Forester and Engineer for review and comment.
( 2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the City shall
notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
( 3) If the City Planning Commission decides to disapprove an
application, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the
reasons for the disapproval.
( 4) If the City approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development, by registered mail,
within five (5) working days after the date of approval.
( 5) Before issuing the Special Permit, the City shall allow the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development thirty (30) days after receipt of the notification
by the Department, to review the application and the
decision made by the City.
( 6) If the City does not receive any communication from the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development during the thirty (30) day review period, it may
issue a Special Permit to the applicant.
( 7) If the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development should decide to disapprove an
application, it shall notify the City and the applicant, in
writing, of the reasons for the disapproval, and the City shall
not issue the Special Permit.
(d) Technical Requirements for Development Requiring a Special
Permit.
In addition to any other applicable requirements, the following
provisions shall also apply to the activities requiring a Special
Permit. If there is any conflict between any of the following
requirements and any otherwise applicable provision, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply.
( 1) No application for a Special Permit shall be approved unless
it can be determined that the structure or activity will be
located, constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
( I) Fully protect the health and safety of the
general public and any occupants of the
structure. At a minimum, all new structures
shall be designed, located and constructed
so that:
( i) The structure will survive inundation
by waters of the one hundred (100)
year flood without any lateral
movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation.
( ii) The lowest floor elevation (including
basement) will be at least one and
one-half (1-1/2) feet above the one
hundred (100) year flood elevation.
(iii) The occupants of the structure can
remain inside for an indefinite period
of time and be safely evacuated at
any time during the one hundred
(100) year flood.
( II) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution,
increased flood levels or flows, or debris endangering
life and property.
( 2) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only a Professional Engineer, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow technical
review by the City and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development.
( 3) Any structure which requires a Special Permit shall be
prohibited within the area measured fifty (50) feet
horizontally from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
( 4) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of
the other requirements of this Section.
ARTICLE 1732
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY
1732.01 Purpose and Intent
1732.02 Definitions
1732.03 Applicability
1732.04 Establishment of a Registry
1732.05 Registration of Abandoned Real Property
1732.06 Maintenance Requirements
1732.07 Security Requirements
1732.08 Public Nuisance
1732.09 Inspections for Violations
1732.10 Additional Authority
1732.11 Opposing, Obstructing Enforcement Officer; Penalty
1732.12 Immunity of Enforcement Officer
1732.13 Amendments
1732.14 Severability
1732.15 Effective Date
1732.99 Fees and Penalties
1732.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of the City to establish a process to address the deterioration and
blight of City neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount of abandoned, foreclosed or
distressed real property located within the City, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the
number of abandoned properties located within the City. It is the City’s further intent to
establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and foreclosed
properties.
1732.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Abandoned Real Property – means any real property located in the City,
whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis
pendens filed against it by a lender holding a mortgage on the property,
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by a lender, is subject to an
ARTICLE 1732 2
application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor’s lien sale, or has been
transferred to a lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The designation
of a property as “abandoned” shall remain in place until such time as the property
is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure action has been dismissed,
and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
Accessible Property/Structure – means a property that IS accessible through
a comprised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is unsecured
and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.
Applicable Codes – means to include, but not be limited to, the City’s Zoning
Code, the City’s International Property Maintenance Code, Solid Waste
Ordinance, Residential and Commercial Recycling Ordinance, and the
Pennsylvania Building and Fire Codes.
Blighted Property – means:
a) Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls,
or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage trespassing; or
b) Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the maintenance
of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in value of the
neighboring properties; or
c) Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the City Codes; or
d) Properties that endanger the public’s health, safety, or welfare because the
properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated, or
violate minimum health and safety standards or lacks maintenance as
required by the applicable codes.
Enforcement Officer – means any natural person, entity, firm, association, foundation,
institution, partnership, co-partnership, corporation or unincorporated association. This
term shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
Owner – means any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership interest
whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also apply to any person,
legal entity or agent responsible for the construction, maintenance or operation of the
property involved.
Property Management Company – means a local property manager, property maintenance
ARTICLE 1732 3
company or similar entity responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property.
Vacant – means any building or structure that is not legally occupied.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
1732.03 APPLICABILITY
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or
provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy available to the City above and beyond
any other State, County or Local provisions for the same.
1732.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1732.05 the City or designee shall establish a registry cataloging
each Abandoned Property within the City, containing the information required by this Article.
1732.05 REGISTRATION OF ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY
a) Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the City of
Bethlehem shall perform an inspection of the property to determine vacancy or
occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days
of the inspection, register the property with the Bureau of Housing, or designee, on
forms or website access provided by the City, and indicate whether the property is
vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether it is
found to be vacant or occupied.
b) If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the
mortgagee or his designee monthly until (1) the mortgagor or other party remedies the
default, or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is
deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection,
update the property registration to a vacancy status on forms provided by the City.
c) Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the mortgagee and
the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee and the server, a direct contact
name and telephone number for both parties, facsimile number and e-mail address for
both parties, the PIN or tax number, and the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact
phone number of the property management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property.
ARTICLE 1732 4
d) All registration fees must be paid directly from the Mortgagee, Servicer, Trustee,
or Owner. Third Party Registration fees are not allowed without the consent of the
City and/or its authorized designee.
e) This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a
foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage
involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.
f) Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration
requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance standards of this section as
long as they remain vacant or in default.
g) Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this section must
report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of
the change.
h) Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify the
registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required
by this article is a violation of the article and shall be subject to enforcement.
i) Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination that any
property is in violation of this article, the City may take the necessary action to ensure
compliance with and place a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed
to benefit the property and bring it into compliance.
1732.06 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the property in accordance
with all applicable codes of the City may result in a violation of the applicable code(s)
and issuance of a citation or Notice of Violation in accordance with the applicable code
of the City. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the City’s Code Enforcement
Officer, Magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction, the City may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with this section.
1732.07 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
a) Properties subject to these Sections shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons.
b) A “secure manner” shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of
windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access
the interior of the property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other
ARTICLE 1732 5
openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or
structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the
window.
c) If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become vacant or
abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work
necessary to bring the property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the
property manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the
requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws.
1732.08 PUBLIC NUISANCE
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which
pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety
of the residents of the City.
1732.09 INSPECTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from any other
obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may apply to the property. Upon offer for
sale or transfer of title to the property, the owner shall be responsible to contact the City’s
Housing Inspections Office for the City of Bethlehem to schedule an inspection of the building
or structure.
1732.10 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY
a) If an Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property subject to the provisions
of this article is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the code
enforcement officer may temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee
and/or owner, and may bring the violations before the magistrate as soon as possible to
address the conditions of the property.
b) The Enforcement Officer or magistrate shall have the authority to require the mortgagee
and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional
maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing
any and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard
or other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.
c) If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, then the code enforcement board or special magistrate
may direct the City to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee with the cost of the
abatement.
ARTICLE 1732 6
d) If the mortgagee does not reimburse the City for the cost of temporarily securing the
property, or of any abatement directed by the code enforcement officer or magistrate,
within thirty (30) days of the City sending the mortgagee the invoice then the City may
lien the property with such cost, along with an administrative fee as determined in the
City’s fee ordinance to recover the administrative personnel services.
1732.11 OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the
enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in the applicable code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
1732.12 IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the City to enforce the sections here within
shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real
property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article.
1732.13 AMENDMENTS
Registration and Penalty Fees outlined in this article may be modified by a Resolution, passed
and adopted by the City Council of the City of Bethlehem.
1732.14 SEVERABILITY
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect or impair any of
the remaining portions of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intention of City Council
of the City of Bethlehem that this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
1732.15 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective on August 28, 2013.
1732.99 FEES AND PENALTIES
a) A non-refundable registration fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00),
per property, shall accompany the registration form.
b) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article may be cited and fined.
The following table shows violations of these sections, as may be amended from
ARTICLE 1732 7
time to time, which may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this regulation; and
the dollar amount of civil penalty for the violation of these sections as it may be
amended. The descriptions of violations below are for informational purposes only
and are not meant to limit or define the nature of the violations or the subject matter
of the City code sections, except to the extent that different types of violations of the
Code section may carry different civil penalties. For each Code section listed in the
schedule of civil penalties, the entirety of the section may be enforced by the
mechanism provided in this section, regardless of whether all activities prescribed or
required are described in the “Description of Violation” column. To determine
whether a particular activity is prescribed or required by this Code, the relevant City
Code section(s) shall be examined.
DESCRIPTION OF VIOLATION CIVIL PENALTIES
Failure to register abandoned real property
on annual basis and/or any violation of any
of the sections of Article 1732.
1st Violation - $ 1,000
2nd Violation - $ 1,000
3rd Violation - $ 3,000
4th Violation - $ 7,000
5th Violation - $10,000
(Ord. 2013-19-Passed 8/6/13)
ARTICLE 101
Codified Ordinances
101.01 Codification Adopted; Procedure.
101.02 Component Codes; Short Title; Citation.
101.03 Amendments And Supplements; Numbering.
101.04 Interpretation And Definitions.
101.05 References And Prior Ordinances.
101.06 Separability Of Provisions.
101.99 General Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Codification of ordinances - See 3rd Class §1014 (53 P.S. §36014)
101.01 CODIFICATION ADOPTED; PROCEDURE.
(a) Certain provisions of the 1946 Code and ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, of a general and permanent nature, consolidated
and codified with minor nonsubstantive changes, as attached hereto and
made a part hereof (Exhibit A), are ordained as the general ordinances of the
City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 1963.
(b) This ordinance shall be introduced in the Council, notice of
introduction shall be published and legal advertisement of the contents of the
Codified Ordinances shall be made in conformity with subsections lO14.1(b)
and (c) of 1951 P.L. 662, as amended by 1957 P.L. 631. (Adopting
Ordinance)
ARTICLE 101 2
101.02 COMPONENT CODES: SHORT TITLE: CITATION.
The Codified Ordinances of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 1963, hereby
adopted, shall be comprised of the following component parts:
Part One - Administrative Code
Part Three - Business Regulation and Taxation Code
Part Five - Traffic Code
Part Seven - General Offenses Code
Part Nine - Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code
Part Eleven - Public Health Code
Part Thirteen - Zoning Code
Part Fifteen - Fire Prevention Code
Part Seventeen - Building Code
The Codified Ordinances of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 1963, may be
referred to as the "Codified Ordinances;" any component code of the Codified
Ordinances may be referred to by its name, such as the "Traffic Code."
Sections of the Codified Ordinances may be cited by their number, such as
Section 101.01. (Adopting Ordinance)
101.03 AMENDMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS; NUMBERING.
(a) The Codified Ordinances of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 1963, may
be amended or supplemented at any time and, when any amendment or supplement
is adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of Council to
make the same a part thereof, such amendment or supplement shall be
incorporated in, and deemed a part of, the Codified Ordinances, so that a
reference to the Codified Ordinances shall be understood and construed as
including the Codified Ordinances of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 1963, and
any and all such amendments and supplements.
(b) All amendments and supplements enacted as a part of the Codified
Ordinances shall be integrated therewith by following the form of arrangement
and plan set forth in the original Codified Ordinances as follows: each
Code shall be subdivided into titles, each title shall be subdivided into
articles, and each article shall be subdivided into sections, which shall be
numbered in accordance with the decimal numbering system. The
numbering of all sections, except the penalty sections, shall be consecutive
within each article commencing with the first section of Article 101, which
ARTICLE 101 3
shall be numbered 101.01, the first "1" signifying Code 1, the two figures
"01" before the decimal signifying the article within the Code, and the two
figures "01" after the decimal signifying the first section in Article 101 of
the Code. Penalty sections shall be designated "99" and shall be the last
section of the article. (Adopting Ordinance)
101.04 INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.
In the construction of the Codified Ordinances the following rules
shall control, excepting those inconsistent with the manifest intent of
Council as disclosed in a particular provisions, section or article:
(a) Adopting Ordinance. "Adopting Ordinance" shall mean the
ordinance of the City adopting the Codified Ordinances of
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 1963, in conformity with the Third
Class City Code of Pennsylvania, and this Article 101.
(b) Authority. Whenever in the Codified Ordinances authority is
given to an officer or an act is required to be performed, such
authority may be exercised and such act may be performed, at
the instance of such officer, by a deputy or subordinate, unless
contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such particular
provision.
(c) Calendar-Computation of Time. "Month" and "year" shall mean
the calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within
which an act is to be done or a period is to expire shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day,
except if the last be Sunday it shall be excluded. If time is
expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday shall be excluded.
(d) City and Municipality. "City" and "Municipality" shall mean the
City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
(e) Conjunctions. "And" shall include "or" and "or" shall include
"and" if the sense so requires.
(f) Council. "Council" shall mean the Council of the City of
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE 101 4
(g) Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be
applied to the feminine and neuter genders.
(h) General Rule. Excepting as otherwise provided in this section,
words and phrases shall be construed according to the common
usage of language, provided, however, that technical words and
phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning
in the law shah be construed according to such technical or
special meaning.
(i) Joint Authority. Words giving authority to a Board,
Commission, Authority or to three or more officers or employees
or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a
majority thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided.
(j) Keeper or Proprietor. "Keeper" or "proprietor" shall mean and
include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships,
whether acting by themselves or as a servant,
agent or employee.
(k) Land or Real Estate. "Land" or "real estate" shall include
rights and easements of incorporeal nature. (Adopting
Ordinance)
(1) Municipal Election. "Municipal election" shall mean that election
required by the Constitution of Pennsylvania to be held in oddnumbered
years. (Ord. 1730 §2. Passed 2/13/62.)
(m) Number. Words in the plural shall include the singular and in
the singular shall include the plural number.
(n) Oath. "Oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or
authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken
by a person having conscientious scruples to taking an oath.
An affirmation shall have the same force and effect as an oath.
(o) Owner. "Owner" when applied to property shall include a part
owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or any part
of such property.
ARTICLE 101 5
(p) Person. "Person" shall extend to and be applied to associations,
clubs, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic, as
well as to individuals.
(q) Premises. "Premises" when used as applicable to property shall
extend to and include land and buildings.
(r) Property. "Property" shall include real and personal, and any
mixed and lesser estates or interests therein. "Personal property"
shall include every kind of property except real property. "Real
property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
(s) Reasonable Time. In all cases where provision is made for an
act to be done or notice to be given within a "reasonable time,"
it shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary
for the prompt performance of such act or giving of such notice.
(t) Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between
the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
(u) State or Commonwealth. "State" or "Commonwealth" shall mean
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(v) Street. "Street" shall be construed to include alleys, avenues,
boulevards, lanes, roads, streets and other public ways in the
City.
(w) Tenant or Occupant. "Tenant" or "occupant" as applied to building
or land shall extend and be applied to any person holding a written
or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or any part of a building
or land, alone or with others.
(u) State or Commonwealth. "State" or "Commonwealth" shall mean
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(v) Street. "Street" shall be construed to include alleys, avenues,
boulevards, lanes, roads, streets and other public ways in the
City.
ARTICLE 101 6
(w) Tenant or Occupant. "Tenant" or "occupant" as applied to building
or land shall extend and be applied to any person holding a written
or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or any part of a
building or land, alone or with others.
(x) Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include
the future.
(y) Third Class City Code. "The Third Class City Code" shall mean
the Act of June 28, 1951, P.L. 662, as amended. The sections
of the Third Class City Code may be cited herein as "3rd Class
(z) Optional Third Class City Charter Law. "The Optional Third Class
City Charter Law" shall mean the Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901,
as amended. The sections of the Third Class City Charter Law may
be cited herein as "3rd Class Charter Law". (Adopting Ordinance)
(aa) Time. Whenever any time established in the Codified Ordinances
for the taking of any action expires on a Sunday or on a legal
holiday, such time shall not expire on such day but shall expire
on the next weekday. (Ord 1730 §501. Passed 2/13/62.)
101.05 REFERENCES AND PRIOR ORDINANCES.
(a) Wherever in any statute of the Commonwealth, or resolution or
ordinance of the City there is a reference to the Department of Accounts and
Finance or to the Director of the Department of Accounts and Finance, the
reference shall be construed to mean the Department of Administration or
the Business Administrator. Where there is a reference to the Department of
Streets and Public Improvements or to the Director of the Department of
Streets and Public Improvements, the reference shall be construed to mean
the Department of Public Works or the Director of the Department of Public
Works.
(b) All references in any other ordinance to Council or any other
board, body or office shall be construed to mean such body, board or office
to which the respective functions, powers or duties are assigned by this
Code. (Ord. 1730 §601. Passed 2/13/62.)
ARTICLE 101 7
101.06 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
Each section and each part of each section of the Codified Ordinances
is declared to be an independent section or part of a section and, notwithstanding
any other evidence of legislative intent, it is declared to be the
controlling legislative intent that if any such section or part of a section, or
any provision thereof, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances,
is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or parts of sections
and the application of such provision to any other person or circumstances,
other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby,
and it is declared to be the legislative intent that the Codified Ordinances
would have been adopted independently of such sections or parts of a
section so held to be invalid. (Adopting Ordinance)
101.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
Whenever in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance of the City
an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense,
or whenever in the Codified Ordinances or in any ordinance the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violator of any such
provision or any ordinance shall be fined six hundred dollars ($600.00) or
imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. (Adopting Ordinance; Ord.
3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 103
Council; City Clerk
103.01 Legislative Power.
103.02 Councilmen: Number, Election, Terms, Qualifications.
103.03 Meetings Of Council.
103.04 City Clerk.
103.05 Rules And Regulations; Duty Of City Clerk.
CROSS REFERENCES
City Council - See 3rd Class §1001 et seq. (53 P.S. §36001 et seq.) City
Clerk - See 3rd Class §1301 et seq. (53 P.S. §36301 et seq.)
103.01 LEGISLATIVE POWER.
The legislative power of the City government shall be vested in and
exercised by Council. (Ord. 1730 §201. Passed 2/13/62.)
103.02 COUNCILMEN: NUMBER, ELECTION, TERMS,
QUALIFICATIONS.
Council shall consist of seven members, elected at large by the voters
of the City at regular municipal elections. The terms of office of the
members of Council shall begin on the first Monday of January next
following their election and shall be for four years and until their successors
qualify. Three members of Council shall be elected at the municipal election
in November, 1963, and every four years thereafter; the remaining four
members shall be elected at the municipal election in November, 1965, and
every four years thereafter. (Ord. 1730 §202. Passed 2/13/62.)
103.03 MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
(a) Regular meetings of Council shall be held at least twice a month
at such place and at such time as fixed by resolution of Council.
(b) All meetings of Council shall be open to the public, and public
notice of meetings shall be given as required by the Act of June 21, 1957
(P.L. 392.). (Ord. 1767 §1. Passed 11/13/62.)
ARTICLE 103 2
103.04 CITY CLERK.
(a) Appointment. The City Clerk shall be appointed by a majority
of the members of Council and shall serve at the pleasure of Council.
(b) Duties. The City Clerk shall carry out the duties assigned to
him by the statues of Pennsylvania. (Ord. 1730 §210, 211. Passed 2/13/62.)
103.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS; DUTY OF CITY CLERK.
(a) No rule or regulation made by any department, office, agency or
authority of the City, except such as relates to the organization or internal
management of the City, shall take effect until it has been approved as to
form and legality by the City Solicitor and approved by the Mayor. Council
shall receive all such rules and regulations which shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
(b) All such rules and regulations shall be published by posting in the
office of the City Clerk for twenty days and in whatever other manner
Council deems desirable.
(c) The City Clerk shall keep a current record of all rules and
regulations filed with him. (Ord. 1767 §4. Passed 11/13/62.)
ARTICLE 104
Requirements for Ethics Training for City Council Members
104.01 Training Requirements
104.99 Penalty
.
104.01 Training Requirements
A. The City Council President, in conjunction with the City Clerk’s office,
shall schedule a Committee of the Whole meeting within six months of the biennial
City Council organizational meeting held pursuant to state law, at which the
Pennsylvania State Ethics Commission shall present a training seminar on the
rules, regulations, penalties, and other pertinent matters relating to ethics guidelines
for municipal elected officials and employees. No other business shall be
transacted or discussed at the ethics training meeting.
B. All Members of City Council shall be required to attend the ethics training
meeting. The meeting shall be open to other City Municipal Elected Officials and
employees of the City of Bethlehem, and Council shall provide for and encourage
their attendance.
C. The ethics training meeting shall be advertised as provided by general law,
and shall be publically announced and posted on the City website 30 days prior to
its commencement.
D. If a Member of City Council is unable to attend said meeting due to
unforeseen emergency, said Council Member shall be required to seek out and
attend equivalent ethics training within the same calendar year at their own
expense.
E. Members of Council will obtain a certificate of completion and submit the
certificate to the City Clerk within one (1) month of attendance. The certificate
shall be forwarded, with signatures redacted, by the Bethlehem City Clerk to the
Information Services Bureau of Bethlehem which shall make accessible such
certificate on the Bethlehem City website not later than five (5) days after they are
received in the Bethlehem City Clerk’s Office.
104.99 Penalty
Any Council Member who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject
to a fine of $100.00.
(Ord.2017-16. Passed 5/17/17)
ARTICLE 105
Mayor
105.01 Executive power.
105.02 Powers of Mayor; appointments.
105.03 Vacancy in office of Mayor.
105.04 Term of office of Mayor; number of terms
CROSS REFERENCES
Election and term - See 3rd Class Charter Law § 403
(53 P.S. §41403)
Acting Mayor - See 3rd Class Charter Law § 406(b)
(53 P.S. §41406(b)
Duties - See 3rd Class Charter Law § 412 (53 P.S. §41412)
Approval of ordinances - See 3rd Class Charter Law §413(a)
[53 P.S. P.S. §41413(a)]
Qualifications - See 3rd Class § 1201 (53 P.S. §36201)
105.01 EXECUTIVE POWER.
The executive power of the City government shall be vested
in and exercised by the Mayor (Ord. 1730 §301. Passed 2/13/62.)
105.02 POWERS OF MAYOR; APPOINTMENTS.
The Mayor shall appoint all department heads with the advice
and consent of a majority of Council passing upon the
appointment. The Mayor, at his pleasure, may remove any
department head after notice and an opportunity to be heard, but
before removing such person, the Mayor shall file a written
notice of his intent to remove with Council, the removal becoming
effective on the twentieth day after such filing. Any employee
of a department may be removed by the head of the department with
the approval of the Mayor. (Ord. 1730 §302. Passed 2/13/62.)
105.03. VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
Until such time as either Council or the Court fills a
vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Business Administrator shall
serve as Mayor and shall possess all the rights, perform all the
duties and exercise all the powers thereof.
(Ord. 1730 §303. Passed 2/13/62.)
ARTICLE 105 2
105.04 TERM OF OFFICE OF MAYOR; NUMBER OF TERMS.
The Mayor shall hold his office during four (4) years from
the first Monday of January next ensuing his election. He shall
be eligible to succeed himself for only one additional term. The
time served to fill in for the remainder of an unexpired term
shall not be deemed a "term" for the purposes of this limitation.
(Ord. 2389 §1. Passed 10/18/73; Ord. 3331. Passed 4/17/90.)
ARTICLE 107
Departments
107.01 Departments Enumerated.
107.02 Department Heads.
107.03 Department of Administration.
107.04 Department of Community and Economic Development.
107.05 Department of Public Works.
107.06 Police Department.
107.07 Fire Department.
107.08 Department of Water and Sewer Resources.
CROSS REFERENCE
Appointment of Business Administrator - See 3rd Class City Charter Law §416 (53 P.S. §41416)
107.01 DEPARTMENTS ENUMERATED.
The City shall have the following departments under the supervision of the Mayor:
(a) Administration.
(b) Community and Economic Development.
(c) Public Works.
(d) Police.
(e) Fire.
(f) Water and Sewer Resources.
(Ord. 2409 §1. Passed 1/29/1974; Ord. 3357. Passed 10/16/1990; Ord. 3894. Passed 6/16/1998;
Ord. 2016-32. Passed 11/15/2016; Ord. 2019-39. Passed 12/3/2019.)
107.02 DEPARTMENT HEADS.
(a) Each department shall, except in the case of the Police and Fire Departments, be
headed by a Director. The Police Department and Fire Department shall be headed by a Chief.
(Ord. 2409 §2. Passed 1/29/1974; Ord. 2012-14. Passed 5/1/2012.)
(b) Each department head shall serve, subject to removal at the pleasure of the Mayor,
during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him and until his successor is appointed and
qualifies. In the event that a Chief or Deputy Chief has been promoted from a position covered
by civil service protection he shall be entitled, upon termination of service as Chief or Deputy
Chief, to return to the last position covered by civil service held before promotion to the rank of
Chief or Deputy Chief. (Ord 2012-14. Passed 5/1/2012.)
Article 107 2
(c) Subject to provisions of Article XLIV of the Third Class City Code as to civil service,
department heads shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within their respective
departments and may, with the approval of the Mayor, remove any such officers or employees.
(d) The head of each department, under the supervision of the Mayor and subject to the
Charter and his Title, shall:
(1) Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of
subordinate officers and employees within the department;
(2) Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and employees
within the department and modify such assignments as need appears;
(3) Supervise the work of the department through the divisions established by
this Title and such other organization units as the head of the department
may find necessary or desirable, and supervise and direct the work of the
employees of the department;
(4) Delegate to division heads such of his powers as he may deem necessary
for efficient administration;
(5) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council in such form as shall be
approved by the Business Administrator on the work of the department
during the preceding year.
(Ord. 2409 §2. Passed 1/29/1974.)
107.03 DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION.
The Department of Administration, under the Business Administrator, shall establish and
supervise standard personnel policies and practices, shall assist the Mayor in the preparation of
the annual budget, and shall monitor expenditures and revenues of said budget throughout the
course of the fiscal year. The Business Administrator shall administer a centralized purchasing
system for all the departments of the City government, and shall maintain and supervise all
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Act 511 tax programs. The Business Administrator shall also
supervise the Information Services Bureau, the Financial Services Bureau, and the Golf Course
Enterprise. (Ord. 2987 §1. Passed 4/2/1985; Ord. 2009-12. Passed 5/20/2009; Ord. 2019-39.
Passed 12/3/2019.)
107.04 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
The Department of Community and Economic Development shall provide and coordinate
those services which are required to ensure proper planning, economic development, zoning,
housing and building inspections, environmental and personal public health, and social services.
(Ord. 3051 §1. Passed 12/17/1985; Ord. 3357. Passed 10/16/1990; Ord. 4220. Passed 11/5/2003.)
Article 107 3
107.05 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the operation of the Streets
Bureau, Traffic Maintenance Bureau, Urban Forestry, Electrical Bureau, Mechanical
Maintenance Bureau, Grounds Maintenance Bureau, Facilities Bureau, Bureau of Recreation
including the swimming pools, skating rink, recreation facility rentals, and programs, and
Engineering Bureau including engineering, construction and maintenance of City road
infrastructure and physical assets of the City. This Department shall provide engineering services
not only for its own activities but also in cooperation with the operating activities of the other
departments of the City government. (Ord. 2987 §1. Passed 4/2/1985; Ord. 3183 §2. Passed
5/3/1988; Ord. 3894. Passed 6/16/1998; Ord. 2009-12. Passed 5/20/2009; Ord. 2016-32. Passed
11/15/2016; Ord. 2019-39. Passed 12/3/2019.)
107.06 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
The Police Department shall be responsible for all police services required for the
protection of the residents of the City, along with Emergency Management. (Ord. 2409 §4.
Passed 1/29/1974; Ord. 2019-39. Passed 12/3/2019.)
107.07 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
The Fire Department shall be responsible for the fire and fire inspection services for the
protection of the residents of the City, along with Emergency Medical Services. (Ord. 3051 §2.
Passed 12/17/1985; Ord. 4220. Passed 11/5/2003.)
107.08 DEPARTMENT OF WATER AND SEWER RESOURCES.
The Department of Water and Sewer Resources shall be responsible for the operation of
the sewer system including the Wastewater Treatment Plant, the water system, including meters,
distribution and collection and storage facilities, and activities and functions related thereto.
(Ord. 3894. Passed 6/16/1998.)
ARTICLE 109
City Treasurer
109.01 Powers And Duties.
109.02 Disbursement Of City Funds.
109.03 Bond And Insurance.
CROSS REFERENCES
City Treasurer - See 3rd Class §1401 et seq. (53 P.S. §36401
et seq.); 3rd Class Charter Law §415 (53 P.S. §41415)
City Controller - See ADM. Art. 111
Finance - See ADM. Art. 121
109.01 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The City Treasurer shall carry out such duties and exercise
such powers with respect to the receipt and disbursement of
public monies as are provided by general law and, in addition
thereto, shall receive for deposit from the departments of the
City government all City monies collected by such departments.
(Ord. 1730 - Passed 2/13/62.)
The City Treasurer may by written agreement with the
Department of Administration of the City of Bethlehem, delegate
and assign any and all duties and powers of the City Treasurer,
as permitted by law. (Ord. 3493 - Passed 10/6/92.)
109.02 DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
The City Treasurer shall disburse all City funds in
accordance with warrants presented to him therefor and duly
signed by the City Controller and the head of the City department
or office requesting such disbursement.
(Ord. 1730 - Passed 2/13/62.)
109.03 BOND AND INSURANCE.
The City Treasurer shall furnish such fidelity bond and
insurance as is required by general law. The fidelity bond shall
be in the amount of one million, two hundred thousand dollars
($1,200,000) or shall be included in the blanket bond covering
all City officers and employees. (Ord. 1730 - Passed 2/13/62;
Ord. 2009-13 – Passed 5/20/09.)
(NOTE: The City Treasurer was made a part time position
beginning in 1992, at a salary of $1,000 annually plus benefits,
as a result of a Committee of the Whole Meeting with Members of
Council and the Administration on February 5, 1991. See
Ordinance No. 3405, passed 3/19/91; salary of $1,300 annually –
Ordinance 2009-9, passed 3/3/2009.)
ARTICLE 111
City Controller
111.01 Powers And Duties.
111.02 To Review And Approve Checks For Payment.
111.03 Bond Required.
CROSS REFERENCES
City Controller - See 3rd Class §1701 et seq. (53 P.S. §36701 et. seq.) and
3rd Class Optional §41420 (53 P.S. §41420)
City Treasurer - See ADM. Art. 109
Finance - See ADM. Art. 121
111.01 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(a) The City Controller shall exercise the control function in the
management of the finances of the City as follows: he shall
maintain the encumbrance system of budget operations set forth
in Article 121.07, and shall provide for expenditures only upon
written requisition, for the pre-audit of all claims and demands
against the City prior to payment, and for the control of all
payments out of any funds by individual checks for each
payment to the official having custody thereof.
(b) He shall assure that the uniform accounting system throughout
the City government as maintained by the Business
Administrator reflects accurately the assets and liabilities and
the income and expenses of the City. He shall receive from the
Business Administrator and other department heads such
information regarding City properties and obligations and City
income and expenditures as he deems necessary to carry out his
duties.
(c) In addition to the requirements of Article XVII of the Third
Class City Code, he shall furnish Council with any reports
requested and other reports at such times as he deems
necessary.
(Ord. 1730 §331. Passed 2/13/62; Ord. 2012-22. Passed 8/7/12.)
ARTICLE 111
2
111.02 TO REVIEW AND APPROVE CHECKS FOR PAYMENT
(a) The City Controller shall review all checks for the expenditure
of City monies and, if satisfied that such expenditure is within
the budget allotment pertaining thereto, shall sign and/or
forward the check before it is presented to the City Treasurer
for payment. In so doing, he shall also pre-audit all claims and
demands against the City prior to payment and shall approve
checks for payment thereof only if satisfied that such payment
is in accordance with law. (Ord. 1730 §331. Passed 2/13/62.)
(b) If it is advantageous to the City to enter into a contract or lease
requiring the expenditure of funds over a period extending
beyond the current budget year, the City Controller shall verify
that the expenditure required for the current year is within the
appropriate budget allotment. Expenditures required in
subsequent years shall constitute obligations of the City which
shall be provided for in the adoption of budgets for such years.
(Ord. 2214. Passed 12/1/70.)
(Ord. 2012-22. Passed 8/7/12.)
111.03 BOND REQUIRED.
The City Controller shall give bond to the City, as required by general law,
in the sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000). (Ord. 1730 §331. Passed 2/13/62;
Ord. 2009-14. Passed 5/20/09.)
ARTICLE 112
Campaign Finance Reports
112.01 Filing and Posting of Campaign Finance Reports
112.02 Filing and Posting of Statements of Financial Interests
112.03 Filing and Posting of Contributions Received After Pre-Election Filing
Date
112.04 Notification to Candidates
112.99 Penalty
112.01 FILING AND POSTING OF CAMPAIGN FINANCE REPORTS
Elected Officials, Candidates, and their respective Committees for the
offices of City Council, Mayor, City Treasurer, and City Controller shall forward
a copy of their respective Campaign Finance Reports to the Bethlehem City
Clerk’s Office on or before the due dates of Campaign Finance Reporting as
mandated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which requires such Campaign
Finance Reports to be filed with the County of Northampton. Such candidates
shall receive a receipt for filing in the Bethlehem City Clerk’s Office. The
Bethlehem City Clerk shall forward the filed Campaign Finance Reports, with
signatures redacted, to the Information Services Bureau of Bethlehem which shall
make accessible such Reports on the Bethlehem City website not later than five
(5) days after the schedule mandated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2015-1; Passed 1/20/15.)
112.02 FILING AND POSTING OF STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL
INTERESTS
A copy of the Statement of Financial Interests required to be filed by
candidates for the offices of City Council, Mayor, City Treasurer, and City
Controller shall be forwarded, with signatures redacted, by the Bethlehem City
Clerk to the Information Services Bureau of Bethlehem which shall make
accessible such Statements on the Bethlehem City website not later than five (5)
days after they are received in the Bethlehem City Clerk’s Office.
ARTICLE 112 2
112.03 FILING AND POSTING OF CONTRIBUTIONS RECEIVED
AFTER PRE-ELECTION FILING DATE
A copy of the notification required to be filed with the Counties by
candidates, and their respective committees, for the offices of City Council,
Mayor, City Treasurer, and City Controller who receive $500 or more in
contributions within a week before the election shall be forwarded by candidates
for the offices of City Council, Mayor, City Treasurer, and City Controller within
twenty-four (24) hours to the Bethlehem City Clerk’s Office and shall be
forwarded, with signatures redacted, by the Bethlehem City Clerk to the
Information Services Bureau of Bethlehem which shall make accessible such
notification on the Bethlehem City website not later than five (5) days after they
are received in the Bethlehem City Clerk’s Office.
(Ord. 2015-1; Passed 1/20/15.)
112.04 NOTIFICATION TO CANDIDATES
The City Clerk’s Office shall forward to candidates notification of their
requirements under this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-1; Passed 1/20/15.)
112.99 PENALTY
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) A fine of $20.00 per day for the first six days that a report is
late;
(2) A fine of $10.00 per day thereafter, up to a maximum penalty
of $250.00.
(Ord. 2015-1; Passed 1/20/15.)
This Ordinance shall be effective beginning with the 2011 Municipal Elections.
(Ord. 2011-9. Passed 3/1/11. Ord. 2015-1; Passed 1/20/15.)
ARTICLE 113
City Solicitor; Bureau of Law
113.01 Appointment.
113.02 Solicitor To Record Departmental Claims And Satisfaction.
CROSS REFERENCE
City Solicitor - See 3rd Class §1601 et. seq. (53 P.S. §3660l et seq.)
113.01 APPOINTMENT.
The City Solicitor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of Council. The Mayor may appoint, with the advice and
consent of Council, such assistant solicitors as he and the City Solicitor
deem necessary. (Ord. 1730 §332. Passed 2/13/62.)
113.02 SOLICITOR TO RECORD DEPARTMENTAL CLAIMS
AND SATISFACTION.
The City Solicitor shall be furnished by the heads of the various
departments with statements of claims of the City which remain due and
unpaid within thirty days from the date the claim became due and payable;
the City Solicitor shall enter such claim in the City lien docket. Upon
payment of any claim so entered, the person receiving the payment shall
forward to the City Solicitor a satisfaction piece. It shall be the duty of the
City Solicitor to cause satisfaction to be entered upon the proper record.
(Ord. 1730 §332. Passed 2/13/62.)
ARTICLE 115
City Planner; Bureau of Planning
115.01 Appointment.
115.02 Responsibility of Bureau.
CROSS REFERENCE
City Planning Commission - See 3rd Class §4001 (53 P.S. §39001)
115.01 APPOINTMENT.
The City Planner shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of Council.
The City Planner shall be under the supervision of and directly
responsible to the Mayor and to the Director of Community Development.
(Ord. 2987 §2. Passed 4/2/85.)
115.02 RESPONSIBILITY OF BUREAU.
The Bureau of Planning, under the City Planner, shall be responsible,
with the advice of the City Planning Commission, for the planning
operations of the City. (Ord. 2987 §2. Passed 4/2/85.)
ARTICLE 117
Officers and Employees
117.01 Appointment of Members To Boards, Commissions, Authorities.
117.02 Removal of Members.
117.03 Blanket Bonds.
117.04 Residence.
117.05 Restriction on Acceptance of Gifts.
CROSS REFERENCES
Officers and employees - See 3rd Class §901 et seq. (53 P.S. §35901 et seq.)
Employment provisions - See ADM. Art. 123
Retirement and Pension System - See ADM. Art. 155
117.01 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS TO BOARDS, COMMISSIONS,
AUTHORITIES.
(a) Where the appointment of members to boards, commissions and authorities is vested in
the City by statute or ordinance, such members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of Council, with the exception noted in subsection (b).
(b) Members of the Environmental Advisory Council, and Library Board shall be
appointed by Council on recommendation of the President of Council.
(c) Members of the Bethlehem Human Relations Commission shall be Appointed by the
Mayor and City Council as set forth in Article 145 - Bethlehem Human Relations Commission
(See Article 145, Section 145.05 - Establishment of Human Relations Commission.) (Ord.
2015-22. Passed 5/5/2015.)
(Ord.1730 §340. Passed 2/13/1962; Ord. 2015-22. Passed 5/5/2015.)
117.02 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
In any case where appointment to any board or commission is made by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of Council, the appointee may be removed at the pleasure of the Mayor and the
vacancy thus created filled for the balance of the unexpired term. (Ord. 2987 §3. Passed 4/2/1985.)
117.03 BLANKET BONDS.
Any officer or employee of the City who is or may be required to give bond to the City
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, except such officers and employees who are
required by law to give individual bonds, may be covered by a public employees' blanket bond, the
amount and coverage thereof to be determined by the Mayor. (Ord. 1730 §333. Passed 2/13/1962.)
ARTICLE 117 2
117.04 RESIDENCE.
(This Section was repealed by Ord. 3174. Passed 3/15/1988.)
117.05 RESTRICTION ON ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS
(a) PURPOSE
Every City employee is a public servant. Public servants must treat members of the public
fairly and equitably. Receipt of money, favors, gifts, gratuities invitations, food, drink, loans,
promises or other benefits (collectively and subsequently referred to in this section as “gifts”)
offered to a public servant because of that person’s position, may create the appearance of a
conflict of interest, if not an actual conflict of interest. Similarly, solicitation of gifts by a public
servant in that person’s capacity as a public servant, for that person’s own benefit, likely
establishes a conflict of interest.
Public servants, in performing their duties, must work for the benefit of the community as a
whole, giving equal consideration to each member of the public, and doing so without giving
special regard because of finances, political affiliations, gender, orientation, creed, or other
categorization.
Conflicts of interest betray the trust of the public with its government and violate
traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.
(b) DEFINITIONS
“City employee.” Any individual receiving a salary or wages from the City of Bethlehem, or
serving as a member of a City agency, Authority, Board, or Commission, and all elected and
appointed officials of the City, provided that it shall not include members of advisory boards
that have no authority to expend public funds other than reimbursements for personal
expenses or to otherwise exercise the power of the City, and provided also it shall not include
Boards, Authorities or Commissions that are not required to file a State of Financial Interest
with the State Ethics Commission.
“Donor” is a person who makes or attempts to make a gift to a City Employee.
“Gift” is a payment, gratuity, discount, subscription, advance, forbearance, rendering, cash or
a deposit of money, food or drink, services or anything of value given to, or for the benefit of,
a city employee, or to a recipient designated by the employee, unless consideration of equal or
greater value is received.
(c) GIFT RESTRICTION
(1). City employees are prohibited from soliciting or accepting gifts as defined
in Section 117.05(b) of this ordinance for which an exception does not
apply.
ARTICLE 117 3
(d) EXCEPTIONS
(1). The Gift Restriction set by Section 117.05 of this ordinance does not apply,
and gifts may be accepted, under the following circumstances:
(A) When a gift has a clear market value and is one that is also
available for the public to purchase (e.g. concert or sporting event
ticket; meal), the City employee may accept the gift provided the
City employee pays its face value, publicly listed price or the fair
market value if there is no fixed value for the gift.
(B) Gifts of food (cookies, candy, etc.) for consumption on the
premises by City employees when the offer may not be reasonably
interpreted as trying to influence the City employee to give more
favorable treatment to the donor in the discharge of the City
employee’s duties.
(C) From family members, business acquaintances and friends who
are not seeking official action or business, and whose offer of the
gifts may not be reasonably interpreted as trying to influence the
City employee to give more favorable treatment to the donor in the
discharge of the City employee’s duties.
(D) Promotional offers or discounts on goods or services when
offered to all City employees may be accepted when such offer may
not be reasonably interpreted as trying to influence the City
employee to give more favorable treatment to the donor than is
accorded the general public in the discharge of the City employee’s
duties.
(E) Nominal, de minimis tokens of appreciation at public
appearances may be accepted.
(F) Food or drink of nominal value supplied at business or
informational meetings or at social events where it is available to all
attendees (meaning nominal offerings commonly provided in the
spirit of convenience, good will or hospitality) may be accepted
when such offer may not be reasonably interpreted as an attempt to
influence the City employee to give favorable treatment to the host,
sponsor or supplier in the discharge of the City employee’s duties.
(G) A political contribution otherwise reportable as required by law.
(H) A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of
business.
ARTICLE 117 4
(I) A gift received from a family member of the individual or from a
relative within the third degree of consanguinity of the individual or
of the individual’s spouse or life partner, or from the spouse or life
partner of any such relative.
(J) Non-pecuniary awards publicly presented, in recognition of
public service, and occasional non-pecuniary gift of nominal value,
and/or admissions to charitable, civic, political or other public
events, and also excludes canvassing and other non-professional
time of volunteers.
(e) RETURN OF GIFTS
If the recipient does not pay consideration of equal or greater value for the gift,
prohibited gifts shall be returned to the donor. When it is not practical to return a gift, the
gift shall be delivered to the Controller who shall record the gift and the donor and donate
the gift in the name of the City to a charity located in the City.
(f) DEBARMENT
The Mayor shall have the authority to debar a contractor, vendor, professional or
other party deemed in the Mayor’s or the Controller’s judgment to have either attempted to
influence or in fact influenced a City employee in the discharge of that employee’s duties
by providing or attempting to provide gifts. The Controller, in conjunction with the Law
Bureau, shall develop a reinstatement policy for debarred contractors, vendors,
professional or other parties.
(g) REVIEW COMMITTEE
The Administration shall create a committee to address questions regarding the
application of these rules in particular situations. The Committee shall consist of the Chief
of Staff, the Director of Human Resources and a representative of the Law Bureau, or their
equivalent positions, as well as such others as the Administration deems appropriate, if
any.
(h) NON-EXCLUSIVE EFFECT
Section 117.05 of this ordinance shall not be interpreted to limit the City’s powers
with respect to any power authorized or matter regulated by this ordinance which is also
authorized or regulated by statutes of the of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or another
City ordinance not effectively repealed by enactment of this ordinance.
117.99 - INVESTIGATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY
(a) Any City Employee who violates any provision of Section 117.05 of this Ordinance
shall be subject to citation, a fine up to but not to exceed $1,000.00 and compelled
return of a prohibited gift or the value thereof.
ARTICLE 117 5
(b) In addition to any other investigation, enforcement, and penalty provisions of state
or city law, the City Controller shall have the authority to investigate alleged
violations and to enforce the penalty provisions of Section 117.05 of this ordinance,
and, for the purposes of hearing or investigation, shall have the authority to issue
subpoenas in the name of the City and signed by the City Controller, and to compel
testimony. The Controller may also refer any matter for further investigation by
appropriate authorities.
(c) Where it is alleged that an employee under supervision of the Mayor or the
Controller has violated Section 117.05 of this ordinance, the Controller shall defer
and refer the matter to the Mayor for investigation and disciplinary action as the
Mayor deems appropriate in lieu of a fine.
(d) City Council shall investigate and enforce the penalty provisions of Section 117.05
of this ordinance - with no less than the powers granted the Controller - when there
is an alleged violation of this ordinance by the Controller.
(e) Investigatory information and materials shall remain confidential and not subject to
disclosure as a public record. Results of investigations by the Controller or a
committee of City Council shall be written to include factual findings, conclusions
and recommendations which shall be subject to disclosure, redaction or
non-disclosure in accordance with the Pennsylvania Right to Know Law.
(f) Under circumstances where either the City Solicitor or City Council Solicitor has
or potentially may have a conflict, or when material testimony is likely to be
required from a Solicitor, the other shall provide legal services and representation
as needed by the City or City Council in matters involving alleged or proven
violations of Section 117.05 of this ordinance.
(g) The Controller may also refer any matter for further investigation by appropriate
authorities when he deems it in the public interest.
(Ord. 2017-30. Passed 9/5/2017)
ARTICLE 119
Registration, Sale and Transfer of Real Estate
119.01 Establishment Of Department.
119.02 Books, Maps, Plans; Preparation.
119.03 Books, Maps, Plans; Custody; Certified Copies; Fees.
119.04 Duties Of Title Holder And Seller.
119.05 Property Sold At Judicial Sales; Deed Records.
119.06 Adoption Of State Act Requiring Seller's Statements.
119.07 Rules And Regulations.
119.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Use registration permits - See 21 P.S. §611 et seq.
Real Estate Registry - See 3rd Class §1515 et seq. (53 P.S. §36515 et seq. )
Realty Transfer Tax - See BUS. REG. Art. 335
Real Estate Tax - See BUS. REG. Art. 337
119.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.
There is established in the City a department for the registration of the
ownership of all real estate situated in the City, which department shall be
under the supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works. (1946
Code C.25 §1)
119.02 BOOKS, MAPS, PLANS; PREPARATION.
The City Engineer, under the direction of the Director of Public
Works, shall cause to be made all such necessary books, maps and plans as
will show the situation and dimensions of each property in the City, which
books, maps or plans shall be prepared so as to show the City number and
the name of the owner thereof, with blank spaces for the owner of each lot,
provisions for the names of future owners and dates of future transfer of
title. For such purpose, the City Engineer shall have free access, without
charge, to any of the records wherein the necessary information may be
obtainable. He may also cause search to be made in any other place for any
muniments or evidence of title not reported to him as hereinafter provided
and requisite for the completion of the books, maps or plans.
ARTICLE 119 2
The books, maps and plans shall be carefully preserved in the office
of the City Engineer, and shall be so kept, by additions from time to time, or
otherwise, as to show the ownership of every lot or piece of real estate, or
subdivision thereof, within the City, with the successive transmissions of
title from the date of commencement of such plans. Nothing required by this
article shall invalidate any municipal or tax claim by reasons of the fact that
the same is not assessed or levied against the registered owner. (1946 Code
C.25 §2)
119.03 BOOKS, MAPS, PLANS; CUSTODY; CERTIFIED COPIES;
FEES.
The books, maps or plans made by the City Engineer, or under his
direction, under the provisions of this article, shall remain in the office of the
City Engineer and under his custody and control, and in no event, for any
purpose, shall be removed therefrom by any person. The City Engineer,
however, shall issue, under his hand and seal, to such persons as many desire
the same, certified copies of any of the entries in the books or upon the maps
or plans, upon the payment of a fee to be established by City Council for
each separate property described in each certificate. (Ord. 2987 §4. Passed
4/2/85.)
The fee, so received by the City Engineer for such certificates, shall
be turned into the City Treasury monthly, and an itemized statement thereof
at the same time shall be furnished to the City Treasurer and the Business
Administrator, with the affidavit of the City Engineer thereto appended.
(1946 Code C.25 §3)
119.04 DUTIES OF TITLE HOLDER AND SELLER.
(a) It shall be the duty of every purchaser, devisee or person acquiring
title by partition or otherwise to any real estate within the City limits, within
one month after acquiring such title, to furnish to the City Engineer, at his
office, descriptions of his respective properties upon blanks to be furnished
by the City and, at the same time, to present his conveyance to be stamped
by the City Engineer, without charge, as evidence of the registration thereof.
(1946 Code C. 25 §4)
ARTICLE 119 3
(b) It shall be the duty of every seller or his agent to, within a
reasonable time of offering for sale or listing for sale, but no later than ten
(10) business days from the date on which the building or structure is offered
or listed for sale, contact the Housing Inspections Office for the City of
Bethlehem to schedule an inspection of the building or structure. A report
concerning any discovered or uncorrected violations of housing, building,
safety or fire ordinances shall be made by the Housing Inspections Office.
Such report shall contain a statement concerning zoning classification and
legality of the present use of such property. The report shall be made known
to the purchaser and attached as an addendum to any offer to purchase or
agreement of sale. However, in addition thereto, the seller shall likewise
deliver to the purchaser any notice of assessment for public improvements.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving a purchaser from the
obligation of obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy. (Ord. 2987 §4. Passed
4/2/85; Ord. 4044. Passed 11/21/00.)
119.05 PROPERTY SOLD AT JUDICIAL SALES; DEED
RECORDS.
The sheriffs of Lehigh and Northampton Counties shall present for
registry the deeds of all properties within the City limits sold by them at
judicial sales, whether in partition or otherwise. The prothonotaries and
recorders of deeds thereof shall not admit for record any deed for any City
property, bearing date subsequent to the approval of this article for the
establishment of such registry, unless the same shall first have been duly
stamped as herein directed, as proof of registry. (1946 Code C.25 §5)
119.06 ADOPTION OF STATE ACT REQUIRING SELLER'S
STATEMENTS.
The Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania of July 27, 1955 (P.L. 288, No. 104) entitled:
"An Act making it unlawful for owners of certain property in
cities of the first class, cities of the second class and in cities of
the third class adopting provisions of this act, to sell or agree to
sell such property without first delivering to the purchaser a
certificate of the district classification and without first
delivering a certification disclosing any notice of an
uncorrected violation of any housing, building, safety or fire
ARTICLE 119 4
ordinance; and requiring such owners to insert in any agreement
of sale of such property a statement concerning zoning
classification, legality of the use of such property and, in
addition thereto, a statement concerning uncorrected violations
of housing, building, safety or fire ordinances; and providing
penalties for violations."
as amended is hereby adopted by City of Bethlehem and made applicable to
the City. (Ord. 2481 §1. Passed 8/26/75.)
119.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Rules and regulations implementing the Act of July 27, 1955, as
amended, shall be promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development, which shall have the responsibility for its
enforcement.(Ord. 2481. Sec. 4 Passed 8/26/75; Ord. 3547 Passed 4/20/93.)
119.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(Ord. 1768 §1. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 121
Finance
121.01 Appropriations
121.02 Depositories of City funds
121.03 Temporary Investment Of City Funds
121.04 Annual Audit
121.05 Contracts; Personal Property Purchase
121.06 Composition of Budget; Capital Plan
121.07 Budget Operation
121.08 Restrictions on Fund Transfers; City Council Approval Required
121.09 Prohibition Against Budget Deficits
121.10 Intermunicipal Fund Transfers
121.11 Financial Reporting to City Council
121.12 Bond Issues, General Obligation Notes, and Lines of Credit
CROSS REFERENCES
Accounts and finances - See 3rd Class §1801 et seq. (53 P.S. §36801 et seq.)
City Treasurer - See ADM. Art. 109
City Controller - See ADM. Art. 111
121.01 APPROPRIATIONS.
No monies shall be paid out of the City Treasury except upon appropriation previously
made by Council and upon warrant pursuant thereto, which shall explicitly state the purpose
for which the money is to be drawn. No work shall be hired to be done, no materials purchased,
no contracts made and no order issued for the payment of any monies in any amount which
will cause the sums appropriated to specific purposes to be exceeded. Council may make
supplemental appropriations for any lawful purpose from funds on hand or estimated to be
received within the fiscal year and not appropriated to any other purpose.
The Business Administrator shall have the power to authorize the transfer of any
unexpended balance of any appropriation item, or any portion thereof, within a department, but
if the amount transferred is more than five percent of the appropriation item, then the Business
Administrator shall not make such transfer without obtaining the approval of at least four
members of Council.
Expenditures from the Contingency Fund shall be made only upon the express approval
of Council. (Ord. 1730 §401. Passed 2/13/62.)
121.02 DEPOSITORIES OF CITY FUNDS.
The City Treasurer shall deposit all City funds and all City taxes collected by him in
such banks or other financial depositories as he is directed by the Mayor, the City Controller
ARTICLE 121 2
and himself acting as a body for the designation of City depositories. All such deposits shall be
made in the name of the City. (Ord. 2987 §5. Passed 4/2/85)
121.03 TEMPORARY INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
The Mayor, the City Treasurer and the City Controller, acting as a body for the
temporary investment of City funds, shall have power to provide for such investment in United
States Treasury bills, and for the disposal of such securities when the monies may be needed,
or in savings accounts or share accounts of institutions insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or the Federal Saving and Loan Insurance Corporation to the extent that
such accounts are so insured or the extent that such deposits with savings institutions are
protected by pledges of United States Government securities having a current market value
equal to the uninsured portion of the account. (Ord. 2253 §1 Passed 6/22/71.)
121.04 ANNUAL AUDIT.
All accounts of the City shall be audited following the close of each fiscal year by an
independent certified public accountant selected by resolution of Council. (Ord. 2408 §1.
Passed 12/27/73.)
121.05 CONTRACTS; PERSONAL PROPERTY PURCHASE
(a) Contract administration for the City, including, but not limited to authority
as to preparation of specifications, letting of bids, award of contracts and
payment of bills, heretofore vested in Council under Article XIX of the
Third Class City Code, shall be vested in the Mayor and Department of
Administration, to be exercised in accordance with the procedures adopted
by the Mayor, except as follows:
(1) For the award of contracts for or the engagement of professional
services, coordination with and approval by Resolution of City Council
prior to contract or engagement execution is required.
(2) For the award of all contracts over $50,000 that are required to be bid by
the provisions of the Third Class City Code, recommendation of the
lowest responsible bidder by the Department of Administration, and
approval by Resolution of City Council prior to contract execution are
required.
(3) For all contracts over $50,000 that are required to be bid by the
provisions of the Third Class City Code, whenever an increase by 10%
or more is recommended by the Administration, resubmission to City
Council and approval by Resolution prior to execution of any increase
are required.
ARTICLE 121 3
(4) For purposes of this Article, when calculating the dollar value of a
contract with renewal clauses, the maximum amount of all renewals
provided for beyond the original term shall be included as if all renewals
were exercised.
(b) The Business Administrator shall file or cause to be filed monthly with the City
Clerk a list by Department of each duly executed purchase order, identifying the vendor, the
product or service purchased and the amount of each purchase order.
(c) The administration shall establish and maintain an ongoing prioritized contract
monitoring function consistent with established best practices to ensure that the objectives of
city contracts are accomplished and vendors meet their responsibilities.
(d) Used personal property may be purchased without formal bidding provided the
following criteria are met:
(1) The request to purchase used personal property shall first be submitted
by the Purchasing Officer, together with justification therefore, to the
Finance Committee for recommendation.
(2) Upon and after recommendation to the Finance Committee, Council, as
a whole, shall have approved the request by resolution. (Ord. 2529 §1.
Passed 9/21/76.)
(Ord. 1730 §405. Passed 2/13/62; Ord. 2014-27. Passed 8/19/14.)
121.06 COMPOSITION OF BUDGET.
(a) Pursuant to Section 417 and Section 418 of the Optional Third Class City
Charter Law, Act of July 15, 1957 (P.L. 901), the City budget shall consist of the following:
(1) General Fund Operating Budget.
(2) Water Fund Operating Budget.
(3) Sewer Fund Operating Budget.
(4) Capital Budget. (Ord. 1767 §6. Passed 11/13/62.)
(b) On or before July 1 of each year, the City Planner shall submit a proposed fiveyear
capital improvement program to the City Planning Commission for its study and
recommendations. On or before October 1 of each year, after receipt of the report of the
Planning Commission, the Mayor shall submit the program to Council, incorporating any of
the recommendations of the Planning Commission which he deems advisable. The program
submitted may be modified by the affirmative vote of five members of Council. The five-year
capital improvement program shall be subject to annual revision. (Ord. 2987 §5. Passed 4/2/85;
Ord. 3945. Passed 3/16/99.)
ARTICLE 121 4
121.07 BUDGET OPERATION.
The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of each annual budget.
Immediately after the budget has been enacted and after consultation with the heads of the
departments, he shall, when Council directs, establish quarterly or other periodic allotments of
appropriations to each department. At the beginning of each allotment period, the amount
specified shall become available to each department for obligation during that period. (Ord.
2987. §5. Passed 4/2/85.)
The allotments for any department may be modified, upon request of the head of the
department, by the Business Administrator or by direction of the Mayor. The Business
Administrator shall file with the City Controller a copy of each allotment and modification
thereof. An encumbrance system of accounts, to control all expenditures within the limits of
budget appropriations and to control such allotments, shall be maintained by the City
Controller.
As part of the City’s Budget Operation and in conjunction with the encumbrance
system of accounts, requisitions and purchase orders shall be required to obligate funds for the
procurement of equipment or materials and for the contracting for public work. The City’s
Purchasing Director, and the City Controller exercising the statutory control function, shall
have the authority to approve all requisitions and purchase orders and bind the City to the
terms of the purchase order. Any authorization signatures that are required may be “ink”
signatures or electronically printed name or signature.
If at any time during the budget year the Business Administrator shall ascertain the
probability of a cash deficit, he shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the
several offices, departments and agencies. Upon such reconsideration and with the approval of
the Mayor, the Business Administrator shall revise the allotments so as to forestall so far as
possible, the making of commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenue to be realized
during the fiscal year.
(Ord. 1730 §407. Passed 2/13/62; Ord. 2016-09. Passed 4/19/2016)
121.08 RESTRICTIONS ON FUND TRANSFERS; CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL REQUIRED
(a) No transfers of unappropriated funds, shall be made from the Water Fund
Operating Budget to the General Fund Operating budget without the prior notice and approval
of City Council.
(b) No transfers of unappropriated funds, shall be made from the Sewer Fund
Operating budget to the General Fund Operating budget without the prior notice and approval
of City Council. (Ord. 4143. Passed 9/3/02.)
(c) No transfers of funds from the Treasurer's Escrow Account shall be made to the
General Fund Operating Budget or to the Water Fund Operating Budget or to the Sewer Fund
ARTICLE 121 5
Operating Budget without prior notice to and approval of City Council. (Ord. 4425. Passed
5/1/07.)
(d) Gaming Local Share Account. Any and all monies received under and pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Race Horse Development and Gaming Act (Act 2004-71) as amended, 4
Pa.C.S.A. §1401, et seq., shall be deposited in a separate bank account, separated and
segregated from all other monies, entitled the "Gaming Local Share Account". A separate bank
account shall be created for Gaming Local Share unappropriated funds to be controlled by City
Council under a line item in City Council's Budget, separated and segregated from all other
monies. The total amount of the Gaming Local Share unappropriated funds shall be deposited
within two business days after receipt into the separate bank account to be controlled by City
Council. No transfers of Gaming Local Share unappropriated funds from the separate bank
account to be controlled by City Council shall be made without prior notice to and approval of
City Council. (Ord. 2008-24. Passed 9/2/08; Ord. 2011-19. Passed 7/19/11.)
121.09 PROHIBITION AGAINST BUDGET DEFICITS
The total expenditures for any fiscal year shall not exceed total revenues for that fiscal
year, and the Mayor may not propose, and the Council may not adopt, any budget where
expenditures will exceed estimated revenues. Revenues shall include all receipts except those
derived from borrowing. (Ord. 4335. Passed 8/16/05.)
121.10 INTERMUNICIPAL FUND TRANSFERS
(a) No transfer of funds exceeding $50,000.00 shall occur between the City of
Bethlehem and the Bethlehem Authority, or the Bethlehem Parking Authority or the Bethlehem
Redevelopment Authority or the Bethlehem Housing Authority without prior approval by
Resolution of Bethlehem City Council. It is the intent of this Ordinance that prior approval by
Resolution of Bethlehem City Council shall be required for all such transfers, regardless of
whether the funds are, or are not, transferred to a City of Bethlehem owned and/or controlled
bank account or other account, and regardless of whether the funds are, or are not, used in
payment of an Authority obligation that would ordinarily be funded by payment from the City
of Bethlehem to such Authority. This requirement shall not apply to any transfers of funds
between any of the said Authorities that have been previously approved by City Council as part
of the City's annual General Fund, Water Fund, Sewer Fund, Golf Course Enterprise, Liquid
Fuels Capital and/or Community Development Block Grant Fund Budgets.
(b) All proposed Resolutions for City Council approval of such transfers of funds
shall be accompanied by a Resolution approved by the Board of such Authority and signed by
the Executive Director of such Authority that certifies that the proposed transfer of funds will
not impair nor have a material impact on the ability of such Authority to satisfy and honor its
financial obligations, nor that the proposed transfer of funds will violate any municipal bond
obligation, contractual obligation or other legal obligation of such Authority.
(Ord. 4379. Passed 4/4/06.)
ARTICLE 121 6
121.11 FINANCIAL REPORTING TO CITY COUNCIL
(a) The Department of Administration shall prepare for submission to City Council
and to the City Controller a report of the following:
(1) Analytical Reports: General Fund Operating Budget, Water Fund Operating
Budget and Sewer Fund Operating Budget.
All revenues and expenditures for the preceding month, and year to date,
together with the cash balance as of the end of the preceding month for the
General Fund Operating Budget, the Water Fund Operating Budget, and the
Sewer Fund Operating Budget. Such reports shall be prepared for each month,
to be submitted within thirty (30) days after the end of each month.
(2) Analytical Report: Gaming Local Share Account.
A statement of all revenues and expenditures for the preceding quarter, and year
to date, together with the cash balance as of the end of the preceding quarter for
the Gaming Local Share Account. Such reports shall be prepared for each
quarter, to be submitted within thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter.
(3) Accounts Payable and Accounts Receivable Reports.
A statement of all accounts payable (with an aging schedule according to dates
to reflect which payments are behind their due date and by how many days) and
a statement of all accounts receivable (with an aging schedule according to
dates to reflect which revenues are behind their due date and by how many
days) for the preceding month. Such reports shall be furnished within thirty
(30) days after the end of each quarter for the General Operating Fund Budget,
the Water Fund Operating Budget, and the Sewer Fund Operating Budget.
(Ord. 2010-8. Passed 4/6/10.)
121.12 BOND ISSUES, GENERAL OBLIGATION NOTES, AND LINES OF CREDIT
(a) All proceeds of any bond issue, general obligation note, and line of credit (or any
other type of loan or advance) shall be deposited in a separate account entitled, Bond
Issue/General Obligation Note/Line of Credit, as applicable. No expenditures and/or transfers of
these funds shall be made from said separate account(s) without prior written notice to City
Council and the City Controller and prior approval by City Council.
(b) All proceeds of any bond issue, general obligation note, and line of credit shall
only be used for the purposes for which the funds are borrowed and/or advanced and shall be
utilized for no other purposes whatsoever without prior written notice to City Council and the
City Controller and prior approval by City Council.
(Ord. 2011-8. Passed 3/1/11.)
ARTICLE 122
Municipal Purchasing
CROSS REFERENCES
Motor Vehicle Procurement Act of 1984, P.L. 193, No. 40
122.01 Purpose
122.02 Buy American
122.03 Cooperative Purchasing
122.04 Bidding and Contracting
122.05 Severability
122.01 PURPOSE.
To establish certain policies and procedures with respect to purchasing.
122.02 BUY AMERICAN.
A. Purpose.
It is the policy of the City of Bethlehem to aid and support the development and
expansion of domestic industry through the purchase of American-made products.
The purchase of American-made products by the City of Bethlehem contributes to
the economic well-being and general welfare of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and to the citizens of the Lehigh Valley and the
City of Bethlehem in particular.
B. Procurement Criteria.
The City of Bethlehem shall not purchase or obligate funds for the procurement of
equipment or material by way of any purchase order or contract for equipment or
material, the total value of which is in excess of $5,000.00, unless such
equipment or material is manufactured, assembled or otherwise produced in the
United States.
C. Purchase of Motor Vehicles.
For the purchase of Motor Vehicles, the provisions of this Article are extended to
include North American made products (United States and Canada) in compliance
with the Motor Vehicle Procurement Act (Act No. 1984-40) of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, effective May 16, 1985.
ARTICLE 122 2
'Motor Vehicle' is defined as self-propelled vehicles such as automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles and vehicles designed primarily for use in construction, agriculture
or road maintenance, such as tractors and earth moving equipment.
D. Exceptions.
The provisions of Subsection 122.02B above shall not apply where the City of
Bethlehem, through the Director of Purchasing or any other employee of the City
finds:
(a) That such equipment or material is not produced in the United States in
sufficient and reasonably available quantities and of satisfactory quality;
or
(b) That the purchase of equipment or material produced in the United States
would increase the overall cost of the contract by more than twenty-five
(25%) percent.
Where such a finding is made, a public record shall be made of the reasons for the
exception.
E. Contract Materials.
Every contract for public work shall contain a provision that in the performance
of the work the contractor and all subcontractors shall use only material produced
in the United States. If the City finds that with respect to any material one of the
factors in Subsection 122.02D above exists, an exception shall be noted in the
specifications as to that material, and a public record shall be made of the reasons
for the exception.
F. Power to Void Contract.
If the City finds that in the performance of any contract there has been a willful
failure to comply with the requirements of this Section, as set forth in the contract,
that contract shall be void (and the contractor shall be prohibited from submitting
bids for contracts with the City of Bethlehem for a period of one (1) year).
G. Applicability.
This Section shall not apply to any contract awarded pursuant to an invitation for
bids issued on or before the date of passage of this Section.
ARTICLE 122 3
122.03 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING
A. The City may enter into joint purchasing or cooperative purchasing agreements in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S. § 2301, et
seq., the Political Subdivisions Joint Purchases Law, 53 P.S. § 5432, and Chapter
19 of the Commonwealth Procurement Code relating to Intergovernmental
Relations, 62 Pa.C.S. § 1901 et seq.
B. The Purchasing Director, with the advice of the Business Administrator, is
delegated and authorized with authority to draft regulations to implement
cooperative purchasing.
C. The foregoing shall be interpreted to grant to the City the maximum options and
authority available under the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, 53 Pa.C.S. §
2301, et seq., the Political Subdivisions Joint Purchases Law, 53 P.S. § 5432, and
Chapter 19 of the Commonwealth Procurement Code relating to
Intergovernmental Relations, 62 Pa.C.S. § 1901 et seq, in order to accomplish the
purposes of cooperative purchasing, in particular cost savings to the City.
122.04 BIDDING AND CONTRACTING
The Purchasing Director, with the advice of the Business Administrator, is delegated and
authorized with authority to draft regulations to implement bidding and contracting procedures.
122.05 SEVERABILITY
If any sentence, clause, or sectional part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses or sections or parts of this
Article. It is hereby declared the intent of the City Council of the City of Bethlehem that this
Article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof not been included herein.
(Ord. 3021. Passed 10/1/85; Ord. 2016-010. Passed 4/19/2016)
ARTICLE 123
Employment Provisions
EDITOR'S NOTE: There are no sections in Article 123. This chapter has
been included to provide for cross references and future
legislation.
Compensation and fringe benefits are not codified herein since they are
subject to administrative regulation. Employee compensation rates are
promulgated by the Office of Administration and approved by the Mayor.
Fringe benefits are established by the Office of Administration in
conjunction with the Municipal Employees Union as approved by the
Mayor.
CROSS REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund - See 3rd Class §4301 et seq. (53 P.S. §39301 et seq.);
ADM. Art. 153
Firemen's Pension Fund - See 3rd Class §4320 et seq. (53 P.S. §39320 et
seq.); ADM. Art. 151
Civil Service - See 3rd Class §4401 et seq. (53 P.S. §39401 et seq.);
ADM. Art. 157
Officers and employees - See ADM. Art. 117
Employees' Retirement and Pension System - See ADM. Art. 155
ARTICLE 125
REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES
125.01 Definitions.
125.02 Administration.
125.03 Litigation.
125.04 Emergency Services Not To Be Refused For Non-Payment.
125.05 Explosive Device Removal Fee.
125.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) An "extraordinary expense" shall be that expense, and those
related costs and fees that are incurred by the City for any extraordinary
service, including, but not limited to, the City's actual cost of labor and
materials associated with the use of any specialized extinguishing or
abatement agent, chemical neutralizer or similar equipment or material that
is employed to extinguish, confine, neutralize, contain, or clean any
hazardous material that is or may be involved in a fire, accidental spill, or
the threat of any accidental spill or fire.
(b) An "extraordinary service" is a service performed by the
Bethlehem Fire Department, the Bethlehem Police Department, the Public
Works Department, the Building Inspection Bureau, the Parks and Public
Property Department, or any other City department or bureau that is in
addition to or above the normal services provided by such departments or
bureaus. "Extraordinary services" may include, but are not limited to, the
abatement and disposition of hazardous materials, spills or the threat of
spills of toxic chemicals, utility line breaks or leakages, other imminent or
perceived or possible threats to the health, safety or welfare of the City
residents that may be detailed or contemplated in Section 125.01 (a) above;
and those incidents where a property owner has been previously warned
about violations of any City Ordinance that, in the judgment of the City, are
a particular threat to the health, safety or welfare of the City residents, and
for which the owner (or owners, agent, or person in charge of the property)
has neglected to comply or has refused compliance therewith.
ARTICLE 125 2
125.02 ADMINISTRATION.
(a) The City Business Administrator shall collect all fees as
follows:
(1) Fees and costs, (including overhead costs, shall encompass
all manpower, equipment, materials and maintenance expenses in such a
form as to insure for the City's full reimbursement for charges for these
services actually rendered. A particular cost or fee schedule need not be set
forth in this Article or elsewhere in the City Ordinances or by further formal
action by the City Council. The City Council's approval of this Article shall
constitute authorization for the Business Administrator (or his designee) to
collect all such fees and costs (including overhead costs) pursuant to his
receipt of related expenditures or costs that are submitted to him by the
affected City bureaus or departments.
(2) Within thirty (30) days of the date of the extraordinary
or dangerous occurrence giving rise to the extraordinary service, the affected
bureau or department shall submit its extraordinary service related costs,
fees, charges, and expenses to the Business Administrator for his review. At
such time as all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to extraordinary
service have been collected and reviewed by the Business Administrator, but
in any case not later than sixty (60) days from the date of determining the
cost of rendering of the extraordinary services, the Business Administrator
shall send a bill for such costs, fees, charges and expenses, to the property
owner, agent or manager with a demand that a full remittance be made
within thirty (30) days of receipt of any bills. In the unusual circumstances
that the Business Administrator is not able to determine all the costs
associated with the incident within a reasonable time, a partial billing may
be made. Interest at the rate of 8% per annum will be charged on all unpaid
balances past due over 30 days. At the discretion of the Department Head,
materials used by the City may be replaced, in kind, by the person(s)
responsible for the incident, in lieu of cash payment.
(3) It is also contemplated that local, state, or federal agencies
may bill, fine, or penalize the City for matters (including but not limited to,
cleanup costs, fees, or expenses) relating to an extraordinary or dangerous
occurrence. The Business Administrator shall, if possible, include any and
all such costs or fees in the consolidated bill sent to the property owner. The
City shall not, however, waive any right to collect such local, state, or
ARTICLE 125 3
federal costs if they are not charged to the property owner or his agent
within the consolidated billing (60) days period. In this regard, the Business
Administrator shall expect reimbursement of all local, state, or federal costs
within thirty (30) days of the owners (or his agents) receipt of the bill for
these particular costs, fees, and charges and expenses.
(4) In cases of hardship, or where circumstances are such that
a full remittance cannot be made to the City within the thirty (30) day
period, the City Council shall hereby authorize the City Solicitor to enter
into negotiations with the property owner or his agent for an extended
payback period of time not to exceed six (6) months.
(5) All monies received under the provisions of this Article
shall be placed in the General Fund, Water Fund or Sewer Fund for those
actual costs and expenses necessary to furnish fire, police and other
emergency or public safety services or protection provided by the City as
outlined herein.
125.03 LITIGATION.
The City may enforce the provision of this Article by civil action in a
court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due
hereunder plus attorneys fees or for any other relief that may be appropriate.
125.04 EMERGENCY SERVICES NOT TO BE REFUSED
FOR NON- PAYMENT.
Nothing in this Article shall authorize any City bureau or department
or any City staff member or bureau or department personnel to refuse or
delay any emergency service to any person, firm, organization or
corporation, that has not reimbursed the City for a municipal service, or that
owes the City any money whatsoever. Furthermore, nothing in this Article
shall be construed to demand reimbursement, to the City, for those
municipal services that are normally provided to City residents and others as
a matter of the City's general operating procedure, and for which the levying
of taxes, or the demand for reimbursement is normally made. (Ord. 3148.
Passed 11/17/87.)
ARTICLE 125 4
125.05 EXPLOSIVE DEVICE REMOVAL FEE.
The City of Bethlehem Bomb Squad may be made available to other
municipalities with the permission of the Commissioner or his
representative. Municipalities who are in need of the service shall be
required to sign an agreement authorizing the City's Bomb Squad to remove
the potentially explosive device. The agreement shall set forth a minimum
fee of $350.00 for the Bomb Squad's services. In the event that the value of
the Bomb Squad's services exceed $350.00, the municipality shall be
obligated to compensate the City for services rendered in accordance with a
rate schedule prepared by the Fire Commissioner. The schedule may be
adjusted from time to time as the Commissioner sees fit. A copy of the
schedule shall be provided to the requesting municipality upon request.
(Ord. 3932. Passed 1/5/99.)
ARTICLE 127
FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW
127.01 Designated Officer.
127.02 Restriction on Payment for Casualty Losses.
127.03 Establishment of Escrow.
127.04 Regulations.
127.05 Severability.
127.06 Prior Ordinance Superseded.
127.07 Filing with Pennsylvania Department of Community
Affairs.
127.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Fire Insurance (40 P.S. §631 et seq.)
127.01 DESIGNATED OFFICER.
The Fire Commissioner or such official's designee is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry
out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
127.02 RESTRICTION ON PAYMENT FOR CASUALTY LOSSES.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter
the "Insuring Agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage
to a structure located within the City of Bethlehem (hereinafter
the "Municipality") where the amount recoverable for the fire
loss to the structure under all policies exceeds Seven Thousand
Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500), unless the Insuring Agent is
furnished by the municipal treasurer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended,
or a municipal certificate and bill pursuant to Section
508(b)(1)(ii), and in such case the bill is paid directly to the
municipality by the Insuring Agent from the insurance proceeds,
and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act
98 of 1992, as amended, and the provisions of this Article.
127.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF ESCROW.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, as
amended, the municipal treasurer issues a certificate indicating
that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or
user charges against real property, or pursuant to Section
508(b)(1)(ii) the municipal treasurer issues a certificate and
bill for such charges and the bill is paid directly by the
ARTICLE 127 2
Insuring Agent from the insurance proceeds, the Insuring Agent
shall pay the claim of the named insured, provided however, that
if the loss agreed to by the named insured and the Insuring Agent
equals or exceeds 60 percent of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering the building or other structure,
the following procedures must be followed:
(1) The Insuring Agent shall transfer from the insurance
proceeds to the designated officer of the
Municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for each
$15,000, and for each fraction of that amount, of a
claim, this section to be applied such that if the
claim is $15,000 or less, the amount transferred to
the Municipality shall be $2,000; or
(2) If at the time of a loss report, the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs
of removing, repairing, or securing the building or
other structure in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
Insuring Agent shall transfer to the Municipality from
the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis
by all companies, associations or exchanges insuring
the building or other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure,
and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the Municipality in excess of
the estimate to the named insured, if the Municipality
has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
(5) Upon receipt of the proceeds under this section, the
Municipality shall do the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds
in the separate fund to be used solely as
security against the total costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the Municipality. Such
costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs
incurred by the Municipality in connection with
such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto; and
ARTICLE 127 3
(b) It is the obligation of the Insuring Agent when
transferring the proceeds to provide the
Municipality with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named
insured, the designated officer shall contact the
named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the
Municipality and notify the named insured that the
proceeds under this subsection shall be followed;
and
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building
or other structure have been completed in
accordance with all applicable regulations and
orders of the Municipality and the required proof
of such completion received by the designated
officer, and if the Municipality has not incurred
any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the
fund shall be returned to the named insured. If
the Municipality has incurred costs for repairs,
removal or securing of the building or other
structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund
and if excess funds remain, the Municipality
shall transfer the remaining funds to the named
insured; and
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds
held by the Municipality pursuant to this
Section, and not returned to the named insured,
such interest shall belong to the Municipality.
To the extent that proceeds are returned to the
named insured, interest earned on such proceeds
shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are returned.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
ability of the Municipality to recover any deficiency.
Furthermore, nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to prohibit the Municipality and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits
the transfer of funds to the named insured if some
other reasonable disposition of the damaged property
has been negotiated.
127.04 REGULATIONS.
The Department of Administration of the City of
Bethlehem may adopt procedures and regulations to implement
Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and this Article and may fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as amended,
ARTICLE 127 4
and this Article; including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections, and
opening separate fund accounts.
127.05 SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this Article shall be severable and, if
any of the provisions hereof shall be invalid or unenforceable,
the remaining provisions of this Article shall remain in effect.
127.06 PRIOR ORDINANCE SUPERSEDED.
This Ordinance hereby supersedes Ordinance No. 3501, passed
on November 17, 1992.
127.07 FILING WITH PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY
AFFAIRS.
The Fire Commissioner or his designee shall file an exact
copy of this Ordinance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Community Affairs together with the name, position, and phone
number of the municipal official responsible for compliance with
its provisions.
127.99 PENALTY.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any Insuring
Agent who violates this Article shall be subject to a penalty of
up to $1,000 per violation.
(Ord. 3660. Passed 1/3/95.)
ARTICLE 128
Insurance
128.01 Insurance Coverage Requirements.
128.02 Information Submission.
128.03 City Council Review of Changes.
CROSS REFERENCE
Resolution 14,330 - Passed April 6, 2004
128.01 INSURANCE COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.
The City of Bethlehem will purchase and continuously maintain liability
insurance coverage, from insurance carriers with an A.M. Best rating of not
less than “A-“, in an amount of not less than $10.0 million.
128.02 INFORMATION SUBMISSION.
The Mayor shall annually submit to Council, at the time of annual submission
of the recommended budget, a listing of the name of the City’s insurance
carrier(s), applicable policy limits, insurance deductibles, together with any
other information requested from time to time by Council concerning the
City’s insurance program.
128.03 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW OF CHANGES.
In the event that material and substantial modifications or changes in the
amounts of insurance coverages, the amounts of deductibles, or the scope of
coverage are proposed, the same will be submitted for prior review by City
Council, before any such changes are implemented.
(Ord. 4275 – Passed 9/21/04)
ARTICLE 129
Municipal Bond Issues
129.01 Bond Issue Items – Subject Matter Restrictions
129.02 Bond Issue Items – Annual Cost Restrictions; Suspension
129.03 Restrictions on Use of Municipal Bond Funds – Prior Approval of
City Council Required
129.01 BOND ISSUE ITEMS – SUBJECT MATTER RESTRICTIONS
No municipal bonds or notes shall be issued and sold by the City for
the purpose of purchasing motor vehicles. The term “motor vehicles” is
defined to include four-door automobiles, two-door automobiles, police cars,
motorcycles, sport utility vehicles, pick-up trucks and vans, but excludes
trucks and any other motor vehicles of a type not herein described.
(Ord. 2009-6 – Passed 3/3/09)
129.02 BOND ISSUE ITEMS – ANNUAL COST RESTRICTIONS;
SUSPENSION
On and after January 1, 2006, no municipal bonds shall be issued and sold
by the City for the purpose of purchasing items of realty, or personalty, which
items have a purchase price or cost of less than $75,000.00. This restriction may
be temporarily suspended, only for good cause shown, by the affirmative vote of
five (5) members of Council. This restriction shall not apply to expenditures
pertaining to economic development related activities or functions, nor shall it
pertain to City government expenditures for local contributions tied to non-City
funding resources, including state and/or federal loans and/or grants.
129.03 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF MUNICIPAL BOND FUNDS –
PRIOR APPROVAL OF CITY COUNCIL REQUIRED
All monies approved by City Council for borrowing in connection
with municipal bond issues or sale of municipal notes, and all monies
received in connection with the sale of municipal bonds or municipal notes,
shall be expended only for projects for which such funds were borrowed
pursuant to authorization and approval of City Council, and for no other
ARTICLE 129 2
purpose. Monies received from the sale of municipal bonds or municipal
notes shall not be used for any other projects or expenses, without issuance
of an opinion letter from bond counsel offering an opinion that the proposed
usage is legal, and does not violate any agreement or contract concerning the
bond issue or note in question to which the City is a party, and without prior
notice and approval of City Council.
(Ord. 4436 – Passed 7/3/07)
(Ord. 4286 – Passed 11/3/04)
TITLE THREE - Boards, Commissions and Authorities
Article 131. Board of Health.
Article 133. Recreation Commission.
Article 135. Bethlehem Area Public Library.
Article 137. Shade Tree Commission.
Article 139. Authorities.
Article 141. Sister City Commission.
Article 143. Fine Arts Commission.
Article 145. Human Relations Commission.
Article 147. Environmental Conservation Commission.
Article 149. Vacant Property Review Committee.
ARTICLE 131
Board of Health
131.01 Establishment; members. 131.05 Director.
131.02 Powers and duties. 131.06 Administration.
131.03 Meetings. 131.07 Repealer.
131.04 Secretary.
CROSS REFERENCES
Board of Health - See 3rd Class §2301 et seq. (53 P.S. §37301 et seq.) Local
Health Administration Law - (16 Pa. C.S.A. §12001 et seq.) Department of
Community Development - See ADM. Art. 107.05
Health Nuisances - See HLTH. Art. 1161
131.01 ESTABLISHMENT: MEMBERS.
A Board of Health is hereby created in the City of Bethlehem,
Pennsylvania, to consist of five (5) members.
The members of the said Board shall serve without compensation and
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. No
member of City Council shall be appointed as a member of the Board of
Health. All of the members shall be residents of the City of Bethlehem. At
least two (2) of them shall be reputable physicians of not less than two (2)
ARTICLE 131 2
year's experience in the practice of their profession, one (1) shall be either s
chemist, bacteriologist or sanitary engineer and the other two (2) shall be
chosen from other businesses or professions.
At the first appointment the Mayor shall designate one (1) of the
members to serve for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for
three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, and one (1) for five (5) years, from
the first Monday of April succeeding their appointment and thereafter one
(1) member of the said Board shall be appointed annually to serve for the
term of five (5) years from the first Monday of April succeeding his
appointment. The Mayor may remove any or all of the members of said
Board for official misconduct or neglect of duty and fill any vacancy for any
unexpired term with the approval of the Council.
131.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to enforce the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem enacted for the protection of the public health. It shall exercise all
the rights and perform all the duties and obligations conferred and imposed
upon like Boards of Health in cities of the Third Class of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania by all Acts of Assembly which may now be in force or
hereafter passed in reference to the same. The Board of Health shall have
power to make and enforce such orders and regulations as may be necessary
to carry out its aforesaid duties and obligations so long as the Council shall
approve such regulations. (Ord. 2693 §3 Passed 12/18/79.)
131.03 MEETINGS.
The Board of Health shall meet at such regular times as it designates
and at such places where the general public has unhampered access to such
meetings, and said Board shall keep regular minutes of its meetings. It shall
have power to adopt rules and by-laws to govern its meetings and
organization. (Ord. 2693 §4 Passed 12/18/79.)
131.04 SECRETARY.
The Secretary of the Board shall be an individual qualified in the
secretarial arts and shall keep the minutes of meetings and perform such
other duties as the Director may direct. (Ord. 2693 §5 Passed 12/18/79.)
ARTICLE 131 3
131.05 DIRECTOR.
The Board of Health shall choose a Director. The Director shall not be
a member of the Board of Health, but shall be an individual who meets the
qualifications established for such position by the Pennsylvania Department
of Health and the Board of Health. In the event of a vacancy in the position
of Director, the Board of Health shall convene at the earliest possible time
for the purpose of filling that vacancy. The salary of the Director shall be
fixed by the Board of Health subject to the approval of City Council. The
Director shall execute the orders of the Board and shall have and exercise for
this purpose all the powers and authority of a policeman. (Ord. 2990 §1.
Passed 4/16/85.)
131.06 ADMINISTRATION.
(a) The City of Bethlehem shall exercise the power to employ
personnel in conformity with 16 P.S. §12012 (b), which for this purpose
shall be held applicable to the Health Board, and the Charter and
Administrative Code of the City of Bethlehem. All such employees shall be
entitled to participate in the benefits of employment conferred on employees
of the City of Bethlehem with regard to pension, social security coverage,
medical and hospitalization benefits, vacation and sick leave. Such
employees shall be subject to removal for misconduct in office or neglect of
duty, excepting that where positions are covered by civil service, civil
service laws shall apply.
(b) The Director shall be the Administrator of the Health Board. All
administrative actions and procedures incident to the operation of the Health
Board, including but not limited to financial administration and the making
of contracts, shall be governed by the Charter and the Administrative Code
of the City of Bethlehem. (Ord. 2990 §2. Passed 4/16/85.)
131.07 REPEALER.
That Ordinance No. 2320, as amended, creating the Bi-City Board of
Health, and all other ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent
herewith be, and the same are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2693 §9. Passed
12/18/79.)
ARTICLE 133
Recreation Commission
133.01 Appointment and Term.
133.02 Duties and Responsibilities of the Commission.
133.03 Organization.
CROSS REFERENCES
Recreation Board - See 3rd Class §3704 et seq. (53 P.S. § 38704 et seq.)
Department of Parks and Public Property - See ADM. Art.107.04
133.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
The Recreation Board shall consist of seven persons. The members of the
board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council and shall serve
for terms no longer than five years and the terms of the members shall be staggered in
such a manner that at least one expires annually. Members of the Recreation Board
shall serve without pay. Vacancies in the Board, occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term, shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments.
(Ord. 2568 §1. Passed 7/5/77; Ord. 3250 § 1. Passed 2/21/89; Ord. 2015-2
Passed 2/03/15.)
133.02 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
RECREATION COMMISSION.
The Recreation Commission shall have the following advisory duties and
responsibilities:
(a) Evaluating recreational needs and desires of the community.
(b) Identifying the community resources presently or potentially
available for recreation.
(c) Suggesting ways and means of effectively matching needs
with resources.
ARTICLE 133 2
(d) Translating these recreational needs and desires to the
administration and city council.
(e) Translating to the community the policy of the Bureau of
Recreation with respect to both current and long-range
planning.
(f) Actively stimulating support for public recreation, facilities
and programs.
(g) Actively encouraging the coordination of quasi-public and
private efforts with public efforts in the field of recreation.
(Ord. 2702 §2. Passed 7/1/80.)
133.03 ORGANIZATION.
The members of the Recreation Board shall elect their own Chair and
Secretary, and select all other necessary officers, to serve for a period of one (1)
year. The Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct
of all business within its jurisdiction. Meetings of the Board shall be subject to the
provisions of 65 Pa. C.S. Ch.7 (relating to open meetings).
(Ord. 2719. Passed 10/21/80; Ord. 2015-2 Passed 2/03/15.)
ARTICLE 135
Bethlehem Area Public Library
135.01 Appointment of Library Board of Directors.
135.02 Library Tax.
CROSS REFERENCE
Free Libraries in Municipalities - See 24 P.S. 4401 et seq.
135.01 APPOINTMENT OF LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
(a) The Board of Library Directors shall consist of eleven
members. (Ord. 3425 - Passed 8/6/91; Ord. 2012-6 – Passed
3/6/12; Ord. 2014-10 – Passed 4/16/14.)
(b) Seven members of the Board shall be citizens of the
City and shall be appointed by Council, on recommendation of the
President of Council. Appointments to fill the places of those
whose terms have expired shall be made for the term of three
years. Vacancies occurring for any cause shall be filled by
Council. The City shall at all times maintain a minimum of a
three member majority over members of the Board from contracting
municipalities. (Ord. 3196-Passed 6/7/88; Ord. 3425-Passed
8/6/91; Ord. 4117-Passed 12/18/01; Ord. 2012–6 – Passed 3/6/12;
Ord. 2014-10 – Passed 4/16/14.)
(c) One member of the Board shall be appointed by the
governing bodies of the following municipalities: Fountain Hill,
and Hanover Township (Northampton County). Bethlehem Township
shall have two members appointed by its governing body. Each
member of the Board shall have one vote. Each of these members
shall be appointed for a term of one year by their municipality.
Vacancies occurring for any cause shall be filled by the
municipality which appointed the member whose term has not been
completed. (Ord. 3196-Passed 6/7/88; Ord. 3425-Passed 8/6/91;
Ord. 4117-Passed 12/18/01; Ord. 2012-6 – Passed 3/6/12; Ord.
2014-10 – Passed 4/16/14.)
(d) No member of the Board shall receive any salary for his
service as such. The organization of the Board shall take place
and its duties shall be performed as provided in the Act of June
14, 1961, relating to free libraries in municipalities.
ARTICLE 135 2
(e) Should a neighboring municipality contract for use of
the Library, the governing body of the municipality shall appoint
a resident to the Board. This member will have one vote; and,
the City of Bethlehem shall receive one additional vote when the
membership of the Board is increased by the addition of a
contracting municipality.
(f) Should an existing contracting municipality end its
contract, the size of the Library Board will be reduced by the
number of members from the contracting municipality ending its
affiliation and one from the City. (Ord. 3052-Passed 12/17/85;
Ord. 3425-Passed 8/6/91.)
135.02 LIBRARY TAX.
A tax of no more than three (3) mills upon the assessed
valuation of the City is established, to be levied annually, and
the proceeds thereof to be appropriated annually for the use of,
and directed to be paid to the Treasurer of the Bethlehem Public
Library in monthly installments, or in a payment schedule
mutually agreeable to the Treasurer of the Bethlehem Public
Library and the City of Bethlehem.
(Ord. 2988-Passed 4/2/85.)
NOTE: Name changed from Bethlehem Public Library - Ord. 3075 -
Passed 6/17/86.)
ARTICLE 137
Shade Tree Commission
137.01 Commission created. 137.04 Council to approve
137.02 Composition; term; vacancies; regulations; publication.
compensation. 137.05 Annual report.
137.03 Powers and duties. 137.06 Disposition of monies.
137.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Shade Tree Commission - See 3rd Class §3801 et seq. (53 P.S. §38801 et seq.)
EDITOR'S NOTE: Article 137 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
2988 which was passed on April 2, 1985.
ARTICLE 139
Authorities
EDITOR'S NOTE:
This article has been established to provide a synopsis of legislation by
Council creating various authorities within the City of Bethlehem.
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities Act - See 53 P.S. §301 et seq.
Housing Authorities Law - See 35 §1541 et seq.
Urban Redevelopment Law - See 35 P.S. §1701 et seq.
Parking Authorities - See 53 P.S. §344 et seq.
Bethlehem Authority - The Bethlehem Authority was created under
provisions of the Act of June 28, 1935 (P.L. 463), as amended by the Act of
1937 (P.L.739), the Act of 1945 (P.L. 3821), the Act of 1949 (P.L. 187) and
by Ordinance 782, passed August 16, 1938, as amended by Ordinance 1045,
passed July 19, 1949. The Bethlehem Authority owns the Municipal water
system which is operated by the City under lease from the Authority.
Bethlehem Revitalization and Improvement Authority – Resolution
2013-195, passed November 6, 2013, authorized formation of the Bethlehem
Revitalization and Improvement Authority (BRIA) under provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended and supplemented) 53 Pa. C.S. Ch.56 (relating to municipal
authorities). The BRIA was established for the purpose of designating the
City Revitalization and Improvement Zone (CRIZ) and other purposes as
provided under H.B. 465-2013 (amended the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6,
No. 2) known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971).
City Center Authority - The Bethlehem City Center Authority was
created under provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), as amended
by Ordinance 1871, passed August 12, 1964, enacted by Council of the City
of Bethlehem and Counties of Lehigh and Northampton. The
purpose of the Authority is to acquire, hold, construct, improve,
maintain, operate and lease buildings intended wholly or partially for
public uses.
ARTICLE 139 2
Housing Authority - Resolution 2809, passed November 4, 1937,
Bethlehem Housing Authority under the Housing Authorities Law, the Act
of May 28, 1937 (P.L. 955) as amended (35 P.S. §1541 et seq.).
139.01 Board Membership of Bethlehem Housing Authority
(a) The Mayor, with the approval of a majority of the members of
City Council, shall appoint five persons to be members of the Housing
Authority. All such members must be residents of the City of Bethlehem.
(b) One of the members of the Housing Authority Board must be a
Housing Authority resident directly assisted by the Housing Authority. The
resident member of the board shall become ineligible to continue to serve on
the board, and shall be deemed to have resigned from the board, in the event
said member is no longer a Bethlehem Housing Authority resident, in which
event a replacement resident member shall be appointed.
(Ord. 4082 - Passed August 14, 2001.)
Lehigh-Northampton Airport Authority - Under provisions of the Act
of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382), Council by Ordinance 959, passed July 9, 1946,
created the Lehigh Airport Authority in conjunction with Lehigh County and
the City of Allentown. Ordinance 963, passed September 10, 1946, provided
funds for the development, operation and maintenance of the Airport and for
distribution of assets in the event of the dissolution or liquidation of the
Authority. Ordinance 1026, passed November 9, 1948, approved the
admission of Northampton County and the City of Easton into the Authority
and created a Board of Governors. Ordinance 1046, passed August 9, 1949,
changed the name of the Authority to the Lehigh-Northampton Airport
Authority.
Lehigh Valley Solid Waste Authority – Resolution 10,129, passed
March 19, 1985, authorized formation of the Lehigh Valley Solid Waste
Authority. Deleted by Ordinance 4082, passed August 14, 2001.
Parking Authority - Ordinance 2196, passed June 2, 1970, authorized
formation of the Parking Authority under the provisions of the Parking
Authority Law, Act of June 5, 1947 (P.L. 458), as amended; Ord. 3218-
Passed 10/18/88, Delegation of Powers from City to Parking Authority for
ARTICLE 139 3
Parking Operations; Ord. 3251 - Passed 2/21/89 Transferring Responsibility
for Setting Parking Meter Rates and Locations from Council to Parking
Authority in accordance with directions from the Mayor.
Redevelopment Authority - Resolution 4624, passed January 13,
1953, authorized formation of the Redevelopment Authority under the
provisions of the Urban Redevelopment Law, Act of May 24, 1945 (P.L.
991) as amended (35 P.S. §1701 et seq.).
Tourism Authority - Resolution 10,806, passed May 3, 1988,
authorized formation of the Bethlehem Tourism Authority under the
provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended.
ARTICLE 141
Sister City Commission
141.01 Establishment; appointment, term and vacancy.
141.02 Officers and rules of procedure.
141.03 Duties.
141.01 ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT, TERM AND VACANCY.
There is hereby established the Sister City Commission of the City of Bethlehem
to be composed of no more than twenty members, to be appointed by the Mayor subject
to the approval and confirmation of Council, and who shall serve without compensation.
Members of the Commission are required to be residents of the City of Bethlehem;
provided, however, that up to five (5) members shall not be required to be residents of
the City. Commission members shall primarily be individuals who have visited
Tondabayashi, Japan or who have demonstrated a personal interest in developing a
stronger relationship between Bethlehem and its Japanese Sister City. Of the original
appointees to the Commission, one-third shall serve for terms of three years, one-third
for two years and one-third for one year, respectively. Thereafter, all appointments
shall be for three-year terms, which will expire on October 1 of the third year of the
term. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original
appointments. The Mayor, with the approval of Council, may remove any member
without cause assigned. (Ord. 3032 §1. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3271. Passed 6/6/89;
Ord. 3617. Passed 5/17/94; Ord. 4046 Passed 12/5/00)
141.02 OFFICERS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE.
The Sister City Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairman, may
elect such other officers within their group as it may deem necessary, and may adopt
such rules of procedure as are necessary to accomplish the duties prescribed in Section
141.03. (Ord. 2327 §2. Passed 11/28/72.)
ARTICLE 141 2
141.03 DUTIES.
The Sister City Commission shall:
(a) Work with the Sister City Commission of Tondabayashi, Japan to
promote better understanding, exchange cultural interests, promote trade interest,
tourism, and exchange general ideas.
(b) Prepare and submit periodic reports of its activities to the Mayor and
Council and from time to time to make recommendations to the Mayor
and Council in connection with the achievement of its objectives. (Ord.
2327 §3. Passed 11/28/72.)
(c) Oversee a Student Exchange Program between Bethlehem and its
Japanese Sister City of Tondabayashi. The Bethlehem Sister City
Commission will interview the applicants and select the students.
Students residing outside the City of Bethlehem may be selected only
when the list of students who reside within the limits of the City of
Bethlehem and who meet the criteria for selection has been exhausted.
(Ord. 3271. Passed 6/6/89.)
ARTICLE 143
Fine Arts Commission
143.01 Establishment; membership.
143.02 Powers and duties.
143.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
A Fine Arts Commission for the City is hereby established, to consist of
no less than twenty nor more than twenty-five members, appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval and confirmation of Council, and who shall
serve without compensation. Members of the Commission are required to be
residents of the City of Bethlehem; provided, however, that up to five (5)
members shall not be required to be residents of the City. (Ord. 4047 Passed
12/5/00)
The members should be broadly representative of the arts of painting,
sculpture, graphics, music, dance, theatre and architecture. Of the original
appointees to the Commission, one-third shall serve terms of three years,
one-third for two years and one-third for one year, respectively. Thereafter,
all appointments shall be for three-year terms, provided that any vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original
appointments. Further, the Mayor, with the approval of Council, may
remove any member without cause assigned. (Ord. 2828. Passed 3/2/82.)
143.02 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall:
(a) Advise the Mayor, Council and any bureau or department of the
City in matters concerning the fine arts;
(b) Maintain and further the fine arts in the City;
(c) Exert leadership in the field of fine arts by:
(1) Informing the community, through publications, such as
brochures and/or calendars of events, of cultural groups
and organizations active in the City and of cultural events
taking place in the City;
ARTICLE 143 2
(2) Encouraging cooperative cultural enterprises in the
community;
(d) Concern itself with all aspects of the City which, by their
nature, require an artistic consideration. (Ord. 1833 §2. Passed
11/19/63.)
ARTICLE 145
Bethlehem Human Relations Commission
145.01 Purpose and Declaration of Policy.
145.02 Definitions.
145.03 Unlawful Practices.
145.04 Exception.
145.05 Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
145.06 Procedures; Expanded Procedures.
145.07 Private Right of Action and Nonlimitation of Remedies.
145.08 Annual Report.
145.09 Review of Ordinance.
145.01 Purpose and Declaration of Policy.
A. In order to ensure that all persons, regardless of actual or perceived race, color,
sex, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability, use
of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids enjoy the full benefits of citizenship
and are afforded equal opportunities for employment, housing and the use of public
accommodations, and to have equal access to post-secondary educational institutions, it is
necessary that appropriate legislation be enacted.
B. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of City of Bethlehem to foster the
employment of all individuals in accordance with their fullest capacities regardless of
actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin,
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age,
veteran status, mental or physical disability, use of guide or support animals and/or
mechanical aids, and to safeguard their right to obtain and hold employment without such
discrimination, to assure equal opportunities to all individuals and to safeguard their rights
to public accommodation and to secure housing accommodation and commercial property
without regard to actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic
information, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial
status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability, use of guide or support animals
and/or mechanical aids, and to have equal access to post-secondary educational institutions
without regard to actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic
information, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, familial
status, marital status, age, mental or physical disability, use of guide or support animals
and/or mechanical aids.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as supporting or advocating any
particular doctrine, position, point of view, lifestyle or religious view. To the contrary, it is
ARTICLE 145 2
the intention of this chapter that all persons be treated fairly and equally, and it is the
express intent of this chapter to guarantee fair and equal treatment under the law to all
people of the City of Bethlehem.
D. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City of
Bethlehem for the protection of the public welfare, prosperity, health and peace of the City.
145.02 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
given to them in this subsection.
CITY: City of Bethlehem, Counties of Northampton and Lehigh, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of Bethlehem.
DISCRIMINATION: Any discriminatory act(s) taken by any person, employer, landlord,
employment agency, labor organization or public accommodation on the basis of actual or
perceived race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or
physical disability, use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids.
DISCRIMINATORY ACTS: All acts defined in the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act as
unlawful discriminatory practices. The fact that the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act
would not define a practice as unlawful when that practice is taken on the basis of actual or
perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, genetic information, familial
status, or marital status shall not exempt such practice from being considered a
discriminatory act under this chapter.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Those post-secondary programs defined as educational
institutions pursuant to the Pennsylvania Fair Educational Opportunities Act, 24 P.S. § 5001,
et seq.
GENDER IDENTITY OR EXPRESSION: Self perception, or perception by others, as male
or female, and shall include an individual’s appearance, behavior, or physical characteristics,
that may be in accord with, or opposed to, one’s physical anatomy, chromosomal sex, or sex
assigned at birth, and shall include, but is not limited to, persons who are undergoing or have
completed sex reassignment, are transgender or gender variant.
GENETIC INFORMATION: That information which is defined as genetic information in
the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C.A. § 2000ff.
EMPLOYEE: Does not include any individuals who, as a part of their employment, reside in
the personal residence of the employer.
ARTICLE 145 3
EMPLOYER: Any person who employs one or more employees, including the City, its
departments, boards and commissions, and any other government agency within its
jurisdiction.
ORDINANCE: This chapter, which shall also be known as the “Anti-Discrimination
Ordinance.”
PERSON: Any natural person, fraternal, civic or other membership organization,
corporation, general or limited partnership, proprietorship, limited liability company, or
similar business organization, including the City, its departments, boards and commissions,
and other for-profit and nonprofit organizations.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: Any accommodation, resort or amusement which is open
to, accepts or solicits the patronage of the general public or offers goods or services,
including loans, to the general public or is listed in Section 4(l) of the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 954(l), but shall not include any accommodations which are in their
nature distinctly private.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Actual or perceived homosexuality, heterosexuality and/or
bisexuality.
To the extent words and phrases appearing in this chapter are not expressly defined
herein, the meaning of this chapter shall be construed consistently with the Pennsylvania
Human Relations Act.
145.03 Unlawful Practices.
A. Discrimination in housing, employment, public accommodations or access to
educational institutions is prohibited under this chapter.
B. Retaliation against any individual because such individual has opposed any
practice forbidden by this chapter, or because such individual has made a charge, testified or
assisted in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter is
prohibited under this chapter.
C. Aiding, abetting, inciting, compelling or coercing the doing of any act declared
by this chapter to be an unlawful practice, or obstructing or preventing any person from
complying with the provisions of this chapter is prohibited under this chapter.
145.04 Exception.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall not be an unlawful
employment practice for a religious corporation or association, not supported in whole or
in part by governmental appropriations, to refuse to hire or employ an individual on the
basis of religion.
ARTICLE 145 4
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit a religious organization,
religious denomination, or association of religious organizations or denominations that is
exempt from Federal taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
any organization affiliated with that religious organization, religious denomination, or
association of religious organizations or denominations, from engaging in any conduct or
activity that is required by, or that implements or expresses its religious beliefs or tenets
of faith. Nor shall anything in this chapter be interpreted to require any such religious
organization, religious denomination, or association of religious organizations or
denominations, or any organization affiliated with that religious organization, religious
denomination, or association of religious organizations or denominations to engage in
any conduct or activity that is prohibited by its religious beliefs or tenets of faith. Nor
shall any such religious organization, religious denomination, or association of religious
organizations or denominations be required to engage in any conduct or activity that
would violate its religious beliefs or tenets, as a condition of entering into any contract
with any agency of this City.
145.05 Establishment of Human Relations Commission.
A. Pursuant to 43 P.S. § 962.1 of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, there
is hereby established a Human Relations Commission in and for Bethlehem (hereinafter
referred to as the “Bethlehem Human Relations Commission” or the “Commission”).
B. The Bethlehem Human Relations Commission shall consist of no fewer than
nine and no more than thirteen members, who shall serve overlapping terms of three
years each. At all times there shall be an odd number of members. If the number of
Commission members is nine, six Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of City Council and three of the Commission members shall be
appointed by City Council. If the number of Commission members is eleven, seven
Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of City Council
and four of the Commission members shall be appointed by City Council. If the number
of Commission members is thirteen, eight Commission members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of City Council and five of the Commission members shall
be appointed by City Council. The Commission may elect up to three nonvoting, ex
officio members to broaden the diversity that serves on the Commission. Members shall
be residents of the City or business owners who operate within the City. No voting
member of the Bethlehem Human Relations Commission shall hold any office in any
political party. Members of the Bethlehem Human Relations Commission shall serve
without salary but may be paid expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, as
approved by Bethlehem Council. Paid staff may be hired by the Mayor to assist in the
performance of the duties of the Commission, and any compensation must be approved
by City Council. The City of Bethlehem Human Resources Director shall be the liaison
to the Bethlehem Human Relations Commission for matters or complaints related to
employment that are presented to the Commission. Should the City of Bethlehem be
designated as a respondent in an allegation considered by the Human Relations
Commission, in that case the Solicitor to Bethlehem City Council shall be the liaison to
the Bethlehem Human Relations Commission. (Ord. 2014-1. Passed 1/6/14.)
ARTICLE 145 5
C. The Commission shall select one of its members as the Chairperson of the
Commission. The Chairperson will be responsible for setting Commission meetings,
coordinating with the City Clerk regarding received complaints and answers, and
generally ensuring that the duties of the Commission are fulfilled. The Chairperson may
delegate responsibility for Commission duties to specific Commissioners or to paid staff,
if applicable.
D. City Council hereby grants to the Bethlehem Human Relations Commission all
of the powers necessary to the execution of its duties (as set forth below), provided that
those powers shall not exceed those exercised by the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission under the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
E. Duties
The Commission shall:
a. Promote mutual understanding, respect and cooperation among all racial,
cultural, religious, ethnic, nationality and other groups within the City
b. Make studies into the status of human relations in the City
c. Cooperate with and assist other organizations, public or private, to
improve relationships among the citizens of the City
d. Conduct an educational program for furtherance of the improvement of
human relations in the City
e. Act as a referral group for complaints of alleged discrimination within the
City and, wherever possible, the Commission shall refer the complainants
to appropriate social, civic or government agencies for further action.
145.06 Procedures; Expanded Procedures.
A. Filing a complaint.
1. Any person(s) claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful practice may make,
sign and file a verified complaint alleging violations of this chapter, which
shall include the following information:
a. The name and address of the aggrieved person(s);
b. The name and address of the person(s) alleged to have committed the
prohibited practice;
c. A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates, constituting
ARTICLE 145 6
the alleged discriminatory practice;
d. If applicable, the address and a description of the dwelling unit which is
involved; and
e. Such other information as may be required by the City/Human Relations
Commission.
2. Complaints may be filed in person at the City Clerk’s office or by mailing
such complaints to the City Clerk’s office or to the Chairperson of the
Human Relations Commission. All complaints must be received by the
City Clerk’s office or by the Human Relations Commission within 180
days of the alleged act of discrimination to be considered timely.
3. The City Clerk’s office shall convey all original complaints received by that
office to the Chairperson of the Human Relations Commission within 10
days of the office’s receipt of such complaints.
B. Notification and answer.
1. Within 30 days of its receipt of a complaint, the Human Relations Commission
shall:
a. Send a copy of the complaint to the person(s) charged with a discriminatory
practice [the “respondent(s)”]; and
b. Send a notice to the person(s) aggrieved, informing them that the complaint
has been received. If the complaint alleges discrimination on a basis
prescribed under federal or state law, the notice sent to the person(s)
aggrieved shall also inform them of the right to file with the state Human
Relations Commission and/or with the federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission.
2. The respondent(s) shall file a written verified answer to the complaint within
60 days of receipt of the complaint. An answer to a complaint may be filed in
the same manner as an original complaint. If the answer is filed with the City
Clerk’s office, it shall be conveyed by the City Clerk to the Chairperson of
the Human Relations Commission within 10 days of the City Clerk’s office’s
receipt thereof. The Commission shall promptly send a copy of the answer to
the person(s) aggrieved.
C. Fact finding conference.
1. After the answer has been received, the Commission shall, within 60 days,
invite the parties to voluntarily participate in a fact finding conference
concerning the dispute. The parties shall respond to the invitation to
ARTICLE 145 7
participate in a fact finding conference within 30 days of being invited to
participate.
2. If the parties agree to participate in a fact finding conference, the parties shall
meet with a Commission member at a location mutually agreeable to the
parties within 30 days of the agreement to participate. Each party will be
invited at the fact finding conference to present evidence and documents
relevant to the complaint. The fact finding conference will not be a public
event, and no record of the conference will be created, excepting the findings
of fact detailed in Subsection C.3 of this Section.
3. The parties shall notify the Commission of whether the fact finding conference
resulted in a resolution of the complaint. In the event the complaint is
resolved, the Commission shall notify the parties that the complaint has been
dismissed. In the event the complaint is not resolved through the fact finding
conference, then the Commissioner, within 30 days, shall prepare findings of
fact and a conclusion as to whether the Commissioner finds probable cause
that an unlawful practice has occurred.
D. Disposition of the complaint. Provided the Commission has not elected under
Subsection E of this section to use expanded procedures, and if the complaint is not resolved
through the fact finding conference, the Commission shall, at the second Commission
meeting following the fact finding conference, consider the findings prepared by the
Commissioner who conducted the fact finding conference. The Commission shall accept or
reject the findings by public vote. The Commission shall provide the parties with the
findings of fact and conclusion, shall notify the parties of the outcome of the vote, and this
notice shall also indicate that the person aggrieved has a right to pursue the matter in
court by filing a lawsuit.
E. Option of the Commission to elect for expanded procedures. The Commission
shall have the authority to elect to adopt expanded procedures as set forth in Subsection F of
this section subject to approval by City Council and appropriation of funding by City
Council for such procedures. A majority of Commission members must vote in favor of
adopting expanded procedures in order for such procedures to be adopted. In the event that
such procedures are adopted, they must, while in effect, be applied to all complaints that are
not resolved through a fact finding conference. If the Commission has adopted expanded
procedures, it may also, by majority vote and in its sole discretion, eliminate such
procedures.
F. Expanded procedures:
1. Dismissal or nondismissal of the complaint. If the fact finding conference was
successful in resolving the complaint, the Commission shall follow the procedures set forth
in Subsection C.3 of this section.
ARTICLE 145 8
2. Investigation. The Commission shall, in a timely fashion, investigate the
allegations of discrimination set forth in the complaint. The Commission may, in the
conduct of such investigation, issue subpoenas to any person charged with an unlawful
practice to furnish information, records or other documents, or to give sworn testimony, as
necessary to assist in its investigation. The Commission may seek enforcement of its
subpoena by Petition to the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton and/or Lehigh County
as appropriate.
3. Finding of no cause. If it shall be determined after the Commission’s
investigation that there is no basis for the allegations of the complaint, the Commission
shall cause to be issued and served upon the parties written notice of such determination.
This notice shall inform the person aggrieved that he/she has the right to pursue the matter
in court by filing a lawsuit.
4. Conciliation. If the Commission, after investigation, determines that probable
cause exists for the allegations of the complaint, the Commission shall immediately
endeavor to eliminate the unlawful practice complained of by persuasion, conference and
conciliation.
5. Public hearing.
a. If the Commission, in its discretion, finds it is not possible to eliminate the
unlawful practices by persuasion, conference or conciliation, the Commission shall cause
to be issued and served a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, which
informs the respondent that the respondent must answer the charges of such complaint at a
hearing before the Commission at a time and place to be specified in such notice.
b. The Commission may designate one or more of its members to preside at such a
hearing or it may, at its election, conduct such hearing with a panel of either 2 or 3
Commissioners.
c. At the public hearing, the case in support of the complaint shall be
presented to the Commission by pro bono counsel or by the City Solicitor’s office. The
case in support of the complaint may instead be presented by the complainant’s attorney, if
the complainant is represented. Both the complainant and the respondent may appear at the
hearing with or without counsel and provide testimony. In addition, both the complainant
and the respondent may introduce the testimony of additional witnesses and may submit
documentary evidence. The Commission and the parties shall not be bound by the strict
rules of evidence at the hearing.
6. Findings. If upon all the evidence at the hearing the Commission shall find that
a respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory practice as
defined in this chapter, the Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and
cause to be served on such respondent an order requiring such respondent to cease and
desist from such unlawful discriminatory practice and to take such additional action as the
Commission deems appropriate. The Commission shall have the authority to order any
ARTICLE 145 9
remedies available to the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission under the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.
7. Finding of No Discrimination. If upon all the evidence the Commission shall
find that a respondent has not engaged in any unlawful discriminatory practice, the
Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the
parties an order dismissing the complaint as to such respondent.
145.07 Private Right of Action and Nonlimitation of Remedies.
A. Any person(s) aggrieved by a violation of this chapter shall have a right of
action in the appropriate Court of Common Pleas either Lehigh or Northampton
or any other court of competent jurisdiction and may recover for each violation
the following remedies:
1. Back pay, front pay and other actual damages, as those remedies are defined
in the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act and case law interpreting the
same;
2. Emotional distress damages;
3. Exemplary damages;
4. Reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs; and
5. Such other relief, including injunctive relief, as the court may deem appropriate.
B. The right of action created by this chapter may be brought upon receipt by the
aggrieved person(s) of notice that the Commission has dismissed the
complaint or, if no such notice is received, after one year from the date of the
filing of the complaint. If the person aggrieved has received notice that the
Commission has dismissed the complaint, an action under this chapter must be
brought by the aggrieved person within one year from the date of receipt of
said notice or it will be barred. Equitable principles such as waiver, estoppel
and equitable tolling shall apply to the time limitations for the filing of any
complaint or other pleading under this chapter.
C. Nothing in this chapter limits the right of an aggrieved person to recover under
any other applicable law or legal theory.
145.08 Annual Report
ARTICLE 145 10
The Bethlehem Human Relations Commission shall keep records of its meetings
and activities. The Bethlehem Human Relations Commission shall provide advisory
reports on a quarterly basis which shall be forwarded to Bethlehem City Council and the
City of Bethlehem Administration.
145.09 Review of Ordinance
City Council retains the right to review the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2011-13. Passed 7/1/11.)
EDITOR'S NOTE: Article 145 was previously repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 2988
which was passed on April 2, 1985.
ARTICLE 146
Environmental Advisory Council
146.01 Establishment.
146.02 Composition.
146.03 Appointment of Members.
146.04 Non-Compensation.
146.05 Advisory Body; Activities.
146.06 Chairperson.
146.07 Powers.
146.08 Records and Reports.
146.09 Term.
CROSS REFERENCES
PA Act 148 – 1973 – gave municipalities the authority to establish Environmental
Advisory Councils (EAC)
PA Act 177 – 1996 – P.L. 1158, No. 177 – amended Act 148
By-laws adopted December 5, 2007
146.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
An advisory council to be known as the City of Bethlehem Environmental
Advisory Council is hereby created.
(Ord. 2010-12. Passed 5/19/10.)
146.02 COMPOSITION
The Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of seven (7) residents of
this City. (Ord. 2014-2. Passed 1/6/14; Ord. 2016-21. Passed 7/19/16)
146.03 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS
Environmental Advisory Council members shall be appointed in accordance with
the following procedures:
1) All council members shall be appointed by Bethlehem City Council.
2) Council members' terms of office shall expire on the first Monday in
January following the last year of their term in office.
ARTICLE 146 2
3) Duly appointed council members shall serve a term of three years,
except that initial appointments shall be so staggered that the terms of
approximately one-third of the membership shall expire each year.
(Ord. 2014-2. Passed 1/6/14.)
146.04 NON-COMPENSATION
Environmental Advisory Council members shall receive no compensation for
their services.
146.05 ADVISORY BODY; ACTIVITIES
The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to and shall coordinate
its activities with the elected officials, planning commission and other such local
governmental agencies.
146.06 CHAIRPERSON
The City Council shall designate the chairperson of the council. (Ord. 2014-2.
Passed 1/6/14; Ord. 2016-21. Passed 7/19/16)
146.07 POWERS
The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following powers:
1) Identify environmental problems, research solutions, and make
recommendations to Bethlehem City Council and City of Bethlehem
Departments and Administration.
2) Recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies for the
promotion and conservation of the natural resources and for the
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment within
the City of Bethlehem and its surrounding areas.
3) Make recommendations as to the possible use of open land areas
and/or environmentally sensitive lands within the City of Bethlehem
and its surrounding areas.
4) Promote community environmental programs.
5) Keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including, but not limited to, flood prone areas, swamps, and other
unique natural areas.
ARTICLE 146 3
6) Advise the appropriate local governmental agencies in the acquisition
of property, both real and personal.
7) Review subdivision and land development plans as appropriate.
8) To assist and maintain a map of the City of Bethlehem and its
surrounding areas.
9) Advise Bethlehem City Council and City of Bethlehem Departments
and Administration upon issues of energy conservation.
10) To undertake such environmental tasks as requested by Bethlehem
City Council and City of Bethlehem Departments and
Administration.
146.08 RECORDS AND REPORTS
The Environmental Advisory Council shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report which shall be printed in the annual municipal
report (if applicable) or otherwise made known and available. Minutes of each meeting
shall be forwarded to Bethlehem City Council and the City of Bethlehem Administration.
146.09 TERM
The Environmental Advisory Council established in Article 146 of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem (Ordinance 4431, passed May 1, 2007) known as
the City of Bethlehem Environmental Advisory Council shall continue in existence
indefinitely; or until such time as Bethlehem City Council takes action as to the term of
existence of the Environmental Advisory Council. (Ord. 2010-12. Passed 5/19/10.)
(Ord. 4431. Passed 5/1/07.)
ARTICLE 149
Blighted Property Review Committee
149.01 Definitions.
149.02 Acquiring Blighted Properties; Redevelopment Authority.
149.03 Establishment, Appointment, Term, Vacancy.
149.04 Determining Blight.
149.05 Powers of Redevelopment Authority.
CROSS REFERENCE
See 35 P.S. §1712.1 - Act No. 1978 - 94
149.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) Abandoned Property. The term abandoned property shall be defined
in accordance with 35 PS § 1712.1(c)(9), as amended.
(b) Blighted Property. The term blighted property shall be defined in
accordance with 35 PS § 1712.1(c), as amended. In addition, no property
shall be certified as blighted unless it is vacant.
(c) Residential and Related Use. The term residential and related use
shall be defined in accordance with 35 PS § 1712.1(d), as amended.
(d) Vacant Property. The term vacant property shall be defined in
accordance with 35 PS §1712.1(e)(1), as amended. Until superseded by an
amendment enacted after June 1, 2016 to 35 PS § 1712.1(e)(1), the term
vacant property shall mean:
(i) any property which is unoccupied or its occupancy has not been
authorized by the owner of the property;
(ii) in the case of an unimproved lot or parcel of ground, any
property subject to a lien for the cost of demolition of any structure
located on the property which remains unpaid for a period of six
months; or
(iii) in the case of an unimproved lot or parcel of ground, any
property which has remained in violation of any provision of local
building, property maintenance or related codes applicable to such lots
or parcels, including licensing requirements, for a period of six months.
149.02 ACQUIRING BLIGHTED PROPERTIES.
Subject to the provisions and procedures of this Article, the
Redevelopment Authority of the City of Bethlehem shall have the power to
ARTICLE 149 2
acquire by purchase, gift, bequest, eminent domain, or otherwise any
"blighted property.”
149.03 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENT, TERM, VACANCY.
(a) There is established a Blighted Property Review Committee to
consist of not more than seven (7) members, who shall serve without
compensation. The Committee is to include at least one member of City
Council, a representative of the Redevelopment Authority board, a
representative to be designated by the Mayor and a representative of the
Planning Commission. Three other members may be added upon the
discretion of the Mayor.
(b) The terms of each member shall be four (4) years and last through
December 31 of the appropriate year and the appointments to each position
shall be staggered so that at least one (1) position is filled by appointment
each calendar year.
149.04 DETERMINING BLIGHT.
(a) Upon receipt of evidence from relevant City officials and
departments that a property may be blighted, the reporting City officials
and/or department shall present such evidence to the Planning Commission
for a recommendation as to whether the property appears to be blighted and
any planning recommendations the Planning Commission may have for
future use(s) thereof, all of which shall be thereafter promptly shared with
the Blighted Property Review Committee. Advance notice to the owner or
his/her/its agent of any proceeding of the Planning Commission is
encouraged, but shall not be required as a precondition to any proceedings
under this Ordinance. Upon completion of such Planning Commission
proceedings, however, a copy of the recommendations of the Planning
Commission shall be promptly served in the manner as an order and notice
provided by section 149.04(c) upon the record owner or his agent, along
with a scheduling notice for the time, place and location of a hearing at
which the Blighted Property Review Committee shall consider such
recommendations and evidence of blight for purposes of certifying to the
Redevelopment Authority whether the property is blighted for possible
condemnation proceedings. The proceedings of the Blighted Properties
Review Committee shall conform to the provisions of the Local Agency
Law, 2 PaCS §§ 101, 105, 551-555, 561-588, 751-754, as amended.
(b) Upon receipt of such recommendations from the Planning
Commission and the evidence from reporting City officials and
departments that such property may be blighted, and in the event the
Blighted Property Review Committee determines that a blighted condition
exists, the Committee shall prepare an appropriate Order and Notice, which
shall be served in accordance with section 149.04(c), giving notification of
the following:
ARTICLE 149 3
(1) the determination that the property is blighted; and
(2) the requirement to eliminate the conditions causing the blight
within the stated period of time; and
(3) that failure to eliminate the conditions causing the blight within
the stated period of time may render the property subject to condemnation
under the Urban Redevelopment Law.
(4) that the Order and Notice shall constitute an “adjudication”
within the meaning of the Local Agency Law for which the owner or his
agent and any such other person with a direct interest in such property shall
have the right to appeal such adjudication within thirty (30) days to the
court of common pleas of the county in which the property is located
pursuant to 2 PaCS §752 and 42 PaCS § 5571(b).
(c) Manner of Service under 149.04(a) and 149.04(b). Any
post-Planning Commission meeting documents required to be served under
subsections (a) or (b) of section 149.04 shall be served by an agent of the
City physically posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the subject
property and by hand delivery or mailing a copy to the mailing address for
the owner as depicted in the online property record maintained by the
Assessment Office of the county in which the subject property is located, or
such other address and/or agent as may be designated by such owner. Such
mailed notice shall be by any form of delivery by the United States Postal
Service requiring the intended recipient or his agent to sign a receipt
evidencing actual delivery of same. Such service shall be complete upon
delivery of the mail. If such attempted by mail is returned with notation by
the postal authorities that the owner or his agent refused to accept the mail
or that the mail was unclaimed, the City shall thereafter have the right to
make service by mailing a copy to the owner or his agent at the same
address by ordinary mail with the return address of the sender appearing
thereon. Service by ordinary mail is complete if the mail is not returned to
the sender within fifteen (15) days after mailing. In the event the such
ordinary mail delivery is returned by the postal authorities as refused or
unclaimed, then such proceedings and deadlines which are the subject of the
documents so mailed shall proceed as though actual service by mail had
been accomplished so long as proof of the efforts made to make service as
required under subsections (a) or (b) of section 149.04 shall be included in
the records of Blighted Properties Review Committee.
(d) A blighted property shall be deemed certified as blighted to the
Redevelopment Authority without further administrative proceedings once
the time period for appeal has expired and no appeal has been taken, or, if
taken, the appeal has been disposed of, and the owner or his agent has failed
to comply with the order of the Blighted Properties Review Committee or
as modified through the judicial appeal process.
ARTICLE 149 4
149.05 POWERS OF REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
(a) Upon receipt of a deemed certification of a blighted property,
including the prior recommendations of the Planning Commission
referenced in section 149.04(a), the Redevelopment Authority of the City of
Bethlehem shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, bequest,
eminent domain, or otherwise any "blighted" property as defined in by the
Article, either within or outside of a certified redevelopment area, and
further, shall have the power to hold, clear, manage and/or dispose of said
property for residential or related reuse and commercial or industrial reuse.
(b) Acquisition and disposition of blighted property under this
ordinance shall not require preparation, adoption or approval of a
redevelopment area plan or redevelopment proposal, provided that
Planning Commission previously determined pursuant to section 149.04(a)
that the proposed residential or related use would be in accord with the
comprehensive plan of the municipality.
(c) Power of eminent domain shall be exercised pursuant to a resolution
of the Redevelopment Authority and the procedure set forth in the act of
June 22, 1964, 26 PS 1-101 et seq. known as the "Eminent Domain Code,"
as amended.
(d) Property disposed of within a redevelopment area shall be disposed
of under a redevelopment contract in accordance with the provisions of 35
PS § 1712.1. Property disposed of outside an urban renewal project area
shall be disposed of by deed in accordance with the provisions set forth in
applicable law.
(e) Nothing in this Article shall be construed to deny or restrict any
powers or privileges conferred upon the Redevelopment Authority of the
City of Bethlehem by virtue of set forth in the Urban Redevelopment Law,
1945, May 24, P.L. 991, 35 PS § 1701 et seq.
Editor’s Note: Article 149 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 2016-24, September 6, 2016
and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 2016-24, September 6, 2016.
ARTICLE 150
Board of Appeals
150.01 Purpose; Establishment.
150.02 Board Membership.
150.03 Procedure for Appeal.
150.04 Decision of Board.
150.05 Judicial Remedies.
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption of Codes - See International Fire Code Art. 1701
Certificates of Use & Occupancy - See Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code Art. 1701; Art. 1731.01
Electrical Code - See Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code Art. 1701
International Property Maintenance Code - See Art. 1733
Plumbing Code - See Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code Art. 1701
Rooming Houses - Hearing - See Art. 1735.05
150.01 PURPOSE; ESTABLISHMENT
There is hereby created a Board of Appeals whose function it shall be to hear and decide
appeals from:
(a) Decisions made by the Fire Department enforcing the provisions of the Codes
adopted pursuant to Article 1701 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem; and -
(b) Decisions made by a building official refusing to grant a modification of the
provisions of the building code, electrical code, mechanical code, plumbing code, residential code,
or property maintenance code covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the
erection, installation, alterations, or repairs or violations existing in a building or structure,
pursuant to Articles 1701 and 1733 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, except
that there shall be no right of appeal from a notice of violation alleging a violation of the
International Property Maintenance Code of 2009; and -
(c) Decisions made by a City official and/or City department where by City ordinance,
a right of appeal has been created from such decisions to the Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 4156. Passed 11/6/2002; Ord 4282. Passed 10/19/2004; Ord. 2017-36. Passed 12/5/2017)
ARTICLE 150 2
.
150.02 BOARD MEMBERSHIP
(a) The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members, each appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council of the City of Bethlehem. Each member is to be
appointed for a term of five (5) years or until his successor has been appointed and confirmed.
There also shall be two (2) alternates, each appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council of the City of Bethlehem, who may act as substitute members in case of absence or
unavailability of members of the Board of Appeals. Members of the Board shall receive no
compensation for services rendered to the Board.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall consist of five individuals, one from each of the
following professions or disciplines.
1. A registered design professional who is a registered architect; or a person involved in a
supervisory capacity in building construction with at least ten years experience, five of
which shall include responsibility for on-the-job supervision of work in the field.
2. A registered design professional with structural engineering or other civil engineering
experience.
3. A registered design professional with mechanical or plumbing engineering experience;
or a person involved in a supervisory capacity in mechanical or plumbing contracting
with at least ten years experience, five of which shall include responsibility for
on-the-job supervision of work in the field.
4. A registered design professional with electrical engineering experience; or a person
involved in a supervisory capacity in electrical contracting with at least ten years
experience, five of which shall include responsibility for on-the-job supervision of
work in the field.
5. A registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience; or a
person involved in a supervisory capacity in fire protection contracting with at least ten
years experience, five of which shall include responsibility for on-the-job supervision
of work in the field.
(c) Alternate members shall be called to serve by the Board Chair to hear appeals
during the absence, disqualification or other unavailability of a member. Alternate members shall
possess the qualifications required for board membership, and shall be appointed for a term of five
(5) years or until a successor has been appointed and confirmed.
(d) Vacancies shall be filled for the un-expired term of any member whose position
becomes vacant due to resignation or other reason, and the Mayor may remove any member for
cause.
(Ord. 4156. Passed 11/6/2002; Ord. 4204. Passed 7/29/2003)
ARTICLE 150 3
150.03 PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL
(a) When any person wishes to appeal a decision he shall file an appeal with the
Secretary to the Board or with the Office of the City Clerk, who shall immediately forward such an
appeal to the Secretary to the Board, within ten days of the official's decision. The appeal shall
contain a concise statement of the relevant facts, the decision appealed from, and the basis for the
appeal.
(b) An application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that: the true intent of the
Codes or rules legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, or the provisions of the
Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better method can be used, or that the decision under
appeal was made in an arbitrary and capricious manner.
(c) Hearings shall be open to the public. The Board shall elect a Chairperson and a
Secretary and prescribe such rules as may be necessary as to place and conduct of hearings. The
Board may in such rules make provision for a filing fee for appeals in the amount of $100.00,
which shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
(d) The Board shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision under appeal by a vote of
three (3) members. Failure to secure three (3) votes shall be deemed an affirmance of the decision
under appeal. Attendance at the hearing by five (5) members of the Board shall be required to
constitute a quorum for a meeting and for action on an appeal.
(e) The Secretary shall transmit copies of the appeal to the fire commissioner, or
building enforcement officer, or other applicable City official, and shall set a date for the hearing
of the appeal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Secretary or at a
stated regular meeting of the Board of Appeals. Notice of the date and time of the hearing shall be
given to all parties involved and shall not be scheduled without concurrence of the fire, or building
department, or other applicable City department, as to the particular date of the hearing.
(Ord. 4156. Passed 11/6/2002; Ord. 4204. Passed 7/29/2003)
150.04 DECISION OF BOARD
The Board shall render its decision at a public meeting after the conclusion of the hearing
and a written decision thereof is to be issued within seven business days thereafter. The decision
shall state the findings of the Board with respect to the material facts and shall reference the
provisions of the Codes or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, if any are deemed
applicable, upon which the decision is based. In reaching its decision, the Board shall consider the
expressed intent of any applicable Codes. (Ord. 4156. Passed 11/6/2002)
150.05 JUDICIAL REMEDIES
This Article shall not be construed to limit or deny any judicial remedies to which a party
may be entitled by law or equity, but any aggrieved party having an appeal under this Article must
first avail himself or herself of the appeal. (Ord. 3281. Passed 8/1/1989)
ARTICLE 151
Firemen's Pension Fund
151.01 Establishment.
151.02 Maintenance of Fund.
151.03 Appropriation from City taxes.
151.04 Election of Members to Benefit.
151.05 Payments from Fund Only; Computation.
151.06 Rights of Paid Fireman; Exceptions.
151.07 Payment from Firemen's Pension Fund Only (Repealed)
151.08 Employment After Retirement (Repealed)
151.09 Board of Managers; Composition; Term.
151.10 Board Rules for Service, Age, Disability.
151.11 Minimum Service and Retirement.
151.12 Reinstatement.
151.13 Pension Benefits Inviolate.
151.14 Administrative Expenses.
151.15 Pick-up Plan.
151.16 Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP).
CROSS REFERENCES
Firemen's Pension Fund - See 3rd Class §4320 et seq. (53 P.S. 39320 et seq.)
Fire Department - See ADM. Art. 107.05
Employee compensation and fringe benefits - See ADM. Art. 123
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act - Act 205 (53 P.S. Sec. 895.101)
151.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established a Bethlehem Firemen's Pension Fund under authority of Article
XLIII(b) of The Third Class City Code, and any other statutes now or hereafter pertaining or
applicable hereto, and any ordinance that may be lawfully enacted for the purposes hereof. (Ord.
1032 §1. Passed 12/28/1948.)
151.02 MAINTENANCE OF FUND.
The Firemen's Pension Fund shall be invested and merged in joint Funds for investment
purposes under the provisions of Article l56 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
The Fund shall charge against each paid member of the Fire Department of the City an amount of
seven percent (7%) of the pay of such member, and an additional one percent (1%) to pay benefits
to surviving spouses, or if no spouse survives or if he/she survives and subsequently dies, then to the
child or children under the age of eighteen years, of members retired on pension or killed or who die
in service. Annual appropriations to the Firemen's Pension Fund by the City shall be made in
accordance with Act 205 of 1984, Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act.
ARTICLE 151 2
(Ord. 3139 §1. Passed 9/15/1987; Ord. 3689. Passed 6/6/95; Ord. 3764. Passed 9/17/1996; Ord
2017-50. Passed 12/19/2017.)
151.03 APPROPRIATION FROM CITY TAXES.
In the year 1949 and annually thereafter, there shall be appropriated and paid to the
Firemen's Pension Fund by the City a sum of money equal to no less than one-half of one percent of
all City taxes levied by the City, other than taxes levied to pay interest on or to extinguish the debt
of the City, or any part thereof. (Ord. 1907 §2. Passed 4/20/1965.)
151.04 ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO BENEFIT.
The Firemen's Pension Fund shall be for the benefit of all paid firemen employed in the
Bureau of Fire, who elect to become members thereof. (Ord. 1032 §5. Passed 12/28/1948.)
151.05 PAYMENTS FROM FUND ONLY; COMPUTATION.
(a) Payment of pensions shall not be a charge on any fund in the treasury of the City or
under its control except the Firemen's Pension Fund herein provided for. For
employees hired on or before October 23, 2011 the basis of the pension of a member
shall be determined by the monthly salary of the member at the date of retirement, or
the highest average annual salary which he received during any five years of service
preceding retirement, whichever is the higher (hereinafter referred to as “Base Pay”),
whether for disability or by reason of age or service; and except as to service
increments provided for in subsection (e) hereof, shall be computed based upon the
following percentage of such Base Pay:
Years of Service Pension Percentage
20 60%
21 62%
22 64%
23 66%
24 68%
25 70%
(b) For the purposes of this section 151.05, “monthly salary” shall be defined to include
the following:
(1) Base pay; plus
(2) Longevity; plus
(3) Shift Differential for the last twelve months; plus
ARTICLE 151 3
(4) Overtime for the last twelve months; plus
(5) Holiday Pay (Current Daily Rate X 12); plus
(6) Holidays worked for the last twelve months multiplied by one-half
the current daily rate; plus
(7) Roster Duty for the last twelve months; plus
(8) Sick Bonus for the last twelve months; plus
(9) Education Bonus for the last twelve months.
(c) For all employees hired on or after October 24, 2011 the City shall solely provide
the minimum required pension benefit as set forth in the Third Class City Code 53
P.S. §35101 to §39701 including but not limited to §39320, §39320.1, §39321,
and §39322. For purposes of calculating pension benefits for employees hired on
or after October 24, 2011, salary shall be defined solely as base salary plus
longevity. Monthly salary shall be defined as annual base salary plus longevity
divided by (12).
(d) In the case of the payment of pensions to members for permanent injury incurred in
service, and to families of members killed or who die in service, the amount and
commencement of the payments of pensions shall be fixed as follows. Such payment
shall not take into consideration the amount and duration of workmen's
compensation allowed by law. Whenever any paid member of the fire department
becomes physically or mentally incapacitated from circumstances or causes arising
from the actual performance of his duties and without fault or misconduct on his
part, the Pension shall be computed pursuant to this Ordinance based upon 20 years
of service. However, in cases where the member has completed 21 or more years of
benefit service at the time of such physical or mental incapacity, then pension shall
be computed based upon the member’s actual years of service. In cases of members
killed or who die in service, payments to surviving spouses, or if no spouse survives
or if he/she survives and subsequently dies, then to the child or children under the
age of eighteen years, of members retired on pension or killed in the service on or
after January 1, 1969, or who die in the service on or after January 1, 1969, shall be
equal to the amount payable to the member or which would have been payable had
he/she been retired at the time of his/her death.
(e) In addition to the pension which is authorized to be paid from the Firemen's Pension
Fund by this article and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon such
pensions and upon contributions, every contributor who becomes entitled to the
pension shall also be entitled to the payment of a service increment in accordance
ARTICLE 151 4
with and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth.
(1) The service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the number
of whole years after having serviced twenty years during which a contributor
has been employed by the City and paid out of the City treasury and
multiplying the number of years so computed by an amount equal to onefortieth
of the retirement allowance which has become payable to such
contributor in accordance with the provisions of this article. In computing
the service increment, no employment after the contributor has reached the
age of sixty-five years shall be included, and no service increment shall be
paid in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month.
(2) Each contributor, from and after the effective date of this section (Ordinance
2152, passed June 17, 1969), shall pay into the pension fund a monthly sum
not to exceed one dollar ($1.00), in addition to his/her pension contribution.
Such service increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor had
reached the age of sixty-five years.
(3) Any person who is a member of the Department on the effective date of this
section (Ordinance 2152, passed June 17, 1969) who has already reached the
age of sixty-five years shall have his/her service increment computed on the
years of employment prior to the date of reaching his/her sixty-fifth birthday.
(4) Service increment contributions shall be paid at the same time and in the
same manner as pensions, and may be withdrawn in full, without interest, by
persons who leave the employment of such City, subject to the same
conditions by which retirements contributions may be withdrawn, or by
persons who retire before becoming entitled to any service increment.
(5) All members of the Fire Bureau who are now contributors to the pension
fund and all those employed by the Fire Bureau after the effective date of
this section (Ordinance 2152, passed June 17, 1969), if required to become
contributors to the pension fund, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section.
(f) Non-Work-related disability. Whenever any paid member of the fire
department becomes physically or mentally incapacitated from
circumstances or causes not arising from the actual performance of his duties
and without fault or misconduct on his part, then for members who shall
have served at least
(1) ten (10) but less than fifteen (15) years of continuous service,
the Pension payable to such member shall be equal to thirty percent (30%) of
his “annual salary” as defined by this Ordinance; or
ARTICLE 151 5
(2) fifteen (15) years or more of continuous service, the Pension
shall be computed pursuant to this Ordinance based upon 20 years of service.
(Ord. 2152 §2. Passed 6/17/1969; Ord. 2013-26. Passed 10/1/2013; Ord 2017-50. Passed 12/19/2017.)
151.06 RIGHTS OF PAID FIREMEN; EXCEPTIONS.
When any paid fireman shall become entitled to receive pension from the Firemen's Pension
Fund and shall have been admitted to participate therein, he/she shall not thereafter be deprived of
his/her right to participation therein on the basis upon which he/she first became entitled thereto,
save from one or more of the following causes: conviction of a felony or misdemeanor, or failure to
comply with some general regulation relating to the management of such Fund, which may be made
by the Board of Managers and which may provide that failure to comply therewith shall terminate
the right to participate in the Fund. Any termination of a pension shall be only after such due notice
and hearing as shall be prescribed by regulation of the Board of Managers. (Ord. 1907 §4. Passed
4/20/1965; Ord. 3764. Passed 9/17/1996.)
151.07 PAYMENT FROM FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND ONLY.
(EDITOR'S NOTE: This section was repealed by Ordinance 1907, passed April 20, 1965.)
151.08 EMPLOYMENT AFTER RETIREMENT; PENSION REGULATIONS.
(EDITOR'S NOTE: This section was repealed by Ordinance 1907, passed April 20, 1965.)
151.09 BOARD OF MANAGERS; COMPOSITION; TERM.
The Firemen's Pension Fund established under the provisions of this article and the Act of
Assembly applicable thereto shall be under the direction and control of a Board of Managers
consisting of the Mayor, the Business Administrator, the City Treasurer, the City Controller, the
Chief of the Fire Bureau ex officio and two members of the Fund to be chosen by the members
thereof, one of the first two members so chosen shall be designated to serve for a term of two years
and the other shall be designated to serve for a term of four years; biennially thereafter, one member
of the Board shall be chosen by the members of the Fund to serve for a four-year term. In case of a
vacancy among the managers chosen by the members of the Fund, his/her successor shall be chosen
by a majority vote of the members of the Fund and shall serve for the unexpired term of the
manager whom he/she succeeds. (Ord. 1907 §7. Passed 4/20/65; Ord. 2989 §1. Passed 4/2/1985;
Ord. 3764. Passed 9/17/1996; Ord. 2013-26. Passed 10/1/2013.)
ARTICLE 151 6
151.10 BOARD RULES FOR SERVICE, AGE, DISABILITY.
The Board of Managers shall compile such rules and regulations of the Firemen's Pension
Fund deemed necessary for the benefit of such members of the paid Fire Bureau as shall receive
honorable discharge therefrom by reason of service, and age or disability, and the families of such
as may be killed in the service or retired on pension or who die in service, subject to the provisions
of the ordinances of the City and the acts of assembly applicable thereto. Such rules and regulations
and all amendments thereto shall be presented to Council for approval. Council may accept or reject
such rules and regulations, or if no action is taken within thirty days from the date of presentation,
such rules and regulations shall be deemed approved. Such rules and regulations shall then be
printed and made available to all interested parties. All pensions as shall be allowed by rules and
regulations to those who are retired by reason of disability or of service and age shall conform to a
uniform scale. Benefits allowed from the Firemen's Pension Fund to families of members killed in
service or retired on pension or who die in service shall take into consideration the member's
surviving spouse and his/her minor children under eighteen years of age, if any survive. In case of
an application for disability pension benefits, proof of such physical disability or mental incapacity
shall consist of the sworn statement of three (3) practicing physicians, selected by the Association,
after examination had by them of the paid fireman, that such paid fireman is in a condition of health
which permanently disables him from performing the duties of his position. Such member shall
thereafter be subject to physical or mental examinations, at any reasonable time or times, upon order
of the Association. The fees of the three (3) physicians designated by the Association to examine the
paid fireman shall be paid by the Fund. (Ord. 2152 §3. Passed 6/17/1969; Ord. 3764. Passed
9/17/1996; Ord 2017-50. Passed 12/19/2017.)
151.11 MINIMUM SERVICE AND RETIREMENT.
Any rule or regulation adopted or enacted for the benefit of the members of the Firemen's
Pension Fund shall prescribe a minimum period of continuous service in the paid Fire Bureau of the
City not less than twenty years, after which a member of the paid Fire Bureau may be retired from
active duty, provided that any such member so retired shall be subject to service from time to time
as a fireman's reserve until the age of sixty-five. It shall be compulsory for all members of the paid
Fire Bureau of the City who reach age sixty-five to retire or be retired on pension. Every member of
this pension fund shall be entitled to credit toward his/her service or increment requirements one
day for each day of sick leave accumulated up to the maximum allowed by the employment
contract. (Ord. 2189 §1. Passed 4/7/1970; Ord. 3764. Passed 9/17/1996; Ord. 2013-26. Passed
10/1/2013.)
151.12 REINSTATEMENT.
If an employee of the Fire Department has ceased for any reason to be a member of the Fire
Department and has been repaid his/her contributions to the pension fund, before he/she shall be
reinstated as a fireman he/she shall repay the contributions refunded to him/her, and shall receive
credit for the prior years of service in the Fire Department. (Ord. 2151 §1. Passed 6/3/1969; Ord.
3764. Passed 9/17/1996.)
ARTICLE 151 7
151.13 PENSION BENEFITS INVIOLATE.
The pension benefit payments allowed to any fireman of the City under this article shall not
be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process, and shall be payable
only to the fireman entitled thereto or the beneficiary designated by him/her or by this article, and
shall not be subject to assignment or transfer. (Ord. 2000 §1. Passed 9/20/1966; Ord. 3764. Passed
9/17/1996.)
151.14 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
Administrative expenses associated with the Pension Fund may be paid from the Fund,
providing the following three conditions are satisfied:
(1) The administrative expense must be directly associated with the Pension Plan.
(2) The members of the Pension Board must be informed and satisfied that the expenses
are necessary, reasonable and have been incurred for the benefit of the Pension Plan.
(3) The expenses must be detailed and itemized. (Ord. 3139 §2. Passed 9/15/1987.)
151.15 PICK-UP PLAN
Effective after December 31, 1992, the City shall pick up the contributions of each affected
employee, as hereinafter defined, which are required to be made pursuant to the provisions of
Section 151.02 and such contributions shall be treated as employer contributions in determining
their tax treatment under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (or any successor
legislation). Such contributions shall be made by the City for the affected employees in lieu of
employee contributions.
(a) The wages of affected employees shall be reduced by the amount of employee
contributions to be made by the City pursuant to the provisions of this Section 151.15 and such
reduction shall be the source of funds used by the City to make such employee contributions.
(b) Employee contributions made by the City under this Section 151.15 shall be treated for
all purposes other than taxation in the same manner and to the same extent as employee
contributions made prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, including, without limitation, the
inclusion of such employee contributions as part of compensation for purposes of calculating
benefits.
(c) No provision in this Section 151.15 shall be construed so as to permit or extend an option
to affected employees to directly receive the contributions made by the City pursuant to this Section
151.15 instead of having them paid to the Firemen's Pension Fund.
ARTICLE 151 8
(d) For the purposes of this Section 151.15, the term "affected employees" shall mean those
officers and employees of the Bureau of Fire whose terms and conditions of employment are
governed by the collective bargaining agreement entered into between the City and International
Association of Firefighters Local 735. (Ord. 3521. Passed 12/15/1992.)
151.16 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN (DROP)
(a) Eligibility: A member may become a participant in the DROP after
attainment of age 57 and completion of 20 years of service.
(b) Election to Participate: Election to participate in the DROP is irrevocable.
The member shall make the election by using forms and procedures as
prescribed by the Bureau of Human Resources.
(c) DROP Pension Payments: Upon entry into the DROP, a member’s years of
service and average applicable salary/compensation shall be frozen and
his/her DROP pension payment shall be calculated as if he/she actually
retired on the date he/she entered the DROP. The monthly DROP pension
payment, plus any applicable COLA, shall be credited to the member’s
individual DROP account. No assets shall be segregated due to the
establishment of individual DROP accounts. There shall be no additional
costs to the City of Bethlehem under the DROP plan.
(d) Individual DROP Account: A member’s individual DROP account at any
time is equal to the sum of the monthly DROP pension payments credited to
the account, accumulated with interest at the rate of 3.0% per annum,
compounded monthly.
(e) Employee Contributions: Upon entry into the DROP, all Employee
Contributions shall cease, with no additional costs to the City. In the event
there are additional costs or expenses to the City of Bethlehem as a result of
the DROP plan, the DROP plan shall be null and void, at the sole option of
the City. If the DROP plan becomes null and void any existing employee
DROP agreement will be honored until the end of the agreement or until
separation of service.
(f) Maximum Participation: The maximum period of participation in the DROP
is thirty-six (36) months. Once the maximum participation has been
achieved, the member must terminate employment and separate from
service. Upon separation from service, the monthly payments shall be paid
directly to the member and not credited to the member’s individual DROP
account.
ARTICLE 151 9
(g) Distribution Options: Commensurate with DROP participation, a member
shall make an election, on forms designated by the Bureau of Human
Resources, of the payout option(s) he/she wishes at the termination of the
DROP period. This election may be changed at any time prior to termination.
The distribution options are as follows:
(1) A full and lump sum distribution;
(2) Rollover to another qualified retirement plan (as permitted by law) or
to an IRA;
(3) Purchase of an annuity; or
(4) Any other distribution provided by the Pension Board Trustees/Third
Party Administrator.
(h) Beneficiary Designation: Commensurate with DROP participation, a
member shall make an election, on forms designed by the Bureau of Human
Resources, of the beneficiary or beneficiaries he/she wishes to receive the
monies in his/her individual DROP account in the event of his/her death
before all monies have been distributed.
(i) Disability: A member who becomes permanently disabled during the DROP
period and retires from service shall revert to his/her normal retirement
pension and to directly receive those pension payments which were being
deposited into his/her individual DROP account.
(j) If the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania passes and implements legislation
governing DROP plans in this State, any plan in effect in the City of
Bethlehem will be brought into compliance with such legislation when
required.
(Ord. 2013-26. Passed 10/1/2013.)
ARTICLE 153
Police Pension Fund
153.01 Re-establishment.
153.02 Election of Members to Benefit, Direction of Council.
153.03 Police Pension Fund Association.
153.04 Application to Join Fund; Contributions; Beneficiary Named.
153.05 Source of Monies for Fund.
153.06 Assets to be Separate and Protected; Investments; Withdrawals.
153.07 Minimum Service for Retirement; Reserve Service; Retirement at 65.
153.08 Additional Provisions.
153.09 Disability and Compensation.
153.10 Reinstatement Upon Removal or Disability.
153.11 Provisions for Contributors, Noncontributors on Leave.
153.12 Scale of Pension Compensation.
153.13 Noneligibility for Fund Membership for Suspensions.
153.14 Rights Not to be Deprived.
153.15 Hearing for Grievances; Council to Rule.
153.16 Pension Benefits Inviolate.
153.17 Amendment and Repeal.
153.18 Members Bound by Present and Future Provisions.
153.19 Administrative Expenses.
153.20 Pick-up Plan.
CROSS REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund - See 3rd Class §4301 et seq. (53 P.S. §39301et seq.)
Employee compensation and fringe benefits - See ADM. Art. 123
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act - Act 205 (53 P.S. Sec. 895.101)
153.01 RE-ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby re-established the Bethlehem Police Pension Fund under authority of Third
Class City Code Sections 4301 et seq. and any other statutes now or hereafter pertaining or
applicable hereto, or any ordinance that may be lawfully enacted for the purposes hereof. The Fund
shall be maintained by: an equal and proportionate charge against each member of the police force,
in the amount of six percent of the pay of such member, except for those employees hired after
January 1, 2012. For those employees their deduction shall be four percent (4%) of the pay of such
member effective July 1, 2015. An additional amount of one percent of the pay of such member will
be charged to provide funds for payments to surviving spouses, or if no spouse survives or if he/she
survives and subsequently dies, then to the child or children under the age of eighteen years of
members of the police force or of members retired on pension; annual appropriations by the City to
such Fund of a sum equal to not less than one-half of one percent of all City taxes levied by the City
ARTICLE 153
2
other than taxes levied to pay interest or to extinguish the debt of the City, or any part thereof, and
such additional amount as is deemed necessary to provide sufficient funds for payments to surviving
spouses of members retired on pension or killed or who die in service; and also from other sources
of revenue. (Ord. 2158. §1. Passed 8/5/69; Ord. 3685. Passed 4/18/95; Ord. 3698. Passed 7/18/95;
Ord. 4091. Passed 10/16/2001; Ord. 2016-28. Passed 10/18/16.)
153.02 ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO BENEFIT; DIRECTION OF COUNCIL.
The Police Pension Fund shall be for the benefit of all members of the police force who
elect to become members thereof and shall, at all times, be under the direction of Council. (Ord.
1033 §2. Passed 12/28/48.)
153.03 POLICE PENSION FUND ASSOCIATION.
(a) Establishment and Composition. There is created a Bethlehem Police Pension Fund
Association, to be comprised of the Mayor, the City Controller, the Business Administrator, the City
Treasurer and three members of the Police Pension Fund to be selected by a majority vote of the
members of the Police Department who are contributors to the Police Pension Fund and whose
terms of office shall be two years. (Ord. 1793 §1. Passed 1/24/63; Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
(b) Officers and Members. The Mayor shall be President of the Association, and the
City Treasurer shall be Treasurer. The members of the Association shall not receive any
compensation for services performed as members of the Police Pension Fund Association. (Ord.
3391. Passed 2/19/91.)
(c) Minute Book and Records. The Association shall keep minutes, setting forth full and
accurate accounts of all of its transactions in a minute book which shall be known as the "Minutes
of the Bethlehem Police Pension Fund Association." The books and records of the Association shall
be open for inspection by any interested party and its accounts shall be audited by an independent
accounting firm. (Ord. 3391. Passed 2/19/91; Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
(d) Meetings. The Association shall meet at least once a month at 9:30 a.m., Eastern
Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time, according to which standard of time is prevailing, on the
first Friday of each and every month, and at such other times as the Association may designate, for
the transaction of such business as may properly come before it. All meetings shall be open to the
public. (Ord. 2989 §1. Passed 4/2/85.)
(e) Quorum. A majority of the Association shall constitute a quorum and shall have
power to transact such business as may property come before it. In case of a tie vote, the decision of
the President shall be final, notwithstanding any previous vote cast by him as a member of the
Police Pension Fund Association.
(f) Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy or vacancies in the Association, for any reason
whatsoever, for a period in excess of thirty days, Council shall fill such vacancy or vacancies by the
appointment of another officer or officers of the City, temporarily or permanently, as it deems best.
ARTICLE 153
3
(g) Fiduciary Liability Policy. The Association shall maintain a fiduciary liability
policy, in a sum not less than two-million dollars, for the faithful performance of duties of the Police
Pension Fund Association. The premium on the policy shall be paid out of the Police Pension Fund.
(Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
NOTE: Former Section (g) Expenditures deleted by Ord. 3140 §1. Passed 9/15/87.
Former Section (g) Treasurer’s Bond deleted by Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
(h) Disbursement of Funds. The Police Pension Fund Association is designated as the
official and authorized organization to hold, receive and distribute all sums of money in the Police
Pension Fund for the purpose of pensioning such members of the police force as shall receive
honorable discharge therefrom by reason of age or disability and the families of such as may be
injured or killed in the service. Any allowance made to those who are retired by reason of disability
or age shall be in conformity with a uniform scale. For the purpose of this article, unless and until
changed by statute or ordinance, a "policeman" means a full-time paid policeman or policewoman.
(Ord. 1033 §3. Passed 12/28/48.)
NOTE: Former Section (h) Report to Council deleted by Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
153.04 APPLICATION TO JOIN FUND; CONTRIBUTIONS; BENEFICIARY NAMED.
Any policeman may elect to join the Fund by notifying the City, in writing, and therein
authorizing the City to deduct six percent (6%) of the officer's pay except for those employees hired
after January 1, 2012. For those employees their deduction shall be four percent (4%) of the
Officer’s pay effective July 1, 2015. An additional amount of one percent (1%) of such officer's pay
will be deducted to provide funds for payment to surviving spouses, or if no spouse survives or if
he/she survives and subsequently dies, then to the child or children under the age of eighteen years
of such officer of the police force or of members retired on pension, as his contribution to the Fund,
and in such communication naming a beneficiary or beneficiaries to whom payment shall be made
in the event of the officer's death while a member of the Police Department or the Fund, and further
stipulating and agreeing that he shall be bound by the provisions of the law pertaining hereto and of
this article and by any future statutes and authorized ordinances pertaining hereto. (Ord. 2627 §1.
Passed 12/5/78; Ord. 3685. Passed 4/18/95; Ord. 3690. Passed 6/6/95; Ord. 4091. Passed
10/16/2001; Ord. 2016-28. Passed 10/18/16.)
In addition to the pension which is authorized to be paid from the Police Pension Fund by
this article and notwithstanding the limitations therein placed upon such pensions and upon
contributions, every contributor who becomes entitled to the pension shall also be entitled to the
payment of a service increment in accordance with and subject to the conditions hereinafter set
forth. (Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
(1) The service increment shall be the sum obtained by computing the number of whole
years after having serviced twenty years during which a contributor has been
ARTICLE 153
4
employed by the City and multiplying the number of years so computed by an
amount equal to one-fortieth of the retirement allowance which has become payable
to such contributor in accordance with the provisions of this article. In computing
the service increment, no employment after the contributor has reached the age of
sixty-five years shall be included, and no service increment shall be paid in excess of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. (Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
(2) Each contributor, from and after the effective date of this section (Ordinance 2152,
passed June 17, 1969), shall pay into the pension fund a monthly sum not to exceed
one dollar ($1.00), in addition to his/her pension contribution. Such service
increment contribution shall not be paid after a contributor had reached the age of
sixty-five years. (Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
153.05 SOURCE OF MONIES FOR FUND.
All contributions shall be deposited to the credit of the City of Bethlehem's Pension Fund, as
set forth in Article 156 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. The Fund shall be
credited to the Police Pension fund in accordance with the apportionment set forth in Article 156.
Into the fund shall likewise be deposited and credited any and all appropriations and contributions
that may be lawfully made by the City. The association is authorized to accept and likewise deposit
and credit any and all contributions, revenues or proceeds from any source, gifts, grants, devises,
bequests of money or property, and any sums paid to the City and inuring to the Fund from any
official or department of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under any present or future law
pertinent thereto. Any such sums deposited will be apportioned on the basis set forth in Article 156.
(Ord. 3140 §2. Passed 9/15/87.)
153.06 ASSETS TO BE SEPARATE AND PROTECTED; INVESTMENTS;
WITHDRAWALS.
The assets of the Police Pension Fund Association shall be deposited into the City of
Bethlehem Pension Fund as set forth in Article 156 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem. The apportionment of the Police Pension Fund shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Article 156.05. (Ord. 3140 §3. Passed 9/15/87.)
153.07 MINIMUM SERVICE FOR RETIREMENT; RESERVE SERVICE;
RETIREMENT AT 65.
The minimum period of continuous service after which members may be retired from active
duty and entitled to a pension hereunder is fixed at twenty years. Policemen so retired shall be
subject to service as a police reserve until unfitted therefor by age or disability, when they may be
finally discharged. While on duty as a police reserve, they shall be paid as wages, in addition to the
regular pension, such sum as Council may determine, which sum, however, with the monthly
pension fund or compensation received by him, shall not be less, in any event, than the monthly
compensation paid to police officers by the City for similar services. All policemen eligible for full
pension hereunder shall retire at the age of sixty-five years. Every member of this pension fund shall
ARTICLE 153
5
be entitled to credit toward his service or increment requirements one day for each day of sick leave
accumulated up to the maximum allowed by the employment contract. (Ord. 2190 §1. Passed
4/7/70; Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
153.08 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Should a policeman be discharged or voluntarily withdraw from service, or otherwise
cease to be a member of the Fund, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) hereof, he shall be
paid from the Fund the full amount of the deductions from his pay, without interest, or the amount
may, in the reasonable discretion of Council, be paid to his spouse, children or other dependents.
(b) Should a policeman, not eligible to pension but in good standing in the Fund, be
honorably discharged because of disability, he shall likewise be paid from the Fund the full amount
of the deductions from his pay, without interest, and shall, if he shall have been in the service at
least one full year, be paid, in addition to any other grants or privileges to which he may be entitled,
an amount equal to his last month's salary. (Ord. 1033 §8. Passed 12/28/48; Ord. 2013-27. Passed
10/1/13.)
(c) Should a policeman in good standing in the Fund die, either while in service or while
retired from active duty and receiving a pension hereunder, there shall be paid monthly to his
surviving spouse, or if no spouse survives, to the policeman's child or children under the age of
eighteen years, a sum equal to the pension to which the member would have been entitled had he
retired at the time of his death while in service or to the pension the retiree was receiving in the
event of death while receiving pension hereunder.
The payments provided in Subsection (b) hereof and this subsection are alternative and not
cumulative. (Ord. 2679. Passed 12/4/79; Ord. 3685. Passed 4/18/95.)
153.09 DISABILITY AND COMPENSATION.
Whenever any member of the police force of the City becomes physically or mentally
incapacitated, from injuries received or disease contracted in the actual performance of his duties
and by reason of the performance of his duties without fault or misconduct on his part, from
performing his duties in the Police Department, the Police Pension Fund Association may, in its
discretion, retire or honorably discharge such member upon submission to it of substantial proof of
such member's physical disability or mental incapacity. Pension shall be computed pursuant to
Section 153.12 based upon 20 years of service; provided however, if the police officer has served
twenty-one or more years at the time of the injury or at the time the disease is contracted, the
pension calculation shall be adjusted according to the sliding scale set forth in Section 153.12(a)
below.
Whenever any member of the police force of the City who shall have served at least ten (10)
but less than fifteen (15) years of continuous service, becomes physically or mentally incapacitated
without fault or misconduct on his part, from performing his duties in the Police Department, the
Police Pension Fund Association may, in its discretion, retire or honorably discharge such member
ARTICLE 153
6
upon submission to it of substantial proof of such member's physical disability or mental incapacity.
However, the Pension payable to such member shall be equal to thirty percent (30%) of his “annual
salary” (as such term is defined in Section 153.12(b) below).
Whenever any member of the police force of the City who shall have served at least fifteen
(15) years of continuous service, becomes physically or mentally incapacitated without fault or
misconduct on his part, from performing his duties in the Police Department, the Police Pension
Fund Association may, in its discretion, retire or honorably discharge such member upon
submission to it of substantial proof of such member's physical disability or mental incapacity.
Pension shall be computed pursuant to Section 153.12 based upon 20 years of service; provided
however, if the police officer has served twenty-one or more years at the time of the disability, the
pension calculation shall be adjusted according to the sliding scale set forth in Section 153.12(a)
below.
Proof of such physical disability or mental incapacity shall consist of the sworn statement of
three (3) practicing physicians, selected by the Association, after examination had by them of the
policeman, that such policeman is in a condition of health which permanently disables him from
performing the duties of his position. Such member shall thereafter be subject to physical or mental
examinations, at any reasonable time or times, upon order of the Association. The fees of the three
(3) physicians designated by the Association to examine the policeman shall be paid by the Fund.
Any policeman, so retired or discharged for such physical disability or mental incapacity by
the Association, shall become entitled to receive an allowance from the Fund and shall be admitted
to participate therein while so physically disabled and mentally incapacitated, upon the final
payment to him of any workmen's compensation benefits payable to him under any agreement of
any workmen's compensation insurance company, any order of the Workmen's Compensation
Board of Pennsylvania, or under any Workmen's Compensation Law now or hereafter enacted by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Ord. 2677. Passed 11/14/79; Ord.4273. Passed 8/17/04.)
153.10 REINSTATEMENT UPON REMOVAL OF DISABILITY.
Any policeman who has been placed on the pension list on account of physical disability or
mental incapacity may, upon application therefor, be reinstated by Council as an active member of
the Police Department, with the same rank and rating which he had at the time he was placed on
pension, upon satisfactory proof presented to Council that such physical disability or mental
incapacity has been removed and that the applicant is physically and mentally fit to perform his
duties in such position and rank. (Ord. 2627 §3. Passed 12/5/78.)
153.11 PROVISIONS FOR CONTRIBUTORS, NONCONTRIBUTORS ON LEAVE.
Upon application, in writing, stating a reason deemed good and sufficient to it, Council may
grant any policeman leave of absence, without pay, for a period not exceeding six months, unless
such period shall be extended by a four-fifths vote of the entire Council, during which time the
policeman shall be considered in relation to the Fund as being in active service, and he shall not lose
any rights to pension or benefits hereunder, provided that while on leave of absence he regularly
ARTICLE 153
7
makes a contribution to the Fund in the amount that would be deducted from his pay if he were on
active duty. The provision of this section may likewise apply where any policeman is prevented by
injury or illness from performing his regular duties, if he remains a member of the Police
Department and of the Fund. Such leave of absence shall not affect any law, ordinance or action of
Council providing for sick leave or vacations. (Ord. 1033 §11. Passed 12/28/48.)
153.12 SCALE OF PENSION COMPENSATION.
(a) For employees hired on or before December 31, 2011 pension compensation shall be
determined by the salary of the retired policeman at the time of the honorable
discharge, disability or retirement, and shall not, in any case, exceed the following
percentages of the annual salary (as defined in section 153.12(b)) of such policeman
computed at such monthly rate:
Years of Service Pension Percentage
20 60%
21 62%
22 64%
23 66%
24 68%
25 70%
(b) For the purposes of this section 153.12, “annual salary” shall be defined to include
the following:
(1) Base pay; plus
(2) Longevity; plus
(3) Shift Differential for the last twelve months; plus
(4) Average overtime pay for the last 5 years; plus
(5) Holiday Pay (Current Daily Rate X 12); plus
(6) Holidays worked for the last twelve months multiplied by one-half the
current daily rate; plus
(7) Average roster pay computed based upon the best five years of roster pay; plus
(8) Sick Bonus for the last twelve months; plus
(9) Education Bonus for the last twelve months.
ARTICLE 153
8
(c) For all employees hired on or after January 1, 2012 the City shall solely provide
the minimum required pension benefit as set forth in the Third Class City Code 53
P.S. §35101 et seq. For purposes of calculating pension benefits for employees
hired on or after January 1, 2012 salary shall be defined solely as base salary plus
longevity. Monthly salary shall be defined as annual base salary plus longevity
divided by (12).
(Ord. 2627 §4. Passed 12/5/78; Ord. 4273. Passed 8/17/04 NOTE: This Amendment shall be
retroactively applied to January 1, 2003; Ord. 2013-27. Passed 10/1/13.)
153.13 NONELIGIBILITY FOR FUND MEMBERSHIP FOR SUSPENSIONS.
No policeman who, during his term of service, has accepted any graft or bribes or who has
been suspended on two occasions for drunkenness or disorderly conduct while on duty or for other
serious infraction of the State laws, rules or ordinances of Council, shall be eligible to be a
participant in the Fund. However, this section shall not be construed to bar any member of the
Police Department from the receipt of his pension unless all charges preferred against him have
been properly substantiated as prescribed by law. All deductions from the payroll of any such
policemen and paid into the Pension Fund prior to his second suspension shall be returned in full to
him, without interest, at the time of his second suspension. (Ord. 1033 §13. Passed 12/28/48.)
153.14 RIGHTS NOT TO BE DEPRIVED.
Whenever any policeman shall become entitled to receive an allowance from the Fund and
shall have been admitted to participate therein by act of Council and the Police Pension Fund
Association, he shall not thereafter be deprived of his right to an equal and proportionate
participation therein, upon the basis upon which he first became entitled thereto. (Ord. 1033 §14.
Passed 12/28/48.)
153.15 HEARING FOR GRIEVANCES; COUNCIL TO RULE.
Any policeman aggrieved by any ruling or action of the Police Pension Fund Association
regarding the Fund and his relation thereto, shall have the right to a hearing before Council, to be
held within ten days of his written request therefor, which he may attend in person and be
represented by counsel, and may further require the attendance of any witnesses on his behalf by
subpoena to be issued by Council on his written request. Minutes and records shall be kept of
testimony and facts produced, and Council may thereupon make such order and ruling in the matter
as may seem just and lawful. (Ord 1033 §15. Passed 12/28/48.)
153.16 PENSION BENEFITS INVIOLATE.
The pension benefit payments allowed to any policeman of the City under this article shall
not be subject to attachment, execution, levy, garnishment, or other legal process, and shall be
payable only to the policeman entitled thereto or the beneficiary designated by him or by this article,
and shall not be subject to assignment or transfer. (Ord. 1033 §16. Passed 12/28/48.)
ARTICLE 153
9
153.17 AMENDMENT AND REPEAL.
The provisions of this article, insofar as they are the same as the statutory provisions, shall
be subject to change or repeal in order to comply with any future statutory provisions. The
provisions of this article may be amended or repealed if statutory authority be granted therefor or
statutory restrictions or mandates are eliminated and discretion vested in Council. (Ord. 1033 §17.
Passed 12/28/48.)
153.18 MEMBERS BOUND BY PRESENT AND FUTURE PROVISIONS.
The policeman applying for membership in the Fund agrees to be bound by the provisions
of this article and by future laws or ordinances pertinent to the subject matter of this article. (Ord.
1033 §18. 12/28/48.)
153.19 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
Administrative expenses associated with the Pension Fund may be paid from the Fund,
providing the following three conditions are satisfied:
(1) The administrative expense must be directly associated with the Pension Plan.
(2) The members of the Pension Board must be informed and satisfied that the expenses
are necessary, reasonable and have been incurred for the benefit of the Pension Plan.
(3) The expenses must be detailed and itemized. (Ord. 3140 §4. Passed 9/15/87.)
153.20 PICK-UP PLAN
Effective after February 3, 2000, the City shall pick up the contributions of each affected
employee, as hereinafter defined, which are required to be made pursuant to the provisions of
Section 153.04 and such contributions shall be treated as employer contributions in determining
their tax treatment under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (or any successor
legislation). Such contributions shall be made by the City for the affected employees in lieu of
employee contributions.
(a) The wages of affected employees shall be reduced by the amount of employee
contributions to be made by the City pursuant to the provisions of this Section 153.20 and such
reduction shall be the source of funds used by the City to make such employee contributions.
(b) Employee contributions made by the City under this Section 153.20 shall be treated for
all purposes other than taxation in the same manner and to the same extent as employee
contributions made prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, including, without limitation, the
inclusion of such employee contributions as part of compensation for purposes of calculating
benefits.
ARTICLE 153
10
(c) No provision in this Section 153.20 shall be construed so as to permit or extend an option
to affected employees to directly receive the contributions made by the City pursuant to this Section
153.20 instead of having them paid to the Police Pension Fund.
(d) For the purposes of this Section 153.20, the term "affected employees" shall mean those
officers and employees of the Department of Police whose terms and conditions of employment are
governed by the collective bargaining agreement entered into between the City and Fraternal Order
of Police - Star Lodge #20. (Ord. 3944. Passed 3/16/99.)
ARTICLE 155
Officers' and Employees' Retirement and Pension System
155.01 Definitions
155.02 Establishment
155.03 Retirement Board
155.04 Election Of Officers; Reimbursement
155.05 Duties Of Board
155.06 Record Of Proceedings; Payments From Fund
155.07 Interest In Investments; Borrowing From Fund
155.08 All Business Transaction In Board's Name
155.09 Information To Be Furnished By Department Head
155.10 Payroll Deductions; Payments Into Fund
155.11 Appropriation By Council For Fund
155.11 Appropriation By Council
155.12 Voluntary Retirement
155.13 Involuntary Termination Of Service
155.14 Permanent Disability
155.15 Optional Spouse's Benefit
155.16 Contributions Required For Twenty Years
155.17 Return Of Contributions Without Interest
155.18 Application Of Benefits
155.19 Computation Of Time Of Service
155.20 Pensions Not Subject To Execution, Attachment Or Assignment
155.21 Termination Date Of Admission Into System
155.22 Beginning Date Of Admission Into System
155.23 Credit For Prior Service (Library Employees)
155.24 Payment For Prior Years Of Service (Library Employees)
155.25 State Law Incorporated
155.26 Elimination Of Social Security Offset By Joint Coverage Members
155.27 Administrative Expenses
155.28 Elimination of Social Security Offset by Active Joint Coverage Members
CROSS REFERENCES
Employees' pension fund - See 3rd Class §4340 et seq. (53 P.S. 39340 et seq.)
Officers and employees - See ADM. Art. 117
Employee compensation and fringe benefits - See ADM. Art. 123
ARTICLE 155 2
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act - Act 205
(53 P.S. Sec. 895.101)
155.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, unless a different meaning is plainly
required by the context, shall have the following meanings:
"Person" means an officer or employee of the City.
"Employee" means a person in the service of the City, who is eligible under
the provisions of this article.
"Officer" means a person elected or appointed to City service.
"Board" means Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board.
"Fund" means Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund.
"Compensation" means retirement allowance or compensation.
"Single coverage member" means an employee who is not covered by Social
Security by reason of City employment.
"Joint coverage member" means an employee who is covered by Social
Security by reason of City employment.
(Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
The retirement system shall be established on January 1, 1946, for all officers
and employees of the city who are not protected by a pension authorized by
ordinances in force on December 28, 1945. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.03 RETIREMENT BOARD.
Council creates an Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board, which shall
consist of the following:
(a) The Mayor.
(b) The City Controller.
(c) The Business Administrator.
(d) The City Treasurer.
(e) Two Employees elected by the Employees.
ARTICLE 155 3
(f) A retired Employee to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by City Council. (Ord. 3639. Passed 10/4/94.)
A vacancy occurring during the term of an employee named in subsection (e)
hereof shall be filled for the unexpired term by an employee chosen by the employees
contributing to the Retirement Fund. Members of the Officers' and Employees'
Retirement Board shall serve until their successors are elected in a manner approved
by the Retirement Board. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.04 ELECTION OF OFFICERS; REIMBURSEMENT.
(a) The Mayor shall be Chairman of the Retirement Board.
(Ord. 3392. Passed 2/19/91.)
(b) The members of the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board shall serve
without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for any necessary expenditures, and no
contributor shall suffer loss of salary or wages through serving on the Officers' and
Employees' Retirement Board. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.05 DUTIES OF BOARD.
It shall be the duty of the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board to receive
and retain all monies received on behalf of the Officers' and Employees' Retirement
Fund, and to invest and merge all Funds for investment purposes pursuant to the
provisions of Article 156 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. (Ord.
3141 §1. Passed 9/15/87.)
155.06 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS; PAYMENTS FROM FUND.
The Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board shall keep a record of all its
proceedings, which shall be open to inspection by the public.
All payments from funds created by this article shall be made by check only, as
authorized by the Retirement Board. No check shall be drawn except by order of the
Retirement Board, duly entered in the record of its proceedings. (Ord. 2213 §1.
Passed 12/1/70.)
ARTICLE 155 4
155.07 INTEREST IN INVESTMENTS; BORROWING FROM FUND.
No person connected with the Retirement Board shall have any interest, direct
or indirect, in the gains or profits of any investment made by the Retirement Board,
nor, as such, directly or indirectly, receive any pay or emoluments for his services.
No person connected with the Retirement Board, directly or indirectly, for himself, or
as an agent or partner of others, shall borrow any of its funds or deposits, or in any
manner use the same, except to make such current and necessary payments as are
authorized by the Retirement Board, nor shall any person connected with such Board
become surety or become, in any manner, an obligor for monies loaned by or
borrowed from the Retirement Board. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.08 ALL BUSINESS TRANSACTED IN BOARD'S NAME.
All of the business of the Officers' and Employees' System shall be transacted
in the name of the Bethlehem Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board. (Ord.
2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.09 INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY DEPARTMENT
HEADS.
Under the direction of the Retirement Board, the Business Administrator shall
furnish such information, and shall keep such records, as the Board may require in the
discharge of its duties. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.10 PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS; PAYMENTS INTO FUND.
There shall be deducted on every payroll of a single coverage member three
percent of the total amount earned, and on every payroll of a joint coverage member
three and one-half percent on that amount subject to Social Security deductions and
five percent on the amount over and above the amount subject to Social Security
deductions, which sum so deducted shall be applied to the purposes provided for by
this article.
The City Treasurer shall pay each of the amounts so deducted into the treasury
ARTICLE 155 5
of the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund, and he shall transmit to the
Secretary of the Retirement Board, monthly, a detailed statement of all amounts so
paid in. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.11 APPROPRIATION BY COUNCIL FOR FUND.
Council shall annually set aside, apportion and appropriate out of all taxes and
income of the City, into the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund, a sum
sufficient to maintain the compensation due under this article. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed
12/1/70.)
155.12 VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT.
(a) Every person now or hereafter elected or appointed to an office of, or
employed by, the City, as hereinafter provided, of the age of sixty years and upwards,
who shall have so served as an officer or employee for a period of twenty years or
more, shall upon application to the Board, be retired from service, and shall during the
remainder of his life receive the compensation fixed by this article, subject to such
qualifications as are hereinafter contained. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
(b) Any person who has served twelve years and voluntarily retires shall, by
continuing his contributions for a total of at least twenty years and until the age of
fifty-five years, whichever occurs last, be entitled to retirement compensation at age
sixty.
(c) During the lifetime of any such person, he shall be entitled to receive as
a compensation annually from the Retirement Fund set aside for the purpose, for each
year of service, two and one-half percent (2-1/2%) up to a maximum of sixty-five
percent (65%) of the amount which would constitute the average annual salary or
wages for the current year or any five years of his service for the City, whichever is
the higher. The compensation shall be paid in monthly installments. In the case of
joint coverage members this benefit shall be reduced by an amount equal to forty
percent (40%) of Social Security benefits earned while in the employ of the City,
unless the off-set has been removed as provided by ordinance. (Ord. 2349 §1,2.
Passed 2/6/73; Ord. 3990. Passed 2/15/00; Ord. 4221. Passed 12/2/03.)
155.13 INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
ARTICLE 155 6
Where an officer or employee of the City shall have served for twelve years or
more and his tenure of office or employment shall be terminated without his
voluntary action before the expiration of twenty years of service, he shall, in such
event, during the remainder of his life after reaching age sixty, be entitled to receive
such portion of the full compensation as the period of his service up to the date of its
termination bears to the full twenty-year period of service. Where an officer or
employee who has served for twenty years or more and his tenure of office or
employment shall be terminated without his voluntary action, then he shall be entitled
to full compensation for the remainder of his life, after reaching age sixty. (Ord. 2213
§1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.14 PERMANENT DISABILITY.
Should an officer or employee become so permanently disabled as to render
him unable to perform the duties of his position or office after fifteen years of service,
he shall be entitled to full compensation during such disability. Proof of such
disability shall consist of the sworn statement of three practicing physicians that the
employee is in a condition of health which would permanently disable him from
performing the duties of his position or office. Such person shall thereafter be subject
to physical examination at any reasonable time upon order of the Board. Upon his
refusal to submit to such examination, his compensation shall cease. (Ord. 2213 §1.
Passed 12/1/70.)
155.15 OPTIONAL SPOUSE'S BENEFIT.
Any officer or employee entitled to compensation hereunder shall have the
option, to be exercised, if at all, at the time of his/her eligibility for benefits, to elect to
have his/her benefit continued after his/her death, payable to his/her spouse for the
spouse's life. The benefit may be continued at fifty (50%) percent, sixty-seven (67%)
percent, seventy-five (75%) percent, or one hundred (100%) percent of the benefit
payable to the officer or employee. If such election is made, the benefit payable will
be reduced to the actuarial equivalent, as determined by the actuary providing services
to the City of Bethlehem Pension Funds, of the benefit otherwise payable to the
officer or employee, based upon his/her age and the age of his/her spouse. (Ord.
3639. Passed 10/4/94.)
ARTICLE 155 7
155.16 CONTRIBUTIONS REQUIRED FOR TWENTY YEARS.
Before any compensation may be granted to an officer or employee of the City
who has not been a contributor to the Retirement Fund, as herein provided, for a
minimum period of twenty years, such person shall be required to pay into the
Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board, for the benefit of the Fund, monthly, an
amount equal to the required percentage of his compensation at the time of his
retirement until such time as his contributions shall have been extended to a period of
twenty years. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.17 RETURN OF CONTRIBUTIONS WITHOUT INTEREST.
If for any cause any officer or employee contributing to the Retirement Fund
shall cease to be in the service of the City before he becomes entitled to any
compensation, the total amount of the contributions paid into the Fund by him shall
be refunded, in full, without interest, provided however, that if any such person shall
have returned to him the amount contributed, as aforesaid, and shall afterwards
reenter the service of the City, he shall not be entitled to reinstatement in the Fund. In
the event of the death of any officer or employee of the City after he becomes entitled
to any compensation and has not elected to retire, the total amount of contributions
paid into the Fund by him shall be paid over to his estate without interest. In the
event of the death of any officer or employee of the City after he has elected to retire
and has been granted compensation, the excess of the total amount of contributions
paid into the Fund by him over the total amount of compensation paid to him during
retirement, if any, shall be paid over to his estate without interest. (Ord. 2908. Passed
9/15/83.)
155.18 APPLICATION OF BENEFITS.
The benefits conferred by this article shall apply to all persons employed in any
capacity by, or holding positions in, the City in accordance with its provisions, except
as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.19 COMPUTATION OF TIME OF SERVICE.
The time of service specified in this article shall be computed from the time of
the first or original service to the City and need not be continuous. (Ord. 2213 §1.
ARTICLE 155 8
Passed 12/1/70.)
155.20 PENSIONS NOT SUBJECT TO EXECUTION, ATTACHMENT
OR ASSIGNMENT.
The compensation herein mentioned shall not be subject to attachment or
execution, and shall be payable only to the beneficiary designated by this article, and
shall not be subject to assignment or transfer. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.21 TERMINATION DATE OF ADMISSION INTO SYSTEM.
Effective August 1, 1978, membership in the Officers' and Employees'
Retirement and Pension System shall be closed, and all officers and employees not
admitted to be members on this date shall be ineligible for membership. (Ord. 2621
§1. Passed 8/15/78.)
155.22 BEGINNING DATE OF ADMISSION INTO SYSTEM.
The City, having placed all its employees, beginning January 1, 1964, under
the Federal Social Security Act, including present employees of the Bethlehem Public
Library System, as far as they are eligible, hereby elects to join the Municipal
Employees' Retirement System as established by the Act of June 4, 1943 (P.L. 886),
as last amended by the Act of September 23, 1959 (No. 390), and does hereby agree
to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of the Act, and to assume all
obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities by the Act.
However, membership for elected officials shall be optional at the discretion of such
officials, and membership for employees of the City, including employees of the
Bethlehem Public Library System, paid on a per diem basis, shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.23 CREDIT FOR PRIOR SERVICE (LIBRARY EMPLOYEES).
Credit for prior service toward the municipal annuity of each original member
shall be for ten years of service prior to January 1, 1964, rendered to the Bethlehem
Public Library System. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.24 PAYMENT FOR PRIOR YEARS OF SERVICE (LIBRARY
ARTICLE 155 9
EMPLOYEES).
Payment for prior years of service noted in Section 155.23 shall be made by the
City from funds contributed by the Trustees of the Bethlehem Public Library for that
purpose in a lump sum payment, in accordance with Section 14 of the Act of June 4,
1943 (P.L. 886), as amended. (Ord. 2213 §1. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.25 STATE LAW INCORPORATED.
The City does hereby incorporate the Municipal Employees' Retirement Law
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act of June 4, 1943, P.L. 886 as amended, as
part of this article insofar as the Act applies to a member municipality. (Ord. 2213
§2. Passed 12/1/70.)
155.26 ELIMINATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY OFFSET BY JOINT
COVERAGE MEMBERS.
In accordance with the authority granted by various acts of the legislature of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (as codified in 53 P.S. §39374) and on the
recommendation of the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board of the City,
permission is hereby given to any joint coverage member of the Officers' and
Employees' Retirement System to elect to receive pension benefits without the
reduction by an amount equal to forty percent of social security benefits provided
that:
(a) No later than December 31, 1972 in the case of retired members of the
Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund, the member shall make a lump sum
payment to the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund equal to the difference
between the amount of the accumulated fund to his credit in such fund as of the last
day for which salary or wages was paid, and the amount which would have been to
his credit in such fund if contributions had been made by him on the portion of his
salary or wages on which social security allowances are payable at the same rate as
made on that portion of his salary or wages in excess thereof from the time that such
salary or wages became subject to social security coverage. Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence those former employees of the City whose employment with the
City was terminated prior to December 1972 and who received no notice of Bill 45,
1972 which established the procedure for employees to eliminate the Social Security
ARTICLE 155 10
Offset, which shall be permitted up to June 30, 1973 to take advantage of the
provisions of Bill 45, 1972. (Ord. 2370 §1. Passed 4/3/73.)
(b) Where a joint-coverage member of the Fund is still active in the employ
of the City, and elects to receive pension benefits without the reduction by an amount
equal to forty percent of social security benefits, such member shall notify the
Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund by December 31, 1972 of such election
and shall make a payment to the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund,
calculated on the same basis as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, either by lump sum
payment without additional charges or by biweekly payments to the Fund during the
period from January 1, 1973 to December 31, 1973 with a charge of three and onehalf
percent of the amount due being added to the payment required.
(c) Such election shall be made in writing, in the form prescribed by the
Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board, and shall be accompanied by the
payment herein required or an authorization for payroll deduction in the case of active
members still in the employ of the City who do not choose to make lump sum
payments.
(d) The member who makes this election prior to retirement shall, in
addition to any payments required, pay thereafter to the Officers' and Employees'
Retirement Board contributions on his entire salary or wages thereafter received at the
rate of five percent. (Ord. 2329 §1-3. Passed 11/28/72.)
155.27 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
Administrative expenses associated with the Pension Fund may be paid from
the Fund, providing the following three conditions are satisfied:
(1) The administrative expense must be directly associated with the Pension
Plan.
(2) The members of the Pension Board must be informed and satisfied that
the expenses are necessary, reasonable and have been incurred for the benefit of the
Pension Plan.
(3) The expenses must be detailed and itemized. (Ord. 3141 §2. Passed
ARTICLE 155 11
9/15/87.)
155.28 ELIMINATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY OFFSET BY
ACTIVE JOINT COVERAGE MEMBERS.
In accordance with the authority granted by various acts of the legislature of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (as codified in 53 P.S. §39374) and on the
recommendation of the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board of the City,
permission is hereby given to any active joint coverage member of the Officers' and
Employees' Retirement System to elect to receive pension benefits without the
reduction by an amount equal to forty percent of social security benefits provided
that:
(a) Where a joint-coverage member of the Fund is still active in the employ of
the City, and elects to receive pension benefits without the reduction by an amount
equal to forty percent of social security benefits, such member shall notify the
Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund by December 31, 2001 and shall make a
lump sum payment to the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Fund equal to the
difference between the amount of the accumulated fund to his credit in such fund as
of the last day for which salary or wages was paid, and the amount which would have
been to his credit in such fund if contributions had been made by him on the portion
of his salary or wages on which social security allowances are payable at the same
rate as made on that portion of his salary or wages in excess thereof from the time that
such salary or wages became subject to social security coverage.
(b) Any active joint-coverage member of the Fund electing by December 31,
2001 to receive pension benefits without the reduction by an amount equal to forty
percent of social security benefits may elect to pay the amount calculated on the basis
set forth in subsection (a) by making biweekly payments to the Fund during the
period from January 1, 2002 to December 31, 2002 with a charge of three and onehalf
percent of the amount due being added to the payment required.
(c) Such election shall be made in writing, in the form prescribed by the
Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board, and shall be accompanied by the
payment herein required or an authorization for payroll deduction in the case of active
members still in the employ of the City who do not choose to make lump sum
payments.
ARTICLE 155 12
(d) Any active member who makes this election shall, in addition to any
payments required, pay thereafter to the Officers' and Employees' Retirement Board
contributions on his entire salary or wages thereafter received at the rate of five
percent.
(Ord. 4102. Passed 12/4/01)
ARTICLE 156
CITY OF BETHLEHEM PENSION FUND
156.01 Establishment.
156.02 Purpose of Fund.
156.03 Board of Managers.
156.04 Duties of Board of Managers.
156.05 Aggregation of Funds; Accounting.
156.06 Effective Date of Aggregation of Funds; Effective Date of Initial Year Following
Aggregation.
156.07 Appointment of Pension Fund Trustees.
156.08 Administrative Expenses.
156.09 Termination.
CROSS REFERENCES
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act - Act 205(53 P.S. Sec. 895.101)
Firemen's Pension Fund - See ADM. Art. 151
Police Pension Fund - See ADM. Art. 153
Officers' and Employees' Pension Fund - See ADM. Art. 155
156.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby re-established and reconstituted the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund under
authority of Act 205 of 1984, Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, and
any other statutes now or hereafter pertaining or applicable hereto, and any Ordinance that may be
lawfully enacted for the purposes hereof. (Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019.)
156.02 PURPOSE OF FUND.
The City of Bethlehem Pension Fund is established for the purpose of managing designated
Municipal Pension Funds of the City of Bethlehem in order to qualify for aid from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania under Act 205 of 1984, Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act. (Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019.)
156.03 BOARD OF MANAGERS.
(a) Establishment and Composition. There is created a City of Bethlehem Pension Fund
Board of Managers, to be comprised of the Mayor; the Business Administrator; the City Treasurer;
the City Controller; and all members of the Firemen's Pension Fund Board of Managers, and the
Police Pension Fund Association, as they may exist at any time. (Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019)
(b) Officers. The Mayor shall be Chairman of the Board of Managers, the Business
Administrator shall be Vice-Chairman, and the City Treasurer shall be Treasurer of the City of
Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of Managers. The officers and members of the Board of Managers
ARTICLE 156 2
shall not receive any compensation for their services to the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund. (Ord.
3393. Passed 2/19/91.)
(c) Minute Book and Records. The City of Bethlehem Pension Fund shall keep minutes,
setting forth full and accurate accounts of all its transactions in a Minute Book provided for that
purpose, which shall be known as the "Minutes of the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of
Managers." The books and records of the Board of Managers shall be open for inspection by any
interested party and its accounts shall be audited by the City Controller.
(d) Meetings. The Board of Managers shall meet once every calendar quarter at 9:30 A.M.
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time, according to which Standard Time is prevailing,
on the first Friday of the following months: February, May, August, and November, and at such
other times as the Board of Managers may designate, for the transaction of such business as may
properly come before it. All meetings shall be open to the public.
(e) Quorum. A majority of the Board of Managers shall constitute a quorum and shall have
the power to transact such business as may properly come before it. In the case of a tie vote, the
decision of the Chairman shall be final, notwithstanding any previous vote cast by him as a
member of the Board of Managers.
156.04 DUTIES OF BOARD OF MANAGERS.
It shall be the duty of the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of Managers to aggregate
the Funds of the Bethlehem Firemen's Pension Fund and the Bethlehem Police Pension Fund
Association and to manage those Funds in a consolidated manner, in order to qualify for aid from
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, under the terms of Act 205 of 1984, Municipal Pension Plan
Funding Standard and Recovery Act. (Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019.)
156.05 AGGREGATION OF FUNDS; ACCOUNTING.
The City of Bethlehem's Pension Fund Board of Managers may aggregate the assets to the
credit of the Bethlehem Firemen's Pension Fund and the Bethlehem Police Pension Fund
Association into a single Pension Trust Fund, to be known as the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund.
Following this aggregation, the City of Bethlehem's Pension Fund shall be the funding mechanism
for both Pension Plans.
Both of the individual Pension Plans shall have an undivided participation in the assets of
the City of Bethlehem's Pension Fund. For accounting purposes, the value of the participation by
each Plan shall be calculated annually. The value for the first fiscal year following aggregation
shall be that portion of the total value of the Pension Trust Fund which bears the same relationship
that the value of the assets of the Pension Plan, as of the date of the aggregation plus the
contributions received by the Pension Trust Fund with respect to that Pension Plan since the date
of aggregation and reduced by the amount of retirement annuities and benefits paid from the
Pension Trust Fund for annuitants and benefit recipients of that Pension Plan since the date of
aggregation, bears to the total value of all assets transferred to the Pension Trust Fund as of the
date of aggregation plus the total contributions received by the Pension Trust Fund since the date
of aggregation and reduced by the total amount of retirement annuities and benefits paid for all
annuitants and benefits recipients since the date of aggregation.
ARTICLE 156 3
The value of the participation for each year subsequent to the initial year following
aggregation shall be that portion of the total value of the Pension Trust Fund which bears the same
relationship that the value of the participation of the Pension Plan, as of the close of the preceding
year plus the contributions received by the Pension Trust Fund with respect to that Pension Plan
during the year and reduced by the amount of retirement annuities and benefits paid from the
Pension Trust Fund for annuitants and benefit recipients of that Pension Plan during the year, bears
to the total value of all participation in the Pension Trust Fund as of the close of the preceding year
plus the total contributions received by the Pension Trust Fund during the year and reduced by the
total amount of retirement annuities and benefits paid for all annuitants and benefit recipients
during the year.
(Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019.)
156.06 EFFECTIVE DATE OF AGGREGATION OF FUNDS;
EFFECTIVE DATE OF INITIAL YEAR FOLLOWING AGGREGATION.
The Funds of the Bethlehem Firemen's Pension Fund and the Bethlehem Police Pension
Fund Association shall be aggregated under the control of the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund
Board of Managers. The City of Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of Managers shall assume control
of the aggregated fund as of October 1, 1987, and legal title to assets in the aggregated Fund shall
be in the City of Bethlehem as Trustee, or its nominees as Trustee.
The "initial year following aggregation" of the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund shall end
on December 31, 1987.
(Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019.)
156.07 APPOINTMENT OF PENSION FUND TRUSTEES.
The City of Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of Managers may appoint a Trustee or
Trustees to invest and manage the aggregated funds under the control of the City of Bethlehem
Pension Fund Board of Managers, in such a manner as the Board of Managers shall direct. The
Pension Fund Trustee shall report to the Board of Managers at each quarterly meeting, and provide
detailed and accurate records of the investment and management of the Funds under the control of
the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of Managers.
156.08 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
Administrative expenses associated with the Pension Fund may be paid from the Fund,
providing the following three conditions are satisfied:
(1) The administrative expense must be directly associated with the Pension Plan.
(2) The members of the Pension Board must be informed and satisfied that the expenses are
necessary, reasonable and have been incurred for the benefit of the Pension Plan.
(3) The expenses must be detailed and itemized.
ARTICLE 156 4
156.09 TERMINATION.
When all the individual pension funds under the aggregate control of the City of Bethlehem
Pension Fund Board of Managers shall become actuarially sound, all Funds under the control of
the City of Bethlehem Pension Fund Board of Managers and its Trustees shall be transferred back
to the individual control of the Bethlehem Firemen's Pension Fund and the Bethlehem Police
Pension Fund Association in accordance with the annual accounting procedures set forth in
Section 156.05. (Ord. 3138. Passed 9/15/87; Ord. 2019-36. Passed11/19/2019.)
ARTICLE 157
Civil Service Board
157.01 Police Civil Service Board.
157.02 Engineering, Electrical and Building Civil Service Board.
157.03 Fire and Health Civil Service Board.
CROSS REFERENCES
Examination of appointees - See 3rd Class §4401 (53 P.S. § 39401)
Appointment of Examining Boards - See 3rd Class §4402 (53 P.S. §39402)
Examination regulations - See 3rd Class §4404 (53 P.S. §39404)
Selection of appointee from lists - See 3rd Class §4406 (53 P.S. §39406)
Suspension and discharge - See 3rd Class §4408 (53 P.S. §39408)
Review of eligibility lists - See 3rd Class §4410 (53 P.S. §39410)
Fire Civil Service - See 53 P.S. §39861
Officers and employees - See ADM. Art. 117
Employment provisions - See ADM. Art. 123
157.01 CIVIL SERVICE BOARD
(a) Pursuant to Sections 417 through 430 of Act 22 of 2014, the
Police, Fire and Health, Engineering, Electrical, and Building Civil Service
Boards are abolished. Any of these civil service boards which had a
suspension, discharge, or disciplinary matter before it as of May 19, 2014,
shall continue until the conclusion of the proceedings, at which point the
respective Board will terminate.
All nonuniformed employees in city positions that were subject to civil
service regulation immediately prior to May 19, 2014, shall continue to be
subject to civil service regulation otherwise provided for in this Article that
are applicable to uniformed employees.
All civil service proceedings initiated after May 19, 2014, shall be before the
Civil Service Board created in Subsection (1) below.
(1) Establishment; Membership; Term. Pursuant to the
provisions of the Act of March 19, 2014 (P.L. 52, No. 22), a
ARTICLE 157 2
Civil Service Board is created that shall provide for and oversee
the examination of applicants for appointment and promotion to
any position in the Police and Fire Departments except for the
positions of police chief and fire chief.
Terms of members of the board shall be staggered. The Mayor,
with advice and consent of Council, shall initially appoint to the
board one person to serve for two years, one person to serve for
three years, and one person to serve for four years. Upon the
expiration of the term of any member a successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of city
council, to serve upon the board for a term of four years. If any
vacancies occur, they shall be filled by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of Council, for the unexpired term.
Each of the members, before entering upon the duties of his
office, shall take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed
by the Constitution of Pennsylvania and the Act of Assembly
above mentioned, 53 Pa. C.S. §1141, and file the same, duly
certified by the officer administering it, with the City
Controller. No salary or other compensation shall be paid to any
member of the Board. Any person who is a registered elector
of the City of Bethlehem may be appointed to the board. No
city officer, official or employe shall be eligible for
appointment to the civil service board.
Two members of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary
for the transaction of business of that board.
The board shall organize immediately after new appointments
to the board are made. After organizing, the board shall elect
one of its members as a chairperson and one as a secretary.
(2) Alternate Board Members
(i) The Mayor, with the advice and consent of
Council, may appoint no more than three qualified
electors of the city to serve as alternate members of the
civil service board. The term of office of the alternate
members shall be four years.
ARTICLE 157 3
(ii) If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a
member, a quorum is not reached, the chairperson shall
designate as many alternate members of the board to sit
on the board as may be needed to provide a quorum.
(iii) When seated pursuant to this section, an alternate
shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the board to the extent as provided by law
for board members, including specifically the right to
cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings,
and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this
act and as otherwise provided by law. Any alternate
member of the board shall continue to serve on the board
in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which
the alternate was initially designated until the board has
made a final determination of the matter or case.
(iv) Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section
shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation
according to declining seniority among all alternates.
(v) Alternates shall hold no other office in the city.
(vi) Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or
discussion of the board but shall not be entitled to vote as
a member of the board unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to this section.
(b) Appointments and Promotions. All appointments of employees
to, and promotions in, the Bureaus of Police and Fire, shall be made
according to qualifications and fitness, to be ascertained by examinations,
which, so far as practicable, shall be competitive. No person or persons may
be appointed to any uniformed position in the police or fire departments,
excluding chiefs, without having first passed all the examinations hereinafter
provided for and without having been appointed in the manner and
according to the terms and provisions and conditions of this Article.
(1) Appointment. Candidates shall be examined, ranked and
appointed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Board, including those required by the General Assembly in
ARTICLE 157 4
Sections 417 through 430 of Act 22 of 2014 and its
amendments.
(2) Promotions. The mayor shall notify the civil service
board of a civil service vacancy in the city which is to be filled
by promotion and shall request the certification of an eligibility
list as provided in this article. The board shall certify for each
vacancy the names of three persons on the eligibility list who
have received the highest average in the last preceding
promotional examination held within the period of two years
preceding the date of the request for the eligibility list. If three
names are not available, the board shall certify the names
remaining on the list. The mayor shall make an appointment
from the names certified, based solely on the merits and fitness
of the candidates, unless the mayor makes objections to the
board regarding one or more of the persons on the eligibility
list. The mayor shall have power to determine in each instance
whether an increase in salary shall constitute a promotion. The
civil service and promotion provisions shall not apply to the
appointment of fire and police chiefs.
(3) Veterans’ Preference. In accordance with Sections 417
through 430 of Act 22 of 2014 and 51 Pa.C.S. Ch. 71, veterans
will receive additional points on examinations and preference
on eligibility lists, as more fully set forth in the Board’s rules
and regulations.
(4) Tenure. All appointments made pursuant to this section
shall be for and during good behavior, and no employe hired
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be removed for
any political reasons whatever.
(5) Temporary Appointments. In case of riot or emergency,
temporary appointments to positions in the civil service may be
made without complying with the provisions of this section.
(c) Rules and Regulations. The board shall have the power and its
duty shall be to prepare and adopt rules and regulations, subject to approval
by Council, which, in the board's discretion, are best adapted to securing and
maintaining the best service for the public for the selection, appointment and
ARTICLE 157 5
promotion of persons who are qualified to perform the work which is the
subject of the civil service examination as provided in this article, and who
are to be employed, appointed or promoted by the city. The rules and
regulations adopted by the board shall provide for ascertaining and
determining, so far as possible, the knowledge, skills, aptitude, mental and
physical abilities, experience, education and character of all applicants as
these criteria would reasonably apply to the respective positions; and the
rules and regulations shall provide for examinations upon any and all
subjects deemed proper or necessary by the board for the purpose of
determining the qualifications of applicants for the respective positions
sought and for which application is made.
(1) Matters subject to rules and regulations. The civil
service board shall, in accordance with this act, adopt rules and
regulations concerning the following matters that may include:
(i) minutes of proceedings;
(ii) rules of procedure;
(iii) records of examinations;
(iv) annual report to council;
(v) notice of the rules and regulations and any
amendments or repeals to the rules and
regulations;
(vi) application forms;
(vii) further provisions concerning the duties of the
chairperson and secretary;
(viii) appointment of examiners; and
(ix) other administrative matters.
(d) Reports and Recommendations. The Civil Service Board shall
make an annual report to the Mayor showing its own actions and rules and
regulations, and all exceptions thereto, in force and the practical effect
thereof, and any suggestions it may approve for the more effectual
accomplishments of the purposes of the Act of Assembly relating to
appointments to the positions referred to herein.
(e) Secretary. The civil service board shall appoint a secretary and
prescribe the secretary's duties and shall have the power to change these
duties. The secretary shall be subject to removal at any time by the board.
Council shall establish the compensation to be paid to the secretary, and all
ARTICLE 157 6
necessary stationery and supplies for the use of the board shall be supplied
by the city.
(f) Eligibility Lists. The Civil Service Board shall make and keep,
in numerical order, a list containing the names of all applicants for civil
service positions in the city who pass the required examinations and
selection criteria. The list shall be compiled in conformance with the rules
and regulations of the board, including those required by the General
Assembly in Sections 417 through 430 of Act 22 of 2014 and its
amendments.
(1) Review of Eligibility Lists. The lists of eligible names
kept by the civil service board shall be annually examined by
the board for the purpose of deleting therefrom persons who are
permanently unavailable for or disqualified for the position or
positions involved, either by death, permanent removal from
the area, written desire to be removed therefrom, or by other
permanent cause in conformity with the board's rules and
regulations.
(g) Suspension, Discharge and Discipline; Reduction of
Employees; Appeals. All employees subject to civil service shall be subject
to suspension, discharge and discipline by the director of the department in
which the employee works for misconduct or violation of any law of this
Commonwealth, ordinance of the city or regulation of the department. If it
should become necessary to reduce the number of employees in said
department for purposes of economy, seniority rights shall prevail, and any
and all removals for such cause or causes shall be from the members last
appointed, and the member or members serving the shortest time shall be
removed first; but members with longer times of service may be discharged
for cause. Any employee aggrieved by the suspension, discharge or
discipline imposed by a department director more serious than a suspension
of three days without pay may request a hearing before the city council, or
by the civil service board if designated by ordinance. At the hearing, the
employee may be represented by counsel.
(1) Any civil service employee aggrieved by the decision of
the council or the civil service board shall have the right to
appeal in accordance with 2 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7 Subch. B (relating to
judicial review of local agency action). This review shall be
ARTICLE 157 7
exclusive. Where no such appeal is taken within the time
prescribed by law, the decision by the city council or the civil
service board shall become final in accordance with the law.
The issue before the court shall be whether the action of the
council or the civil service board shall be affirmed or be
modified in any respect or whether the charges should be
dismissed or whether the suspension or demotion made by the
director shall be affirmed or rescinded. Where any employee
has been suspended and the charges are dismissed or the
suspension rescinded on appeal, the employee shall receive full
compensation for the entire period of suspension.
(2) In any case in which a police officer or firefighter who is
a member of a bargaining unit is subject to suspension,
discharge or discipline, the police officer or firefighter shall
have the option of challenging the suspension, discharge or
discipline imposed by using the procedures provided in
subsections (g) and (g)(1) or by a proceeding in grievance
arbitration. A choice to proceed either by subsection (a) or by
grievance arbitration shall foreclose the opportunity to proceed
in the alternative method.
(h) Investigations and Subpoenas.
(1) The board shall have the power to make investigations
concerning all matters relating to the administration and
enforcement of its rules and regulations. The chairperson shall
be authorized to administer oaths and affirmations for witnesses
testifying in matters before the board.
(2) The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the chairperson or designee and to require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and
papers pertaining to matters before the board, including any
background investigation conducted pursuant to any applicable
rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2014-30. Passed 10/21/14)
ARTICLE 157 8
157.02 ENGINEERING, ELECTRICAL AND BUILDING CIVIL
SERVICE BOARD.
The Engineering, Electrical and Building Civil Service Board is
abolished pursuant to Sections 417 through 430 of Act 22 of 2014.
All nonuniformed employees in city positions that were subject to
civil service regulation immediately prior to May 19, 2014 shall continue to
be subject to civil service regulation otherwise provided for in this Article
that are applicable to uniformed employees.
(Ord. 2014-30. Passed 10/21/14)
157.03 FIRE AND HEALTH CIVIL SERVICE BOARD.
The Fire and Health Civil Service Board is abolished pursuant to
Sections 417 through 430 of Act 22 of 2014.
All nonuniformed employees in city positions that were subject to
civil service regulation immediately prior to May 19, 2014 shall continue to
be subject to civil service regulation otherwise provided for in this Article
that are applicable to uniformed employees.
(Ord. 2014-30. Passed 10/21/14)
ARTICLE 301
Yard Sales
301.01 Definitions.
301.02 Property Permitted to be Sold.
301.03 Permitted Number of Yard Sales Per Year.
301.04 Hours of Operation.
301.05 Display of Sale Property.
301.06 Advertising; Signs.
301.07 Public Nuisance.
301.08 Inspection - Arrest Authority of Inspector.
301.09 Parking.
301.10 Persons Exempted from Ordinance.
301.11 Severability.
301.99 Penalty.
301.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein.
(a) Yard Sale shall mean and include all general sales,
open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premise in
any zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of
disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all
sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch,"
"room," "auction," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or
"rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a situation
where no more than two (2) specific items are held out for sale
and all advertisements of such sale specifically names those
items to be sold.
(b) Personal Property shall mean property which is owned,
utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her
residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or
maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which
was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
ARTICLE 301 2
301.02 PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for
sale, under authority granted by this Ordinance, property other
than personal property.
301.03 PERMITTED NUMBER OF YARD SALES PER YEAR.
It shall be unlawful for any residents and/or family
household to conduct more than two (2) yard sales during any one
(1) calendar year. If members of more than one residence and/or
family household join in the operation of a garage sale, it shall
be considered as a garage sale for each and all such residences
and/or family households.
301.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Such yard sales shall be limited in time to no more than the
daylight hours of two (2) consecutive days.
301.05 DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY.
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within
the residence, porch, in a garage, carport, and/or in any yard,
but shall not be permitted within the public right of way.
301.06 ADVERTISING; SIGNS.
(a) Signs Permitted. Only the following specified signs
may be displayed in relation to a pending yard sale:
(1) Two (2) Signs Permitted. Two (2) signs of not
more than four (4) square feet each shall be
permitted to be displayed on the property of the
residence where the yard sale is being conducted.
(2) Directional Signs. Two (2) signs of not more than
two (2) square feet each are permitted, provided
that the premises upon which the yard sale is
conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and
written permission to erect such signs is received
from the property owners upon whose property such
signs are to be placed.
(b) Time Limitations. No sign or other form of
advertisement shall be exhibited for more than twelve (12) hours
prior to the commencement of such a sale.
(c) Removal of Signs. Signs must be removed immediately
upon the conclusion of the sale.
ARTICLE 301 3
301.07 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Individuals conducting a yard sale and the owner or tenant
of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall
be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good
order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale
or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or
boisterous conduct on said premises. All such individuals shall
obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire
departments of the City of Bethlehem, in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare.
301.08 INSPECTION - ARREST AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR.
The Zoning Officer, a police officer or any other official
designated by the Zoning Officer, shall have the right of entry
upon any premises showing evidence of a yard sale, for the
purpose of enforcement of this Ordinance and shall make
inspections to enforce the same and shall have the right to issue
citations for violations of this Ordinance.
301.09 PARKING.
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance
with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the police
department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any
special hazards and/or congestion created by any yard sale.
301.10 PERSONS EXEMPTED FROM ORDINANCE.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to or
affect the following:
(a) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process
of Court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Persons acting in accordance with their powers or
duties as public officials.
(c) Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or
other business establishment, firm or at a place of business
wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of
the City of Bethlehem or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by
a manufacturer, dealer or vendor, and which sale would be
conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise
prohibited in other ordinances.
ARTICLE 301 4
(d) Persons acting in accordance with their
responsibilities as court-appointed decedents' personal
representatives.
(e) Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational,
cultural or governmental institution, or organization when the
proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution or
organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are
not sold on a consignment basis.
301.11 SEVERABILITY.
If any court of competent jurisdiction declares any
provision to be unconstitutional or invalid, that decision shall
only affect the provision so declared. The declaration shall not
affect any other portion of this Ordinance, or the Article as a
whole.
301.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First Violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second Violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$600.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3406 - Passed 3/19/91.)
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF BETHLEHEM
PART THREE - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
TITLE ONE - Business and Licensing
Article 301. Auctions.
Article 303. General Business Licenses and Permits.
Article 305. Amusement Devices.
Article 307. Video Amusement Arcades
Article 309. Moving of Household Goods.
Article 331. Peddlers and Solicitors.
Article 313. Private Watchmen.
Article 315. Solid and Liquid Fuels Sales.
Article 317. Weights and Measures.
ARTICLE 301
Auctions
301.01 Permit and fee.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to license sales - See 3rd Class §2403 (46) (53 P.S. §37403) (46))
City Treasurer - See ADM. Art. 109
Business Licenses and permits generally - See BUS. REG. Art. 303
301.01 PERMIT AND FEE.
Repealed by Ordinance No. 2747, passed 12/16/80.
ARTICLE 303
General Business Licenses and Permits
303.01 Licenses and permits; fees.
303.02 Term.
303.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Power to license - See 3rd Class §2601 (53 P.S. §37601)
303.01 LICENSES AND PERMITS; FEE.
(a) All persons except as hereinafter provided in
subsection (b) engaged in the following trades, businesses,
occupations, or activities shall obtain a business license or
permit and pay to the City Treasurer the following fees:
(1) (A) Bus Companies $ 35.00 per bus
(B) Taxicab Companies $ 25.00 per taxicab
(2) Carnivals and circuses except $100.00 per year
those for religious, educational
or charitable purposes
(3) Food Service Establishments $1.00 per year
(4) Peddlers and solicitors of $10.00 per day
bread, meat, vegetables and
food articles
(5) Peddlers and solicitors of $10.00 per day
goods, wares, or merchandise
(6) Operas, shows, circuses and $100.00 per year
all kinds of public exhibitions
for pay except those of religious,
educational or charitable
purposes
(7) Utility Companies (including $100.00 per year
gas, electric, telephone and
telegraph)
(8) Alarm Monitor Equipment $100.00 per
installation
(Except in governmental entities) $100.00 per year
(9) Septic Tank Waste $25.00 per 1,000
gallons
With a minimum charge of $25.00 per load
(10) Inspection of Motor Fuel Meters $20.00 per meter
(Ord. 3013. Passed 9/3/85; Ord. 3064. Passed 3/4/86;
Ord. 3186 §1. Passed 5/3/88; Ord. 3681. Passed
4/4/95; Ord. 4152. Passed 11/6/2002; Ord. 2015-3 Passed
2/17/15.)
(b) Members of political and/or religious organizations for
the sale of political newspapers and/or religious articles are
excepted from (a) above. (Ord. 2833. Passed 4/7/82.)
303.02 TERM.
All licenses or permits, unless otherwise indicated herein,
shall be issued on an annual basis for the calendar year,
renewable each January, and the fees set forth in Section 303.01
are due and payable on March 1 of each year and are not subject
to proration of a part thereof. (Ord. 1904 §2. Passed 2/16/65.)
303.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall
be fined six hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more
than ninety days, or both. (Ord. 1768 §1. Passed 11/13/62; Ord.
3242. Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 304
First Responder’s Fee/Amusement Tax
304.01 Authority for Enactment
304.02 Definitions; Word Usage
304.03 Imposition of Tax
304.04 Exemption; Limitations
304.05 Permit Required
304.06 Payment of Tax
304.07 Duties of the Business Administrator
304.08 Fine for Nonpayment; Recoverability
304.09 Suits on Collection and Penalty
304.10 Confidentiality of Information
304.11 Applicability
304.12 Severability
304.13 Effective Date
304.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
304.01 Authority for Enactment
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S.
§6901, et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
304.02 Definitions; Word Usage
(a) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall have, for the purpose of this article, the meanings herein
indicated:
(1) “Admission” means the established price or regular
monetary charge of any character whatsoever,
charged, paid, or in any manner received by
producers, as herein defined, from the general
public, or a limited or select number thereof,
directly or indirectly, for the privilege of
attending or engaging in any amusement, as herein
defined.
(2) “Amusement” means any manner or form of
entertainment within the City of Bethlehem,
including, but not limited to, the following:
ARTICLE 304 2.
circuses, shows, concerts, lectures, sports events,
amusement parks, athletic contests, auto races, and
any other form of diversion, sport, pastime or
recreation, for which admission is charged or paid.
(3) “Person” means any natural person, entity, firm,
association, foundation, institution, partnership,
copartnership, corporation or unincorporated
association, except the term person shall not
include any political subdivision or municipal
corporation. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing or imposing a penalty, or both, the term
“person,” as applied to a corporation or
association, shall include the officers thereof.
(4) “Producer” means any person, as herein defined,
conducting any place of amusement, as herein
defined, where the general public, or a limited or
select number thereof, may, upon the payment of an
established price, attend or engage in any
amusement.
(b) In this article, the singular shall include the
plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
304.03 Imposition of Tax
(a) A tax is hereby imposed, for general revenue purposes,
at the rate of 5% of the price of admission to each and every
amusement within the City of Bethlehem, Lehigh and Northampton
County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) Where the price of admission is based on a group rate
or discount, the tax shall be based upon the gross admissions
collected.
(c) The maximum tax imposed on any single admission shall
not exceed $2.00.
(Ord. 2014-49-Passed 12/16/14.)
304.04 Exemption; Limitations
(a) The tax herein levied and imposed shall not be charged
and collected on admissions where the maximum venue capacity is
200 or less, based on the permitted occupancy capacity of the
venue as determined by applicable building codes, or where the
admission price is $10.00 or less.
ARTICLE 304 3.
(b) The tax herein levied and imposed shall not be charged
and collected on admissions to any form of amusement which is
sponsored, organized, and promoted by, and whose benefits inure
to, a political subdivision or municipal corporation within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c) The tax herein levied and imposed shall not apply to
membership dues, fees or assessments for charitable, religious,
beneficial or nonprofit organizations, so long as the charge and
collection of such tax is prohibited by applicable law.
(d) The tax herein levied and imposed shall not apply to
admissions to motion-picture exhibitions and sound motion-picture
exhibitions having no form of live entertainment, vaudeville or
theatrical performance in connection therewith, to the extent the
charge and collection of such tax is prohibited by applicable
law.
(e) The tax herein levied and imposed shall not apply to
membership, membership dues, fees or assessments, donations,
contributions or monetary charges of any character whatsoever
paid by the general public, or a limited or select number
thereof, for such persons to enter into any place, indoors or
outdoors, to engage in any activities, the predominant purpose or
nature of which is exercise, fitness, health maintenance,
improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition education, or
weight control, so long as the charge and collection of such tax
is prohibited by applicable law.
(f) The tax herein levied and imposed shall only apply to
admissions to bowling alleys or bowling lanes, to the extent
permitted by applicable law.
(g) The tax herein levied and imposed shall not apply to
racetracks, so long as the charge and collection of such tax is
prohibited by applicable law.
304.05 Permit Required
(a) After the effective date of this article, any person
desiring to conduct or to continue to conduct any amusement, the
price of admission to which is subject to tax under this article,
shall file with the Business Administrator, or his designee, an
application for either a permanent amusement permit or a
temporary amusement permit, as the case may be. Every
application for such permit shall be made upon a form prescribed,
prepared and furnished by the Business Administrator. In the
case of any amusement that is to continue for longer than 30
days, a permanent amusement permit shall be issued. In the case
ARTICLE 304 4.
of any amusement that is to continue for 30 days or less, a
temporary permit shall be issued.
(b) Information required:
(1) The application shall be in such form as the
Business Administrator shall prescribe and shall
include the following requests for information:
a. The proper legal names and addresses of the
persons conducting the amusement;
b. The proper legal names and addresses of the
persons owning the facility at which the
amusement is to be conducted;
c. The type of permit being applied for;
d. The location of the amusement covered by the
permit;
e. The admission price or prices charged or to be
charged;
f. The approximate total receipts anticipated;
g. The names and addresses of copartners, members
and/or officers of the persons conducting the
amusement;
h. Type/description of amusement; and
i. Period for which the permit is to be issued.
(2) The application shall be signed by the producer,
if a natural person, and in the case of an
association, by a member or partner thereof having
the authority to execute the application, and in the
case of a corporation, by an officer having the
authority to execute the application.
(c) At the time of making such application, the applicant
shall pay to the Business Administrator, or his designee, any
permit fee established by the City Council of the City of
Bethlehem, for each annual permit or for each temporary permit.
(d) Upon approval of the application and the payment of any
permit fee herein required, the Business Administrator, or his
designee, shall grant and issue to each applicant an annual or
temporary amusement permit for each place of amusement within the
City as set forth in the application. Amusement permits shall
not be assignable and shall be valid only for the persons in
ARTICLE 304 5.
whose names they are issued and for the conduct of amusements at
the places designated therein. All permits for permanent places
of amusement shall expire on December 31 next succeeding the date
upon which they are issued. Permits for temporary places of
amusement shall expire at the time specified therein.
(e) Permits issued for permanent places of amusement under
the provisions of this article shall be renewed annually before
January 1, upon application made to the Business Administrator,
or his designee, and the payment of any renewal fee established
by the City Council for the City of Bethlehem.
304.06 Payment of Tax
(a) Each producer holding a permit shall, on or before the
last day of each month of each year after the effective
date of this article, transmit to the Business
Administrator, or his designee, on a form prescribed and
prepared by him, a report of the amount of tax collected
by him during the preceding month of the year. Said
report shall be submitted under oath or affirmation of
the producer. Reports shall be due, respectively for
each month, on or before the last day of the succeeding
month.
(b) Every producer holding a temporary permit shall, within
30 days of the expiration of the temporary permit, transmit to
the Business Administrator, or his designee, on a form prescribed
or prepared by him, a report of the amount of tax collected by
him during the term of the temporary permit. Said report shall
be submitted under oath or affirmation of the producer.
(c) Each producer, at the time of making each and every
report required by this section, shall compute and pay to the
Office of the Business Administrator, the taxes collected by him
and due to the City during the period for which the report is
made.
(Ord. 2014-49-Passed 12/16/14.)
304.07 Duties of the Business Administrator
(a) The Business Administrator is charged with the duty of
collecting and receiving the taxes, permit fees, fines and
penalties imposed by this article. It shall be the duty of the
Business Administrator, or his designee, to keep a record showing
the amount received by him from each person paying the tax, fees,
fines and penalties, and the date of such receipt.
(b) The Business Administrator and his designee are hereby
empowered, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
ARTICLE 304 6.
administration and enforcement of this article, including
provisions for the examination and correction of returns, and
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an
overpayment is claimed, or found to have occurred, and charged
with enforcing the provisions of this article and any rules
and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
(c) The Business Administrator and his designee are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any person
or persons subject to or supposed to be subject to the tax
imposed by this article, in order to verify the accuracy of the
report made, or if no report was made, ascertain the tax due.
304.08 Fine for Nonpayment, Recoverability.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be
paid when due, a penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and
unpaid shall be added thereto.
304.09 Suits on Collection and Penalty
(a) The Business Administrator, or his designee, shall have
the power in the name of the City to institute proceedings
against any and all persons who violate the provisions of this
article.
(b) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit
is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefore, shall be liable for the costs of collection and
interest and penalties herein imposed.
304.10 Confidentiality of Information.
Any information gained by the Business Administrator or any
other official agent or employee of the City of Bethlehem as a
result of any reports, investigations, hearings or verifications
required or authorized by this article shall be kept
confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
304.11 Applicability
Nothing in this article shall be construed to empower the
City of Bethlehem to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on
any person, business or any portion of any business not within
the taxing power of the City of Bethlehem under the laws and
Constitution of the United States and the laws and Constitution
of this Commonwealth.
304.12 Severability
ARTICLE 304 7.
(1) Each section, paragraph, part, term and/or
provision of this chapter shall be considered severable, and if,
for any reason, any paragraph, part, term and/or provision herein
is determined to be invalid and contrary to or in conflict with
any existing or future law or regulation, such shall not impair
the operation or affect the remaining portions, sections,
paragraphs, parts, terms and/or provisions of this article, and
the latter will continue to be given full force and effect, and
said invalid sections, parts, paragraphs, terms and/or provisions
shall be deemed not to be a part of this article.
(b) The provisions of this article are severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, said determination shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of City Council of the City of
Bethlehem that this article would have been adopted if such
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provisions had not been
included herein.
304.13 Effective Date
This article shall become effective on February 1, 2015, and
shall continue on a calendar-year basis thereafter without annual
reenactment.
304.99. Violations
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this article
or who neglects, fails or refuses to furnish complete and correct
reports, or who fails to pay over any tax levied at the time
required, or who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or
fraudulent return, or who attempts to do anything whatsoever to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by
this article, shall be subject to a fine or penalty not exceeding
$600 for each and every offense, and the costs of prosecution
thereof, or to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both.
(b) Each day on which a person violates any of the
provisions of this article may be considered as a separate
offense and punishable as such.
(c) Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
(Ord. 2013-1. Passed 1/15/13; Ord. 2014-49. Passed 12/16/14.)
ARTICLE 305
Amusement Devices
305.01 Definitions.
305.02 Gambling Devices Prohibited.
305.03 License Required.
305.04 License Application.
305.05 License Fees.
305.06 License Display, Transferability.
305.07 License Revocation.
305.08 Seizure And Destruction Of Machine.
305.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to license - See 3rd Class §2601 (53 P.S. 37601)
Gambling - See GEN. OFF. Art. 713
305.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise indicates:
(a) "Amusement Device" means any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or other form of payment, may
be operated by the public generally for a game, entertainment or amusement,
or for the emission of songs or music, including but not limited to marble
machines, pinball machines, skill ball games, video amusement games or
devices, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
(b) "Person," "firm," "corporation," or "association" as used herein,
include the following: any person, firm, corporation or association which
owns any such machine; the person, firm, corporation or association in
whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public,
and the person, firm, corporation or association having control over such
machine. (Ord. 2883. Passed 4/19/83.)
ARTICLE 305 2
305.02 GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
Nothing in this Article shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that
has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way
contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State. (Ord.
1850 §2. Passed 2/4/64.)
305.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any amusement device as herein defined
by Section 305.01 (a) shall be required to obtain a license from the City,
upon payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall be made to
the Police Commissioner, upon a form to be supplied by him for that
purpose. (Ord. 2883. Passed 4/19/83.)
305.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
The application for such license shall contain the following in
formation:
(a) Name and address of the applicant, and age, date and place of
birth.
(b) Name and address of the operator of the business or owner of
the machine, if different than that set forth in subsection (a)
hereof.
(c) Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place.
(d) Description of machine to be covered by the license. No license
shall be issued to any individual applicant unless he shall be
eighteen (18) years of age or older and a citizen of the United
States. (Ord. 2883. Passed 4/19/83.)
ARTICLE 305 3
305.05 LICENSE FEES.
(a) Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay the
annual license fee of $75.00 to the City of Bethlehem for the privilege of
operating or maintaining for operation each amusement device. (Ord. 3370.
Passed 11/20/90.)
(b) The payment of such annual fee by the applicant shall be deemed a
compliance with this section.
(c) Each license shall expire on the last day of the calendar year in
which it is furnished.
(d) For purposes of annual renewal, the fee shall be paid on or before
January 31 of each year. (Ord. 2883. Passed 4/19/83.)
305.06 LICENSE DISPLAY, TRANSFERABILITY.
(a) Upon payment of the license fee provided for in Section 305.05,
the City Treasurer shall issue a miscellaneous license. This miscellaneous
license will list the number of the amusement devices licensed and permitted
on the business premises. The license provided shall be posted permanently
and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
(b) If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location
within the City, the license may be transferred to such new location upon
application to the Police Commissioner, giving the street and number of the
new location. (Ord. 2883. Passed 4/19/83.)
305.07 LICENSE REVOCATION.
Every license issued under this Article is subject to the right, which is
hereby expressly reserved, of revocation should the licensee, directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any amusement device contrary to the
provisions of this Article, any other Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem, or
any law of this Commonwealth. If it is determined that a license shall be
revoked, the Police Department shall, within five (5) days of such
determination, notify the licensee of the reasons for the revocation. The
ARTICLE 305 4
licensee may, within five (5) days of the date of notice, request in writing a
hearing before City Council to evaluate the validity of the revocation. City
Council shall conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any
request for hearing. The determination of a majority of the members o£ City
Council shall be the final decision regarding the revocation. (Ord. 2883.
Passed 4/19/83.)
305.08 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE.
If the Police Commissioner shall have reason to believe any licensed
amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be
seized by the police and impounded and if, upon trial o£ the licensee for
allowing it to be used as a gambling device, such licensee is found guilty,
such machine shall be destroyed by the police. (Ord. 2883. Passed 4/19/83.)
305.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, in addition
to the revocation of his license, shall be fined six hundred dollars ($600.00)
or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. (Ord. 1850 §10. Passed
2/4/64; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 307
Video Amusement Arcades
307.01 Definitions. 307.06 License Requirements.
307.02 Gambling Devices Prohibited. 307.07 License Revocation.
307.03 License Required. 307.08 Severability.
307.04 License Application. 307.99 Penalty.
307.05 License Fees.
307.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Applicant" means any person, group of persons, firm,
corporation, association, or other legal entity which is the real party in
interest for a license under the terms of this Article.
(b) "Attendant" means any individual eighteen (18) years of age or
older, who is employed by or otherwise serves on behalf of a licensee, who
shall have the authority to act on behalf of the licensee with respect to the
operation of the licensed video amusement arcade.
(c) "Licensed Premises" means all public and nonpublic areas of a
video amusement arcade which operates under a license granted pursuant to
this Article; including the interior of the arcade as well as the exterior areas,
entrances, sidewalk and parking lots.
(d) "Licensee" means any person, group of persons, firm, corporation,
association, or other legal entity which operates or is otherwise the real party
in interest in a video amusement arcade, and which receives a license under
the terms of this Article.
(e) "Video Amusement Arcade" means any place of business making
available for use by the public six (6) or more video amusement devices.
ARTICLE 307 2
(f) "Video Amusement Device" means any electronic machine which,
upon insertion of a coin, token, slug, plate or disc, or other form of payment,
may be operated by the public to provide use as a game, contest or
amusement, whether or not registering a score thereon, including but not
limited to video games and other devices which utilize a visual display
screen; but excluding such mechanical devices as marble machines, pinball
machines, skill ball games and mechanical grab machines, as well as coinoperated
musical machines.
307.02 GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
Nothing in this Article shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that
has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way
contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State.
307.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
After the effective date of this Ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any
person, group of persons, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity
to operate a video amusement arcade without first having obtained the
proper license from the Police Commissioner.
307.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
The application for a license under this Article shall be filed in writing
with the Police Commissioner and shall specify:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, and if a corporation,
association or other legal entity, the names and addresses of the principal
officers thereof.
(b) The address of the premises for which the application is filed.
(c) The names and addresses of all attendants who will be on duty on
the licensed premises.
ARTICLE 307 3
(d) The trade names, serial numbers, names of manufacturers and
general descriptions of all video amusement devices to be located in the
licensed premises.
(e) The fee that is paid and the effective dates of the application,
which shall be from whatever date the license is granted until December 31
of that year.
(f) That the applicant has complied with the requirements of Article
305 with respect to each video amusement device on the licensed premises.
307.05 LICENSE FEES.
(a) No license shall be granted under this Article to any applicant until
the annual fee of $100.00 has been paid to the City of Bethlehem.
(b) For purposes of yearly renewal, the fee shall be paid on or before
January 31 of each year.
(c) The license granted to an applicant under this Article shall not be
transferable to another video amusement arcade operator. A new owner or
operator of the licensed premises shall be required to apply for a new license
and pay the fees therefor.
307.06 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance and control
of the entire licensed premises at all times.
(b) The licensee or qualified attendant shall be present on the leased
premises during all hours of operation.
(c) The licensee or a qualified attendant shall be responsible for
regular inspection of all portions of the licensed premises during all hours of
operation.
(d) No minor under the age of twelve (12) years shall be allowed on
any licensed premises unless such minor is accompanied by a responsible
person age eighteen (18) years or older.
ARTICLE 307 4
(e) No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverages while
on the licensed premises unless the licensed premises are otherwise licensed
and regulated by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(f) No person shall loiter, gamble, or engage in fighting while on the
licensed premises.
(g) The licensee shall display in a prominent location in the licensed
premises, a copy of the Regulations for Operation of Video Amusement
Arcades, on a form which shall be supplied to the licensee by the Police
Commissioner.
(h) The licensee shall maintain the licensed premises in compliance
with all fire, housing, health and other Codes adopted by the City of
Bethlehem.
(i) The licensee shall limit the number of persons on the licensed
premises at any one time to the number established for that location by the
Fire Marshal of the City of Bethlehem.
(j) The licensee shall comply with all other applicable statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem in
maintaining the licensed premises and operating the video amusement
arcade.
(Ord. 2014-15 – Passed 6/3/14)
307.07 LICENSE REVOCATION.
Three (3) documented violations of the Licensing Requirements set
forth in Section 307.06, above, within one license year shall constitute
grounds for revocation of a license. If it is determined that a license shall be
revoked, or shall not be issued to any applicant, the Police Department shall,
within five (5) days of such determination, notify the licensee or applicant of
the reasons for the determination. The licensee or applicant may, within five
(5) days of the date of notice, request in writing a hearing before City
Council to evaluate the validity of the determination. City Council shall
conduct a hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any request for
hearing. The determination of a majority of the members of City Council
shall be the final decision regarding the revocation.
ARTICLE 307 5
307.08 SEVERABILITY.
If any court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision to be
unconstitutional or invalid, that decision shall only affect the provision so
declared. The declaration shall not affect any other portion of this
Ordinance, or the Article as a whole.
307.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, in addition
to the revocation of his license, shall be fined six hundred dollars ($600.00)
or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. (Ord. 2884. Passed
4/19/83; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 309 1
ARTICLE 309
Moving of Household Goods
309.01 Permit Required.
309.02 Permit Application.
309.03 Permit Fee.
309.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to license - See 3rd Class §2601 (53 P.S. §37601)
City Treasurer - See ADM. Art. 109
Business licenses and permits generally - See BUS. REG. Art. 303
309.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall move, or cause to be moved, from any place within the City to another
place therein, or place beyond the limits thereof, or from a place outside the City to within the
City any household goods in bulk, without first securing from the City Treasurer a permit for
such moving or transportation. (Ord. 1271. Passed 12/15/53; Ord. 3388. Passed 12/18/90.)
309.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.
Any person desiring such a permit for the removal or transportation of household goods
in the manner above described shall make application to the City Treasurer setting forth his name
and address, the names of the owners or reputed owners of the property to be moved, the address
and location from which the property is to be removed and the new address or location of the
place to which the property is to be removed. (Ord. 1271 §2. Passed 12/15/53.)
309.03 PERMIT FEE.
The City Treasurer shall, upon application being made as provided for in Section 309.02,
issue a permit for which a charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) will be made, setting forth the name
of the permittee as well as the names of the owners of the goods to be moved and the address
from which the goods are to be moved and the address to which the goods are to be delivered.
(Ord. 2294 §1. Passed 5/2/72; Ord. 3388. Passed 12/18/90; Ord. 2014-46-Passed 12/16/14.)
309.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
ARTICLE 309 2
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $600.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both;
(Ord. 1768. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 311
Peddlers and Solicitors
311.01 Peddling On Private Property Without Invitation Declared A Nuisance.
311.02 Exceptions.
311.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Power to license transient retail merchants - See 3rd Class §2620 (53 P.S.
§37620)
License fee for peddlers and solicitors - See BUS. REG. Art. 303
Unnecessary noise in crying wares - See GEN. OFF. Art. 717
311.01 PEDDLING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT
INVITATION DECLARED A NUISANCE.
Except as hereinafter provided in Section 311.02, the practice of going
in and upon private residences in the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers,
itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, without having
been requested or invited to do so by the owners or occupants of such
private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the
same, is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such. (Ord. 2758.
Passed 1/6/81.)
311.02 EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) The sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products,
vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the
sale of these commodities is now authorized by law.
ARTICLE 311 2
(b) The sale or soliciting of orders for goods, wares and merchandise
if the solicitation is conducted in the furtherance of religious or political
beliefs, and provided:
(1) The donation or fee is consistent with the cost of
publishing or manufacture; and
(2) The merchandise, goods, wares, publication, pamphlet
being offered is limited to religious and/or political
materials. (Ord. 2758. Passed 1/6/81.)
311.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $600.00, or ninety
days imprisonment, or both;
(Ord. 1768 §1. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 313
Private Security Services
313.01 General.
313.02 Notice.
313.99 Penalty.
313.01 GENERAL.
This Ordinance shall apply to any person, organization, corporation or
entity that employs, engages or otherwise accepts the services of any other
person, organization, corporation or entity that provides watch guard,
protective patrol, detective or criminal investigative services in the City of
Bethlehem. This Ordinance shall not be construed to apply to the
employment, engagement, or acceptance of the services of local, state or
federal government employees, police officers commissioned by the
Governor or police officers of a municipal authority, educational institutions,
armored car companies, licensed private detectives who are employed in a
purely investigative capacity, or any humane society or similar association
authorized by law.
313.02 NOTICE.
Any person, organization, corporation or entity to which this
Ordinance is applicable shall, personally or through an agent, provide the
following information and notice to the Police Commissioner of the City of
Bethlehem:
A. At least five (5) days prior to the hiring, employment,
engagement or acceptance of the services of any person,
organization, corporation, or entity, to which this Ordinance
is applicable, such person, organization, corporation, or
entity shall provide notice of such hiring, employment,
engagement or acceptance on a form provided by the
Bethlehem Police Department. Notice of hiring,
ARTICLE 313 2
employment, engagement or acceptance may be provided in
advance at the beginning of any week, month or year, so
long as the Police Commissioner receives notice of each
hiring, employment, engagement or acceptance within at
least five (5) days of the commencement of such hiring,
employment, engagement or acceptance.
B. If a person, organization, corporation, or entity to which this
Ordinance is applicable hires, employs, engages or accepts
the services less than five (5) days prior to such hiring,
employment, engagement or acceptance of the services, such
person, organization, corporation, or entity shall provide
notice of such hiring, employment, engagement or
acceptance, on a form provided by the Bethlehem Police
Department, as soon as practicable immediately thereafter.
313.99 PENALTY.
Any person, organization, corporation or entity that violates any
provision of this Article shall be subject to the following penalties:
A. First violation – A fine of not less than $25.00 nor
more than $50.00;
B. Second violation – A fine of not less than $50.00
nor more than $250.00;
C. Third and Each Subsequent Violation – A fine of
not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Ord. 4433 – Passed 6/19/07)
Note: Article 313 – Private Watchmen was deleted in its entirety and
replaced with Article 313 – Private Security Services.
ARTICLE 315
Solid and Liquid Fuel Sales
315.01 Definitions. 315.09 Unequipped dealers to obtain
315.02 License required; fee; proper weight certificates.
display. 315.10 Unequipped dealers; weighing
315.03 License nontransferable; fee.
license for vehicles; City 315.11 Anthracite; compliance with
Treasurer to control. State law.
315.04 Solid fuel to be sold by 315.12 Delivery ticket required;
weight; weighing to be in exception.
City. 315.13 Enforcement of provisions.
315.05 Vehicles to have approved 315.14 Time for delivery of fuel.
meters; deliveries to be 315.15 Fraudulent weighing or
metered; exceptions, measuring; false entries a
315.06 Further exceptions to violation.
metered deliveries. 315.16 Mayor to designate places
315.07 Bottled gas; approval of for scales.
containers and contents. 315.17 Mayor to designate approved
315.08 Equipped dealer outside scales of equipped dealers.
City to be licensed for 315.99 Penalty.
scales.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to regulate weighing of commodities - See 3rd Class §2403(52)
[53 P.S. §37403(52)]
Standards of weights and measures - See BUS. REG. Art. 317
Inspector of Weights and Measures - See BUS. REG. Art. 317
House-to-house sales from vehicles - See BUS. REG. Art. 317
Storage of flammable liquids - See FIRE PREV. Art. 1505
315.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ARTICLE 315 2
(a) "Bureau" shall mean the Bureau of Weights and Measures of the
City.
(b) "Inspector" shall mean and include the Inspector of Weights and
Measures of the Bureau of Weights and Measures of the City or any duly
authorized assistant.
(c) "Solid fuel" shall mean any anthracite, semi-anthracite,
bituminous, semi-bituminous or lignite coal, briquettes, boulets, coke, gas,
house coke, petroleum carbon or any other manufactured or patented fuel
not sold by liquid or metered measure.
(d) "Fuel oil" shall mean kerosene, No. 1 fuel oil, No. 2 fuel oil, No. 3
fuel oil or any similar oil used for domestic heating or for industrial
purposes.
(e) "Bottled gas" shall mean any gas or product other than solid fuels
and fuel oils sold and intended for use for domestic heating.
(f) "Retail," when used in conjunction with fuel, shall mean the sale,
delivery, or sale and delivery of fuel in less than car or cargo lots and in
excess of one hundred pounds, except the sale, or sale and delivery of fuel
for purposes of resale.
(g) "Ton" shall mean the net ton of 2,000 pounds avoirdupois.
(h) "Vehicle" shall mean any truck, wagon, cart or other conveying
device using the streets, alleys, highways or other thoroughfares of the City,
but not including railroad cars, in the sale and delivery or delivering of fuels
to consumers within the territorial limits of the City.
(i) "Consumers" shall mean those in residences, apartment houses,
stores, churches, office buildings and similar edifices.
(j) "Equipped dealer" shall mean any person, firm or corporation
regularly engaged in the sale, delivery, or sale and delivery of fuels at retail,
to his consumers within the territorial limits of the City who maintains
unloading, storage and service facilities commensurate with the nature of the
business, equipped with and using wagon or truck scales, meters or other
ARTICLE 315 3
approved weighing or measuring devices of sufficient size and capacity, and
maintained in condition accurately to weigh and measure the maximum load
for which it is utilized, maintaining an office accessible to the public with a
competent person on duty and who regularly carries a stock of fuel.
(k) "Unequipped dealer" shall mean all other persons, firms or
corporations engaged in the sale, delivery, or sale and delivery of fuel at
retail for consumption within the territorial limits of the City. (Ord. 1554
§1. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; DISPLAY.
All persons, firms or corporations selling, delivering, or selling and
delivering fuel at retail to consumers in the City shall obtain a license from
the City Treasurer to engage in such business and shall pay to the City
Treasurer, to cover the cost of necessary inspections and regulations, a
license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each calendar year, or part
thereof, for the year that such business is engaged in, which license must be
displayed by the licensee in his place of business, in addition to a card to be
in the possession of the operator of the vehicle and a metal plate which must
be attached securely to and prominently displayed at all times on each
vehicle used in the delivery of fuels to consumers within the City. (Ord.
1554 §2. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.03 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; LICENSE FOR
VEHICLES; CITY TREASURER TO CONTROL.
(a) No vehicle subject to this article, may deliver any fuel to
consumers without such metal plate being securely attached to and
prominently displayed on each such vehicle. It is the clear import of this
article that a licensee hereunder may not by lease, agreement, contract or
otherwise grant any person, firm or corporation, employee, stockholder,
trucker, contract carrier or contractor any privilege or license to sell, deliver,
or sell and deliver fuel to consumers within the City, unless such person,
firm or corporation, employee, stockholder, trucker, contract carrier or
contractor is or becomes a licensee for such purposes. (Ord. 1554 §3. Passed
7/1/58.)
ARTICLE 315 4
(b) The City Treasurer shall issue vehicle tags upon approval of the
Sealer of Weights and Measures, and upon proof of actual and sole
ownership of such vehicles, at a cost not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00) for
such cards and plates for each vehicle owned by the licensee, it being
expressly provided and ordered that no plates shall be issued to any
corporation, firm or individual for any vehicle that is not owned by the
corporation, firm or individual and used for the delivery of fuels to
consumers within the City. (Ord. 2631 §1. Passed 12/19/78.)
(c) Transfer of title of a vehicle is not sufficient unless the sole
ownership of the vehicle is proved to be in licensee, and no ownership or
control remains or vests in any other person, firm or corporation. However,
liens or encumbrances on any vehicle will not disqualify an applicant for a
license under this article.
(d) The City Treasurer may furnish a form of application or
questionnaire for the determination of the facts required by this section. His
decision shall be final. (Ord. 1554 §3. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.04 SOLID FUEL TO BE SOLD BY WEIGHT; WEIGHING TO
BE IN CITY.
All solid fuel sold, delivered, or sold and delivered by vehicles to
consumers in the City shall be sold by weight. A tolerance at the rate of
thirty pounds per ton shall be allowed in each consignment, and all such
solid fuel, except as otherwise herein provided, shall be weighed within the
corporate boundaries of the City. (Ord. 1554 §4. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.05 VEHICLES TO HAVE APPROVED METERS;
DELIVERIES TO BE METERED; EXCEPTIONS.
No person shall deliver fuel oils to any consumer, unless the vehicle
by which the fuel oils are delivered is equipped with a meter of a type
approved under provisions of the Act of Assembly of May 5, 1921 (P. L.
389), of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended, and which meter
has been tested for accuracy by the Inspector of Weights and Measures of
the City. All delivery of fuel oil to a consumer shall be made by the use of
such a meter. Further, this section shall not apply to deliveries of heavy fuel
oils or to deliveries of fuel oils to industrial plants in truck tank loads,
provided such tank truck is of a type approved by the Act of May 5, 1921 (P.
ARTICLE 315 5
L. 389), of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended. (Ord. 1554 §5.
Passed 7/1/58.)
315.06 FURTHER EXCEPTIONS TO METERED DELIVERIES.
Light fuel oil deliveries of fifty gallons or less may be delivered
without being metered. However, such delivery shall be made in standard
measures of not less than five-gallon capacity, and only such measures as
approved by provisions of the Act of Assembly of May 5, 1921 (P.L.389), of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended, shall be used. (Ord. 1554
§6. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.07 BOTTLED GAS; APPROVAL OF CONTAINERS AND
CONTENTS.
No person shall deliver bottled gas to any consumer except in cylinder
tanks or containers which have been approved by the Fire Underwriters'
Association and/or the Bureau of Standards of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and a sample of which shall have been submitted by the dealer
to the Inspector of Weights and Measures for his inspection and approval, to
determine whether or not the same complies with all regulations, standards
and requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Fire
Underwriters' Association. (Ord. 1554 §7. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.08 EQUIPPED DEALER OUTSIDE CITY TO BE LICENSED
FOR SCALES.
Equipped dealers whose place of business is outside the corporate
limits of the City, but not any more than one-half mile therefrom at the
nearest point by open thoroughfare, and who normally sell and deliver to
consumers within the City, may have their scales designated by the Bureau
of Weights and Measures for the conduct of their own business within the
City, upon procuring from the City Treasurer the regular license as provided
for in Section 315.02 and upon submitting to the Bureau of Weights and
Measures satisfactory evidence of the accuracy and reliability of their scales,
and evidence that such scales are, from time to time, tested and approved by
the public agency having such jurisdiction. (Ord. 1554 §8. Passed 7/1/58.)
ARTICLE 315 6
315.09 UNEQUIPPED DEALERS TO OBTAIN PROPER WEIGHT
CERTIFICATES.
Unequipped dealers engaged in the selling, delivery, or sale and
delivery of fuel to consumers in the City, purchased from and weighed over
the scales of any equipped dealer in the City, shall be furnished by such
equipped dealer with weight certificates signed by any licensed weighmaster
of such equipped dealer. (Ord. 1554 §9. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.10 UNEQUIPPED DEALERS; WEIGHING FEE.
Unequipped dealers engaged in the sale, delivery, or sale and delivery
within the City of solid fuel to consumers shall pay a fee of fifty cents (50¢)
for each weighing of any load or part of a load of solid fuel or the weighing
of the vehicle used in conveying and discharging such solid fuel, to the
owner of the scale on which such load, part of a load or vehicle is weighed.
(Ord. 1554 §10. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.11 ANTHRACITE; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
All solid fuel commonly known or delivered as "anthracite" sold and
delivered to consumers for use within the territorial limits of the City shall
comply with all the provisions of the Act of the Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania approved May 31, 1947 (P.L. 368), as
amended by the Act of the Assembly approved on May 18, 1949 (P.L.
1467), as to size and quality. (Ord. 1554 §11. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.12 DELIVERY TICKET REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
(a) Each separate consignment of fuel sold, delivered, or sold and
delivered, to consumers in the City shall be accompanied by a delivery
ticket, showing the name and address of the licensee and dealer, the net
weight or quantity of the consignment and the signature of the weighmaster.
One copy of the delivery ticket shall be retained at the place of business
where the same is weighed or metered and one shall be left with the
consignee. (Ord. 1771 §1. Passed 11/13/62.)
(b) When solid fuel is sold in lots of less than one hundred pounds, the
provisions of this section shall not apply, provided the solid fuel is delivered
in a closed bag or other closed container, plainly and conspicuously marked
ARTICLE 315 7
with the correct weight of the contents and the name and address of the
dealer or person packing the solid fuel in such bag or container. (Ord. 1554
§12. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.13 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
(a) Inspector of Weights and Measures; Powers and Duties.
It shall be the duty of the City Inspector of Weights and Measures to
enforce the provisions of this article. The Inspector is authorized and
empowered to require the testing of any meter used in the delivery of light
fuel oils to consumers of the City at such times and places as he may
designate, and not less than once in each sixty days, as well as the testing
and inspection of any scales for the weighing of solid fuels by equipped
dealers within the City. The Inspector is authorized and empowered to
require the weighing of solid fuel transported over any street, alley or lane of
the City for delivery to consumers within the corporate limits of the City,
and the weighing of any vehicle used in the delivery of fuels to the
consumers therein, whenever he deems it necessary or advisable to do so in
order to protect the inhabitants of the City against fraud, accident, mistake or
deception and to secure to them the full weight and the quantity of any fuel
purchased by consumers of the City, notwithstanding the possession by the
person in charge of any vehicle, tank truck, cylinder or tank or other
container containing fuel delivered within the corporate limits of the City of
any certificate for, or pertaining to, the weight or quantity of such fuel or the
vehicle on which the same is loaded or any cylinder, tank or other container
in which the same may be loaded.
(b) Arrest Without Warrant Permitted.
The City Inspector of Weights and Measures or any police officer, in
whose presence any violation of this article has been or is being committed,
shall have power, without warrant, to arrest the offender and conduct him
before an alderman, a committing magistrate or the Mayor and there make
information of such violation before such officer, which shall be disposed of
according to law.
(c) Police Authority to Require Compliance.
Each police officer of the City is authorized and empowered to require
ARTICLE 315 8
the weighing and measuring of any fuel for delivery to consumers within the
corporate limits of the City, as well as the weighing of any vehicle used for
the delivery of any fuel therein, whenever he deems it necessary or advisable
so to do in order to protect the inhabitants of the City against fraud, accident,
mistake or deception, and to secure to them the full weight or quantity of any
fuel purchased by consumers.
(d) City to Pay Costs When Enforced Weighing Proves Accurate.
Whenever the City Inspector of Weights and Measures or any police
officer shall require the weighing or measuring of any fuel being delivered
to a consumer within the corporate limits of the City, and the weight of any
vehicle tank truck, cylinder or tank or other container used in the delivery
thereof, and upon such weighing or measuring of same is found to be
accurate, the cost of such weighing or measuring required by the Inspector
or police officer shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 1554 §3. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.14 TIME FOR DELIVERY OF FUEL.
No fuel may be delivered to consumers in the City before 7:00 A.M.
or after 7:00 P.M., Standard Time, or at any time on Sunday, without a
permit issued by the Bureau of Police for good cause shown. However, the
driver of a vehicle engaged in the delivery of solid fuel after 7:00 P.M. shall
not be held in violation of this article if he can show that his vehicle left any
one of the designated weighing scales provided by this article no later than
5:00 P.M. of the same day and date, and that this delay was due to
unavoidable causes. (Ord. 1554 §14. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.15 FRAUDULENT WEIGHING OR MEASURING; FALSE
ENTRIES A VIOLATION.
Any owner of any scales or measuring devices used for the weighing
or measuring of fuels to be sold to consumers within the corporate limits of
the City, or any agent or representative of such owner, or any weighmaster,
who shall fraudulently weigh or measure, cause to be fraudulently weighed
or measured, or who shall contribute to the effecting of a fraudulent
weighing or measuring of any fuel, or who shall alter or cause to be altered
any weighing or measuring delivery certificate, or who shall make or cause
to be made a false entry of such weight or measure, shall be guilty of a
violation of this article. (Ord. 1554 § 15. Passed 7/1/58.)
ARTICLE 315 9
315.16 MAYOR TO DESIGNATE PLACES FOR SCALES.
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, the
Mayor shall, by and with the approval of Council, designate scales at
convenient places for the weighing of fuels to be sold and/or delivered to
consumers in the City. (Ord. 1554 §16. Passed 7/1/58.)
315.17 MAYOR TO DESIGNATE APPROVED SCALES OF
EQUIPPED DEALERS.
The Mayor shall immediately designate the scales of all equipped
dealers within the City for the use of such dealers in the conduct of their own
business, subject, however in the test and approval of such scales by the
Inspector of the Bureau of Weights and Measures. (Ord. 1554 §17. Passed
7/1/58.)
315.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(Ord. 1768 §1. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 317
Weights and Measures
317.01 Standards to be Furnished.
317.02 Inspector of Weights and Measures; Powers and Duties
317.03 House-to-house Sales from Vehicles.
317.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Inspector of Weights and Measures - See 76 P.S. §201 et seq.
Power to regulate weighing and measuring of commodities - See 3rd Class
§2403 (52) (53 P.S. §37403 (52))
Weighing of solid fuel - See BUS. REG. Art. 315
317.01 STANDARDS TO BE FURNISHED.
The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall be supplied at the
expense of the City with standard tests of weights and measures in
uniformity with those established by the government of the United States or
the Bureau of Standards of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the
laws of this Commonwealth. (1946 Code C. 31 §2.)
317.02 INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES; POWERS
AND DUTIES.
The duties of the Inspector of Weights and Measures shall be to report
in writing to the chief of the State Bureau of Standards upon blanks to be
furnished by the Commonwealth:
(a) The number of tests made since the last preceding report.
(b) The number of weights, measures and balances found by such
tests to be correct.
(c) The number of weights, measures and balances found by such
test to be false.
ARTICLE 317 2
(d) The number of prosecutions instituted by such Inspector since
the last preceding report, together with the name of the accused, the title of
the court where prosecution was instituted and the result of such
prosecution.
(e) Such other matters as the chief may from time to time prescribe.
The Inspector of Weights and Measures shall take charge of and keep
safely the proper standards. He shall have power, within his respective
jurisdiction, to test all instruments and devices used in weighing or
measuring anything sold or to be sold, including instruments and devices for
weighing at coal mines and including instruments, weighing machines and
scales installed in places frequented by the public, which scales or weighing
machines by whatever means purport to indicate the weight of any person or
object placed thereon upon the deposit of a coin, and seal the same if found
to be correct. Such tests shall include all appliances connected or used with
such instruments or devices.
For the purpose of making such test, the Inspector of Weights and
Measures may, at any reasonable time and without formal warrant, enter
upon any premises, and may, on any public highway, stop any vendor or
dealer or the agent or servant of such vendor or dealer, or stop any vehicle
used in delivering any commodity which is weighed or measured as
delivered.
He may condemn and mark as condemned, or may seize any false or
illegal instrument or device used, or intended to be used, in weighing or
measuring. If he shall seize any such instrument or device, he shall retain
possession thereof until it shall have been used as evidence in any
prosecution under the laws of this Commonwealth relating to weights and
measures or to the sale of commodities. After the determination of such
prosecution, the false or illegal instrument or device shall be destroyed,
unless otherwise ordered by the proper court. (1946 Code C. 31 §3.)
317.03 HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SALES FROM VEHICLES.
All dealers selling merchandise by weight and measure from house to
house within the City shall, at all times when engaged in selling such
merchandise, keep and carry upon each vehicle accurate weights and
ARTICLE 317 3
measures which have been tested and sealed by the Inspector of Weights and
Measures. All merchandise sold from bulk quantities thereof carried on such
vehicle shall be weighed or measured on such weights and measures, and
such weighing shall be done in the presence of the purchaser thereof or his
agents or servants, whenever request thereof is made of the person in charge
of the vehicle delivering such commodity. (1946 Code C. 31 §4.)
317.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(Ord. 1768 §l. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
TITLE THREE - Taxation
Article 329. Property Tax.
Article 331. Residence Tax.
Article 333. Earned Income Tax.
Article 335. Realty Transfer Tax.
Article 337. Per Capita Tax.
Article 339. Occupation Privilege Tax.
Article 341. Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax.
Article 342. Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance.
ARTICLE 329
Property Tax
329.01 Rates
320.02 Payment dates; discounts and penalties.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power of Council to levy property taxes - See 3rd Class §2531 (53 P.S. §37531)
Tax liens; liability for false return - See 3rd Class §2537 (53 P.S. §37537)
EDITOR'S NOTE: Under the provisions of Section 2531 of the Third Class City
Code, as amended (53 P.S. §37531), a property tax is enacted
annually.
329.01 RATES.
A tax shall be paid and the same is hereby levied on all persons and real
property within the City subject to taxation for City purposes for the fiscal year, as
follows: Tax for the year 1985, for general City purposes, the sum of twenty and
seventy-six one hundredths (20.76) mills on each dollar of assessed valuation (or
the sum of two hundred and seven and six tenths (207.60) cents on each one
hundred dollars of assessed valuation); for debt purposes, the sum of seven and
eighty-five one hundredths (7.85) mills on each dollar of assessed valuation (or the
sum of seventy-eight and five tenths (78.50) cents on each one hundred dollars of
ARTICLE 329 2
assessed valuation); for Library purposes, the sum of one and sixty-nine onehundredths
(1.69) mills on each dollar of assessed valuation (or the sum of sixteen
and nine tenths (16.90)cents on each one hundred dollars of assessed valuation) to
wit:
Mills on Each Cents on Each One
Dollar of Hundred Dollars of
Purpose Assessed Valuation Assessed Valuation
General 20.76 207.60
Debt 7.85 78.50
Library 1.69 16.90
Total - All Purposes 30.30 303.00
(Ord. 2974. Passed 12/18/84.)
329.02 PAYMENT DATES; DISCOUNTS AND PENALTIES.
(a) Taxpayers making payment of property taxes on or before the discounted
tax date in any taxable year shall pay the base tax, minus a discount of two percent
(2%).
(b) Taxpayers making payment of property taxes after the discounted tax
date, but no later than two months after the discounted tax date, shall pay the base
tax.
(c) Taxpayers making payment of property taxes later than two months after
the discounted tax date shall be charged a penalty of ten percent (10%), which
penalty shall be added to the base tax by the tax collector.
(d) For taxpayers choosing to pay property taxes under the quarterly
installment plan, a penalty charge of ten percent (10%) of the quarterly payment
shall be added to the payment if such payment is not paid within five days after the
quarterly due date.
(e) The provisions of this section shall take effect for the taxable year of
1985, and all such provisions shall apply for all taxable years thereafter. (Ord. 2994.
Passed 5/7/85.)
ARTICLE 331
Residence Tax
331.01 Rate Established.
331.02 Report Of Rental Unit Owners.
331.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to enact - See 3rd Class §2531 (53 P.S. §37531)
Per Capita Tax - See BUS. REG. Art. 337
EDITOR'S NOTE: Under the provisions of Section 2531 of the Third Class
City Code, as amended (53 P.S. §37531), a residence tax
is enacted annually.
331.01 RATE ESTABLISHED.
A residence tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of five dollars
($5.00) per year is hereby levied on all inhabitants of the City above the age
of twenty-one years. (Ord. 2284 §1. Passed 12/27/71.)
331.02 REPORT OF RENTAL UNIT OWNERS.
On May 15 of each year, every owner of rental units used for living
purposes located within the City, including hotels, motels, rooming houses
and apartments, is required to register with the City Treasurer and shall
submit to the Treasurer a statement of the number of rental units and a
listing of all tenants with full names and addresses of such tenants, on
premises so owned, operated or managed by such individuals or firms,
which tenants have occupied the premises for a period of at least thirty days
prior to the due date of the report. In addition, on November 15 of each year,
each owner shall notify the Treasurer of changes in the listing of tenants.
(Ord. 2143 §1. Passed 4/15/69.)
ARTICLE 331 2
331.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $600.00, or ninety
days imprisonment, or both;
(Ord. 2143 §3. Passed 4/15/69; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 2012 ARTICLE 333
Earned Income Tax
333.01 Definitions.
333.02 Imposition Of Tax.
333.03 No Exemption from Tax.
333.04 Taxpayer Tax Returns, Declarations and Payments.
333.05 Employer Withholding, Remittance, and Tax Returns.
333.06 Tax Officer.
333.07 Interest, Penalties, Costs and Fines.
333.08 Severability.
333.09 Purpose/Repeal.
333.10 Construction.
333.11 Effective Date.
CROSS REFERENCES
City Treasurer - See ADM. Art. 109
City Controller - See ADM. Art. 111
53 P.S. Section 6924.101, et seq.
PA Public Law 197, Act No. 32 – July 2, 2008
333.01 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Ordinance, all terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. Sec. 6924.101, et seq., shall have the meanings set forth therein.
In addition, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein,
unless the context shall clearly indicate otherwise:
a. Tax Officer. The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax in the TCD.
b. Effective Date. January 1, 2012.
c. Local Tax Enabling Act. The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. Sec.
6924.101, et seq., and as amended in the future, including any
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic
Development thereunder.
d. TCD. The Northampton Tax Collection District, or any future tax
collection district, to which the City or any part of the City is assigned
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
ARTICLE 333
2
e. TCC. The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
f. Tax. The tax on earned income and net profits imposed by this
Ordinance.
g. Tax Return. A form or forms prescribed by the Department of
Community and Economic Development, or by the Tax Officer with
the approval of the TCC, for reporting the amount of Tax or other
amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or reported under
this Ordinance or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
h. Tax Year. The period from January 1 to December 31 in a single
calendar year.
i. Taxpayer. A person or business required under this Ordinance or the
Local Tax Enabling Act to file a Tax Return or to pay Tax.
333.02 IMPOSITION OF TAX
a. General Purpose Resident Tax. The City hereby imposes a Tax for
general revenue purposes at the rate of one percent (1%) on earned income
and net profits of residents of the City.
b. General Purpose Municipal Nonresident Tax. The City also imposes a
Tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of one percent (1%) on earned
income and net profits derived by a non-resident from any work, business,
profession, or activity, of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the
City.
c. Ongoing Tax. The Tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current Tax Year and each Tax Year thereafter, without annual reenactment,
until this Ordinance is repealed or the rate is changed.
d. Local Tax Enabling Act Applicable. The Tax is imposed under
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that
relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
Ordinance. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are
required to be applied to the Tax will automatically become part of this
ARTICLE 333
3
Ordinance upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for
formal amendment of this Ordinance, to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. Sec. 1937.
e. Applicable Laws, Regulations, Policies, and Procedures. The Tax
shall be collected and administered in accordance with (1) all applicable
laws and regulations; and (2) rules, regulations, policies and procedures
adopted by the TCC or by the Tax Officer in conformity with the Local Tax
Enabling Act. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. Sec.
1937.
333.03 NO EXEMPTION FROM TAX
Although credits and deductions against Tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from Tax based on age, income, or other factors.
333.04 TAXPAYER TAX RETURNS, DECLARATIONS AND
PAYMENTS
Every Taxpayer receiving earned income or earning net profits in any Tax
Year shall make and file Tax Returns and declarations and pay Tax in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer. A Taxpayer is required
to file timely an annual Tax Return even if no Tax payment is due and
owing. In addition, even though a resident of the Township/Borough/City
did not have earned income or net profits in the prior Tax Year, the resident
must file an annual Tax Return, when requested to do so by the Tax Officer,
stating the reason why there was no income or net profits to report.
333.05 EMPLOYER WITHHOLDING, REMITTANCE, AND TAX
RETURNS
Every employer shall register, require employee residency certificates,
withhold and remit Tax, and file Tax Returns and withholding statements in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer.
ARTICLE 333
4
333.06 TAX OFFICER
a. Collection of Tax. The Tax will be collected from Taxpayers and
employers by the Tax Officer. The Tax Officer is authorized to file an
action in the name of the City for the recovery of the Tax due to the
City and unpaid. Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of
the City to file an action in its own name for collection of the Tax
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
b. Criminal Complaints for Violations. The Tax Officer is authorized to
file criminal complaints on behalf of the City for violation of this
Ordinance or the Local Tax Enabling Act. Nothing in this section
shall affect the authority of the City to file a criminal complaint on it
own behalf for violation of this Ordinance or the Local Tax Enabling
Act.
333.07 INTEREST, PENALTIES, COSTS AND FINES
In the event of violation of this Ordinance or the Local Tax Enabling Act, or
non-payment of Tax, Taxpayers and employers are subject to interest,
penalties, costs, and fines in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act,
including costs of collection imposed by the Tax Officer in accordance with
authorization by the TCC. The Tax Officer may retain reasonable costs of
collection in accordance with Local Tax Enabling Act and as approved by
the TCC.
333.08 SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance. It is declared to
be the intention of the governing body of the City that this Ordinance would
have been adopted if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had not been
included.
333.09 PURPOSE/REPEAL
The primary purpose of this Ordinance is to conform the City’s currently
existing earned income and net profits tax to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior ordinance or part of any prior ordinance
ARTICLE 333
5
conflicting with the provisions of this Ordinance is rescinded insofar as the
conflict exists. To the extent the provisions of this Ordinance are the same
as any ordinance in force immediately prior to adoption of this Ordinance,
the provisions of this Ordinance are intended as a continuation of such prior
ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If this Ordinance is declared invalid,
any prior ordinance levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect
and shall not be affected in any manner by adoption of this Ordinance. The
provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or
to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this Ordinance.
Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Section, this Ordinance shall
supersede and repeal on the Effective Date any ordinance levying a tax on
earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to the Effective Date.
The Tax imposed by this Ordinance shall not apply to any person as to
whom it is beyond the legal power of the City to impose the Tax herein
provided under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
333.10 CONSTRUCTION
This Ordinance is intended to be consistent with the Local Tax Enabling
Act. The Ordinance is intended to include all necessary authorizations to
permit the Tax Officer to take all actions for the collection, administration,
disbursement, and enforcement of the Tax and all other actions on behalf of
the political subdivisions of the TCD as authorized by the Local Tax
Enabling Act, subject to the policies and procedures of the TCC. To give
full force and effect to this Ordinance, the authority of the Tax Officer shall
be interpreted in the broadest permissible sense for the benefit of the Tax
Officer’s ability to perform its duties.
333.11 EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2012,
and shall apply to earned income received or earned and net profits earned or
made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter
without annual re-enactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance imposing such change.
(Ord. 2011-25, Passed 11/1/11.)
ARTICLE 335
Realty Transfer Tax
335.01 Short Title
335.02 Authority
335.03 Definitions
335.04 Imposition of Tax; Interest
335.05 Exempt Parties
335.06 Excluded Transactions
335.07 Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and Members,
Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof
335.08 Acquired Company
335.09 Credits Against Tax
335.10 Extension of Lease
335.11 Proceeds of Judicial Sale
335.12 Duties of the Recorder of Deeds
335.13 Statement of Value
335.14 Civil Penalties
335.15 Lien
335.16 Enforcement
335.17 Regulations
335.18 Severability
CROSS REFERENCES
Registration of real estate - See ADM. Art. 119
Property tax - See BUS. REG. Art. 329
335.01 SHORT TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax" of the
City of Bethlehem.
335.02 AUTHORITY
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby
imposed upon the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate
situated within the City of Bethlehem, regardless of where the
documents making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where
the actual settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by
Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. §8101-d, et
seq.
335.03 DEFINITIONS
(A) “Association” shall mean a partnership, limited
partnership, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or
conducted by two or more persons other than a private trust or
decedent's estate.
(B) “Corporation” shall mean a corporation, joint-stock
association, business trust, or banking institution which is organized
ARTICLE 335 2
under the laws of this Commonwealth, the United States, or any other
state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
(C) “Document” shall mean any deed, instrument or writing which
conveys, transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer
or demise of title to real estate, but does not include wills,
mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments or like character given
as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land
contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the grantee until
the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period
of time exceeding thirty (30) years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. This shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
Section 335.08 of this article.
(D) “Family Farm Corporation” shall mean a corporation of which
at least seventy-five (75%) percent of its assets are devoted to the
business of agriculture and at least seventy-five (75%) percent of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of
the same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to
include:
(a) Recreational activities such as, but not limited to,
hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show competition
or racing;
(b) The raising, breeding or training of game animals or
game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals
intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities
(c) Fur farming;
(d) Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations;
(e) Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
(E) “Members of the same family” shall mean any individual,
such individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of
such individual's parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal
descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing,
and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the
half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were released
by the whole-blood.
(F) “Person” shall mean every natural person, association, or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
fine or imprisonment, or both. The term "person" as applied to
associations, shall include the responsible members or general partners
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
(G) “Real estate” shall mean:
(a) All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this
City, including without limitation buildings,
structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas,
ARTICLE 335 3
quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables
or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with
a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial
plant.
(b) A condominium unit.
(c) A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative
housing corporation, trust or association under a
proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
(H) “Real estate company” shall mean a corporation or
association which is primarily engaged in the business of holding,
selling or leasing real estate, ninety (90%) percent or more of the
ownership interest in which is held by thirty-five (35) or fewer
persons and which:
(a) Derives sixty (60%) percent or more of its annual
gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of
real estate; or
(b) Holds real estate, the value of which comprises
ninety (90%) percent or more of the value of its
entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferrable and actively
traded on an established market.
(I) “Title to real estate” shall mean:
(a) Any interest in real estate which endures for a
period of time, the termination of which is not fixed
or ascertained by a specific number of years,
including without limitation an estate in fee simple,
life estate, or perpetual leasehold; or
(b) Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed
period of years but which, either by reason of the
length of the term or the grant of a right to extend
the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee
simple, life estate or perpetual leasehold, including
without limitation a leasehold interest or possessory
interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a
term of thirty (30) years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in
which the lessee has equity.
(J) “Transaction” shall mean the making, executing, delivering,
accepting, or presenting for recording of a document.
(K) “Value” shall mean:
(a) In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at
arm's length for actual monetary worth, the amount of
the actual consideration therefore, paid or to be
ARTICLE 335 4
paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby,
whether or not the underlying indebtedness is
assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part
thereof where such liens or other encumbrances and
ground rents also encumber or are charged against
other real estate: Provided, that where such
documents shall set forth a nominal consideration,
the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in or actual consideration for the
contract of sale;
(b) In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a
judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage by a
judicial officer, transactions without consideration
or for consideration less than the actual monetary
worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an
occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real
estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary
worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the
assessed value of real estate for local real estate
tax purposes for the common level ratio factor
developed by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue
for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base
calculations;
(c) In the case of an easement or other interest in real
estate, the value of which is not determinable under
clause (1) or (2), the actual monetary worth of such
interest; or
(d) The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth
of any executory agreement for the construction of
buildings, structures or other permanent improvements
to real estate between the grantor and other persons
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby
or between the grantor, the agent or principle of the
grantor of a related corporation, association or
partnership and the grantee existing before or
effective with the transfer.
335.04 IMPOSITION OF TAX; INTEREST
(A) Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts
presents for recording any document or in whose behalf any document is
made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall
be subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part
thereof, a tax at the rate of one (1%) percent of the value of the real
estate represented by such document, which tax shall be payable at the
earlier of the time the document is presented for recording or within
thirty (30) days of acceptance of such document or within thirty (30)
days of becoming an acquired company.
(B) The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence by
the affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
of Lehigh County or Northampton County, respectively, whereon the date
ARTICLE 335 5
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
(C) It is the intent of this ordinance that the entire burden
of the tax imposed herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the
limitations prescribed in The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. §6901 et seq., so that if any other
political subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax
on the same person or transfer then the tax levied by the City under
the authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the
tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be one-half (½)
of the rate and such one-half (½) rate shall become effective without
any action on the part of the City provided, however, that the City and
any other political subdivision which impose such tax on the same
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective
rates to one-half (½) of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
(D) Where lands lying partly within the boundaries of the City
and partly without such boundaries are transferred, the tax herein
imposed shall be calculated upon such portion of the value as shall be
represented by the portion of such lands lying within the boundaries of
the City, such apportionment of value to be evidenced by the affidavit
or certificate of value hereinafter provided for, but shall in no event
be less than the highest assessed valuation for local tax purposes
placed upon the same in the assessment of property within the City.
(E) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at
the rate in effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and
collected.
335.05 EXEMPT PARTIES
The United States, the Commonwealth, or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt
from payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
335.06 EXCLUDED TRANSACTIONS
The tax imposed by Section 335.04 shall not be imposed upon:
(A) A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in
connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the
condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the
time of condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one (1) year from
the date of condemnation.
(B) A document which the City is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
ARTICLE 335 6
(C) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district
or county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(D) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which
corrects or confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not
extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(E) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual
consideration of property passed by testate or intestate succession and
held by cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater
in value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(F) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who
were previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired
by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of a
brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or
sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
(1) year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such
transfer.
(G) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(H) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a
trustee of an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to
all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries
are contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the
trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible
beneficiaries.
(I) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a
trustee to a beneficiary or an ordinary trust.
(J) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from
trustee to successor trustee.
(K) A transfer (i) for no or nominal actual consideration
between principal and agent or straw party; or (ii) from or to an agent
or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal,
no tax would be imposed under this article. Where the document by
which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the
benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(L) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or
consolidation of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit
corporation, except where the department reasonably determines that the
ARTICLE 335 7
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance
of the tax imposed by this article.
(M) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate
held of record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the association
in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real
estate being conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the
interest in the association has been held by the grantee for more than
two (2) years.
(N) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency
or authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a transfer
to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(O) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency
or authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i)
the grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, energy conversion, energy
production, pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and (ii) the
agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate
transferred.
(P) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide
mortgage in default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to
a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder
of a mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(Q) Any transfer between religious organizations or other
bodies or person holding title for a religious organization if such
real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor for
commercial purposes.
(R) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt
status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code of
1954, (68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. §501(c)(3) and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(S) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of
agriculture to a family farm corporation by a member of the same family
which directly owns at least seventy-five (75%) percent of each class
of the stock thereof.
(T) A transfer between members of the same family of an
ownership interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(U) A transaction wherein the tax due is One ($1.00) Dollar or
less.
(V) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil,
natural gas or minerals and assignments thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the
true, full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the
ARTICLE 335 8
statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of
coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be
limited to an explanation of the reason such document is not subject to
tax under this ordinance.
335.07 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO ASSOCIATIONS OR CORPORATIONS
AND MEMBERS, PARTNERS, STOCKHOLDERS OR SHAREHOLDERS
THEREOF
Except as otherwise provided in Section 335.06, documents which
make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real
estate between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose
of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate
from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
335.08 ACQUIRED COMPANY
(A) A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change
in the ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the
change does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or
together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or
indirectly, ninety (90%) percent or more of the total ownership
interest in the company within a period of three (3) years.
(B) With respect to real estate acquired after February 16,
1986, a family farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
corporation or when, or because of issuance or transfer of stock or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm corporation under this ordinance.
(C) Within thirty (30) days after becoming an acquired company,
the company shall present a declaration of acquisition with the
Recorder of each county in which it holds real estate for the
affixation of documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration shall
set forth the value of real estate holdings of the acquired company in
such county. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration
of Acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
335.09 CREDITS AGAINST TAX
(A) Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a
licensed real estate broker which property was transferred to him
within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the
time of the transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of
the tax due upon the transfer.
(B) Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential
property which was transferred to the builder within the preceding year
as consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the
time of the transfer to the builder shall be given to the builder
toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
ARTICLE 335 9
(C) Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by
the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the
lease shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
(D) Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which
was previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for
the amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the
grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
(E) If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit
given under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit
allowed is greater than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover
credit shall be allowed.
335.10 EXTENSION OF LEASE
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a
right or option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the
rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the
rental charge is established.
335.11 PROCEEDS OF JUDICIAL SALE
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out
of the proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other
obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of
the writ upon which the sale is made except the State Realty Transfer
Tax, and the sheriff, or other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay
the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in
connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to
pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for
the remaining tax.
335.12 DUTIES OF THE RECORDER OF DEEDS
(A) As provided in 16 P.S. §11011-6, as amended by Act of July
7, 1983 (P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds of Lehigh County and
Northampton County, respectively, shall be the collection agent for the
local Realty Transfer Tax, including any amount payable to the City
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax, without
compensation from the City.
(B) In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the
property is located in more than one political subdivision, the
Recorder of Deeds of Lehigh County and Northampton County,
respectively, shall not accept for recording such a deed unless it is
accompanied by a statement of value showing what taxes are due each
municipality.
(C) On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder of Deeds
of Lehigh County and Northampton County, respectively, shall pay over
to the City all local Realty Transfer Taxes collected, less two (2%)
percent for use of the County, by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
reporting collections of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. The two
(2%) percent commission shall be paid to the County.
ARTICLE 335 10
(D) Upon a redetermination of the amount of Realty Transfer Tax
due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder of Deeds of
Lehigh County and Northampton County, respectively, shall rerecord the
deed or record the additional Realty Transfer Tax form only when both
the State and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
335.13 STATEMENT OF VALUE
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds of
Lehigh County and Northampton County, respectively, for recording,
shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full
and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of
value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete
value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject
to tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer
Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real
estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the
transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full
and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is
not subject to tax under this ordinance.
335.14 CIVIL PENALTIES
(A) If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this
article is due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount
equal to fifty (50%) percent of the underpayment.
(B) In the case of failure to record a declaration required
under this article on the date prescribed therefore, unless it is shown
that such failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to
the tax five (5%) percent of the amount of such tax if the failure is
for not more than one (1) month, with an additional five (5%) percent
for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such failure
continues, not exceeding fifty (50%) percent in the aggregate.
335.15 LIEN
The tax imposed by this ordinance shall become a lien upon the
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, laying
being situated, wholly or in part within the boundaries of the City,
which lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are
described in or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the
subject of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this ordinance is
due and payable, and continue until discharge by payment, or in
accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file a
municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County or
the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County, respectively, in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. §7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
ARTICLE 335 11
335.16 ENFORCEMENT
All taxes imposed by this ordinance together with interest and
penalties prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of
like character are recovered.
335.17 REGULATIONS
The Treasurer of the City of Bethlehem is charged with the
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the
tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. §8101-C et seq. are incorporated
into and made a part of this ordinance.
335.18 SEVERABILITY
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance in its entirety or of any part thereof other than that
declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 2017 §12. Passed 12/30/66; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89;
Ord. 4259-Passed 6/15/04)
ARTICLE 337
Per Capita Tax
337.01 Rate Established.
337.02 Report Of Rental Unit Owners.
337.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to tax - See Act 511 of 12/31/65 (53 P.S. §6901-6924)
Residence tax - See BUS. REG. Art. 331
337.01 RATE ESTABLISHED.
A per capita tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of five dollars
($5.00) per year is hereby levied on all inhabitants of the City about the age
of twenty-one years. (Ord. 2285 §1. Passed 12/27/71.)
337.02 REPORT OF RENTAL UNIT OWNERS.
On May 15 of each year, every owner of rental units used for living
purposes located within the City, including hotels, motels, rooming houses
and apartments, is required to register with the City Treasurer and shall
submit to the Treasurer a statement of the number of rental units and a
listing of all tenants with full names and addresses of such tenants, on
premises so owned, operated or managed by such individuals or firms,
which tenants have occupied the premises for a period of at least thirty days
prior to the date of the report. In addition, on November 15 of each year,
each owner shall notify the Treasurer of changes in the listing of tenants.
(Ord. 2142 §1. Passed 4/16/69.)
337.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(Ord. 2142 §3. Passed 4/16/69; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 339
Local Services Tax
339.01 Short Title
339.02 Definitions
339.03 Levy, Assessment and Collection
339.04 Duty Of Employers
339.05 Returns
339.06 Dates For Determining Tax Liability And Payment
339.07 Self-Employed Individuals
339.08 Individuals Engaged In More Than One Occupation
339.09 Employers And Self-Employed Individuals Residing Outside The City
339.10 Exemptions
339.11 Administration Of Tax
339.12 Suits For Collection
339.13 Validity
339.14 Saving Clause
339.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Local Tax Enabling Act 511 of 1965 – House Bill 197 of November 2004
See Ord. 2925, Passed 2/7/84; Ord. 2994, Passed 5/7/85; Ord. 3242, Passed 2/7/89;
and Ord. 4301, Passed 1/4/05.
NOTE: Emergency and Municipal Services Tax (EMST) replaced the
Occupational Privilege Tax of $10 originally effective January 1,
1967 – Ord. 2020; The Emergency and Municipal Services Tax
(EMST) was replaced by the Local Services Tax (LST) – State Act 7 -
2007
339.01 SHORT TITLE.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Local Tax Ordinance.”
339.02 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or language
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
(a) "Individual" means any person, male or female, engaged in any
ARTICLE 339 2
occupation, trade or profession within the corporate limits of the City.
(b) "Occupation" means any trade, profession, business or undertaking of
any type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the City for which compensation is
charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages, commissions or fees for
services rendered.
(c) "Employer" means an individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed
person.
(d) “Tax” means the Local Services Tax in the amount of fifty-two dollars
($52.00) levied by this article.
(e) "Treasurer" means the Treasurer of the City.
(f) “Administrator” means the Tax Administrator of the City under whose
direction this tax shall be enforced.
(g) "Fiscal year" means the period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of each calendar year.
(h) "City" means the area within the corporate limits of the City of
Bethlehem.
(i) "He," "his" or "him" means and indicates the singular and plural number,
as well as the male, female and neuter gender.
339.03 LEVY, ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION.
For general revenue purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the privilege of
engaging in an occupation within the corporate limits of the City during the fiscal
year of 1967 and thereafter. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for
any length of time during the year shall pay a tax not to exceed fifty-two dollars
($52.00), in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax is in addition to
ARTICLE 339 3
all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the City.
The tax must be assessed and collected on a pro-rata basis determined by
the number of payroll periods established by an employer for a calendar year. The
pro-rata share of the tax assessed on each taxpayer for a payroll period is calculated
by dividing the combined rate of $52.00 by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year.
339.04 DUTY OF EMPLOYERS.
Each employer within the City, as well as those employers situated outside
the City but who engage in business within the City, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting from each employee engaged by him and performing for him
within the City such tax not to exceed fifty-two dollars ($52.00) per annum and
with making a return and payment thereof to the Treasurer.
Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax from each
employee in his employ, whether such employee is paid by salary, wages or
commission, and whether or not part or all of such services are performed within
the City.
339.05 RETURNS.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to him by the Bureau of Taxes, 10 E. Church Street,
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. It is further provided that if the employer fails to file
such return and pay such tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof from the
salary, wages or commissions paid by him to such employee, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax, in full, as though the tax had originally been
levied against him.
339.06 DATES FOR DETERMINING TAX LIABILITY AND
PAYMENT.
Each employer shall use his employment records from January 1 to March
31 of each fiscal year, for determining the number of employees from whom such
tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Treasurer on or before April 30 of each
ARTICLE 339 4
fiscal year.
Supplemental reports and payment of tax due thereon shall be made by each
employer on July 31 and October 31 of the same fiscal year, and on January 31 of
the succeeding fiscal year, of new employees as reflected on his employment
records from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30, and October 1 to
December 31 of each fiscal year. Payment of tax due on these supplemental reports
shall be made on July 31 and October 31 of the same fiscal year, and on January 31
of the succeeding fiscal year, respectively.
339.07 SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind,
engaged in any occupation or profession within the City, shall be required to
comply with this article and pay the tax on a quarterly basis, as if their payroll
period is a calendar quarter. The tax should be remitted within thirty (30) days
after the close of the quarter.
339.08 INDIVIDUALS ENGAGED IN MORE THAN ONE
OCCUPATION.
(a) Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
City shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his principal occupation, and his
principal employer shall deduct this tax and deliver to him evidence of deductions
on a form to be furnished to the employer by the Bureau of Taxes, which form
shall be evidence of deduction having been made, and when presented to any other
employer shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax from the
employee's wages, but to include such employee on his return by setting forth his
name, address and the name and account number of the employer who deducted
this tax.
(b) In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, or an
occupation which requires his working in more than one political subdivision
during the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect such Local Services Tax
shall be in the following order: first, the political subdivision in which a person
maintains his principal office or is principally employed; second, the political
subdivision in which the person resides and works, if such a tax is levied by that
ARTICLE 339 5
political subdivision; third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed
and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. The place of
employment shall be determined as of the day the taxpayer first becomes subject to
the tax during the calendar year. It is the intent of this provision that no person
shall pay more than fifty-two dollars ($52.00) in any calendar year as a Local
Services Tax, irrespective of the number of the political subdivisions within which
such person may be employed within any given calendar year. In case of dispute, a
tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year declaring that the taxpayer
has made prior payment shall constitute prima facie certification of payment to all
other political subdivisions.
339.09 EMPLOYERS AND SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS
RESIDING OUTSIDE THE CITY.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside of the City but who perform services of any type or kind, or
engage in any occupation or profession within the City, do, by virtue thereof, agree
to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations
promulgated under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of the City. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within the
City, and an employee of a nonresident employer, may, for the purpose of this
article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid,
the City shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
339.10 EXEMPTIONS.
(a) Income: Any individual who derives income of less than twelve
thousand dollars ($12,000) per year, from all sources within the City of Bethlehem,
shall be entitled to a refund of tax paid by him or withheld from him by his
employer, and may file a claim for refund on such form as may be prescribed by
the Administrator.
(b) Upfront Exemption: Any employee who reasonably expects to
receive earned income and net profits of less than twelve thousand dollars
($12,000) from all sources within the City of Bethlehem for the current calendar
year, may file an “upfront” exemption form with the City of Bethlehem and the
employee’s employer. The exemption form must be filed with a copy of the
ARTICLE 339 6
employee’s last pay stub(s) or W-2 forms from employment within the City of
Bethlehem for the year prior to the year for which the employee is requesting an
exemption. The exemption form must be filed each year an exemption is
requested. Employers must make upfront exemption forms readily available to
employees at all times and provide new employees with the forms at the time of
hiring.
(c) Suspension of Withholding: Upon receipt of an upfront exemption
form and until otherwise instructed by the City of Bethlehem, employers must stop
withholding the tax for the specific calendar year from employees for whom the
exemption applies.
(d) Restoration of Withholding: Employers must “restart” withholding
the tax from an employee who files an exemption certificate in the following
circumstances:
(1) If instructed to do so by the political subdivision levying the tax;
(2) If notified by the employee that they are no longer eligible for
the exemption; or
(3) If the employer pays the employee more than $12,000 for the
calendar year.
Employers “restart” withholding of the tax by withholding (1) a
“catch-up” lump sum tax equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the
employee as a result of the exemption; and (2) the same amount per payroll period
that is withheld from other employees.
(e) Military Exemption: The following are exempted from the tax: (1)
members of a reserve component of the armed forces called to duty and (2)
honorably discharged veterans who served in any war or armed conflict who are
blind, paraplegic, or a double or quadruple amputee as a result of military service
or who are 100% disabled from a service-connected disability.
339.11 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to accept and receive payments of
ARTICLE 339 7
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him from
each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the tax was
received.
(b) The Administrator is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article, and is hereby charged and empowered to prescribe,
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of the payroI1 records of any employer subject to this article, the
examination and correction of any return made in compliance with this article and
any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred, or any payment made by a taxpayer who is
engaged in a business or occupation, or businesses or occupations, from which he
derives less than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000) per year. Any person aggrieved
by any decision of the Business Administrator shall have the right to appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County as in other cases provided.
(c) The Administrator, or his duly appointed delegates, is hereby authorized to
examine the books and payroll records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of
any return made by an employer, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due.
Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Administrator the means,
facilities and opportunity for such examination.
339.12 SUITS FOR COLLECTION.
(a) In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid thirty
days after the due dates above set forth, the Administrator may sue for the recovery
of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with interest and penalty.
(b) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of six
percent on the amount of such tax shall be calculated, beginning with the due date
of such tax, and a penalty of five percent shall be added to the flat rate of such tax
for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the
individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs
of collection.
339.13 VALIDITY.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions shall
ARTICLE 339 8
be held invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect or
invalidate any of the remaining provisions. It is hereby declared to be the
legislative intent that this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provision had not been included herein.
339.14 SAVING CLAUSE.
(a) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
City to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the
taxing power of the City under the Constitution of the United States and the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of
the United States or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any
individual, the decision of the Court shall not affect or impair the right to impose
or collect such tax, or the validity of the tax so imposed on other persons or
individuals as herein provided.
339.99 PENALTY.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this
article, or who refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his custody
and control setting forth the number of employees subject to this tax who are in his
employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this article
shall, upon conviction before any alderman or magistrate, be sentenced to pay a
fine for each offense of six hundred dollars ($600.00), or imprisoned not more than
ninety days, or both. It is further provided that the action to enforce the fine and
penalty herein provided may be instituted against any person in charge of the
business of any employer who has failed or refuses to file a return required by this
article.
(Ord. 4454. Passed 12/4/07)
ARTICLE 341
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax
341.01 Definitions.
341.02 Rate, basis and computation of tax.
341.03 Declaration and installment payment of estimated tax.
341.04 Returns.
341.05 Payment of tax and penalties for late payment.
341.06 License.
341.07 Continuing offense.
341.08 Duties of the Tax Administrator and Treasurer.
341.09 Confidential nature of returns, etc.
341.10 Suits on collection and penalty.
341.11 Savings and severability clauses.
341.12 Duties of other City departments.
341.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to tax - See Act 511 of 12/31/65 (53 P.S. §6901-6924)
Occupation Privilege Tax - See BUS. REG. Art. 339
341.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) "Business" means the carrying on or exercising of any trade, profession, or other
commercial activity. Employment for a salary or wage is not “business”.
(b) "City" means the City of Bethlehem.
(c) "License year" means the year commencing May 1 and ending April 30.
(d) "Person" means a natural person, individual, partnership, association, corporation,
limited partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary, corporate officer, or
any other entity subject to or claiming exemption from the tax or under a duty to perform an act for
itself or for another under or pursuant to the City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile
Tax.
(e) “Tax Administrator” means person, public employee, or private agency designated
by the governing body to collect and administer the licensing of businesses and the tax on gross
receipts. (Ord. 2017-12. Passed 3/7/2017)
ARTICLE 341 2
(f) "Taxpayer" means a person, partnership, association, or any other entity, required
hereunder to file a return of gross receipts, or to pay a tax thereon.
(g) "Tax year" means the calendar year.
(h) "Treasurer" means the Treasurer of the City.
341.02 RATE, BASIS AND COMPUTATION OF TAX.
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1971 and annually thereafter a tax for general
revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein defined in the City, as follows:
(a) Rate and Basis of Tax.
The rate of tax on every dollar of the whole or gross volume of business transacted
within the territorial limits of the City shall be calculated as follows:
(1) On receipts attributable to wholesale sales of merchandise the rate shall be
one mill or one dollar ($1.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000) of gross
volume of business.
(2) On receipts attributable to all other business the rate shall be one and
one-half mills or one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per one thousand dollars
($1,000) of gross volume of business.
(3) On receipts attributable to retail sales of merchandise the rate shall be one
and one-half mills or one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per one thousand
dollars ($1,000) of gross volume of business.
(b) Computation of Volume of Business.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced business prior to the beginning of the tax year shall compute
gross volume of business transacted during the immediately preceding tax
year.
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced or who commences business subsequent to the beginning of the
tax year, shall compute gross volume of business upon the actual gross
volume of business transacted during that tax year.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business’ temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature, shall
compute his estimated gross amount of business to be transacted by him for
the period the person engages in such temporary, seasonal or itinerant
ARTICLE 341 3
business within the City by a method to be determined by the Tax
Administrator.
(4) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept “payment in protest”
of the amount of business privilege tax claimed to be due by the Tax Bureau
in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or the amount of the
City’s claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by the Tax
Appeal Hearing Officer or a court of competent jurisdiction that the City
has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the
taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to cases in
which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(c) Persons, Business and Receipt Exempted.
(1) Persons and Businesses.
Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
agencies of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the business of any political subdivision, or of any
authority created or organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly
are exempt from the provisions of this article.
(2) Privileges, Transactions, etc.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege, transaction,
subject, or occupation which is subject to a State tax of license fee, and
which tax or license fee has been held by the Courts of Pennsylvania to be
the basis for exemption from the imposition of a business privilege or
mercantile tax by a municipality.
(3) Utilities.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross receipts from utility
service of any person or company whose rates of service are fixed and
regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or on any public
utility service rendered by any such person or company or on any privilege
or transaction involving the rendering of any such public utility service.
(4) State Tax on Tangible Property.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the privilege of employing
such tangible property as is subject to a State tax except on sales of
admission to places of amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or
possession of property.
ARTICLE 341 4
(5) Production and Manufacture.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on goods, articles and products,
or on byproducts of manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural resources
and farm products, manufactured, produced or grown in the City or on the
preparation or processing thereof for use or market, or on any privilege, act
or transaction related to the business of manufacturing, the production,
preparation or processing of minerals, timber and natural resources or farm
products, by manufacturers, by producers and by farmers with respect to the
goods, articles and products of their own manufacture, production or
growth, or any privilege, act or transaction relating to the business of
processing byproducts of manufacturer, or on the transportation, loading,
unloading or dumping or storage of such goods, articles, products or
byproducts.
(d) Determination of Gross or Whole Volume of Business. The gross or whole volume
of business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall include the gross consideration
credited or received for or on account of sales made and/or services rendered, subject only to the
following allowable deductions and exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail dealers
derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by any
dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and
merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the trade-in
allowance.
(2) Refunds, credits or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser on
account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or on account of
goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such other
broker.
(4) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for Federal
income taxation purposes.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States, the Commonwealth or the
City.
(e) Partial Exemptions. Where the gross or whole volume of business in its entirety
cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions of the
Constitution of the United States, or any other provision of law, the Tax Administrator under the
direction of the Business Administrator shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
ARTICLE 341 5
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross or whole volume of business which is
properly attributable and allowable to doing business in the City shall be taxed hereunder.
(f) Rate When Two Taxing Bodies Impose Same Tax. If any person is liable for the
same tax on the same subject imposed under Pamphlet Law 1257 and its amendments (Act 511 of
12/31/65 (53 P.S. §6901-6924)), to the City and one or more political subdivisions of the State,
then and in that event the tax shall be apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed upon by
such political subdivisions, but, in no event, shall the combined taxes of both subdivisions exceed
a maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Enabling Act permitting the imposition of such taxes.
(g) Records. The exempt or partially exempt taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing
enumerated exclusions and deductions, shall keep books and records of business so as to show
clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales and services as are excluded from the
tax and the amounts of such sales and services, which may be deducted from the gross volume of
business as hereinbefore, provided.
341.03 DECLARATION AND INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED TAX.
(a) Every person subject to the provisions of this article, whose annual gross receipts
can be reasonably expected to exceed two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), is encouraged to file
quarterly declarations of estimated tax and pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated annual
tax with each filing.
(b) Every person filing a declaration shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
The fact that an individual’s name is signed on the return shall be prima facie evidence that the
individual is authorized to sign the return on behalf of the taxpayer.
(c) Every person filing a declaration of estimated tax shall file such declaration and
make payment of the estimated tax in quarterly installments of twenty-five percent (25%) of the
total estimated tax to be due for the year. Payments of the quarterly estimated installments are due
on April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31 of the succeeding year.
(d) An overpayment of the quarterly estimated installments may be credited to the next
year’s first quarterly installment or refunded directly to the taxpayer.
341.04 RETURNS.
(a) Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Administrator. Every
person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
(b) The fact that an individual’s name is signed on the return shall be prima facie
evidence that such individual is authorized to sign the return on behalf of the taxpayer.
(c) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced his
business subsequent to the beginning of any tax year shall on or before the first Monday of May of
the next year, file with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth his name, his business, business
ARTICLE 341 6
address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of
business transacted by him during the preceding tax year and the amount of the tax due.
(d) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article who engages
in a business activity that is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature or who does not intend to
continue such activity within the City of Bethlehem for a full year, shall within forty-five (45) days
of the close of the temporary, seasonal or itinerant business activity, file a return with the Tax
Administrator setting forth his name, his business name, his business address and such information
as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business transacted. At the time of
filing the tax return the taxpayer shall make payment of the tax due or make claim for credit or
refund of any overpayment. For purposes of this paragraph, vendors at fairs, festivals, and craft
shows/fairs shall be considered temporary, seasonal or itinerant businesses required to file such
returns within forty-five (45) days of the close of the fair, festival or craft show/fair.
(e) Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within thirty (30) days
from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the actual gross volume of business
conducted and done by such person during that tax year in which the person ceased doing business,
and pay the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the time of filing the
return. If such tax has been previously paid based upon estimated gross receipts, the taxpayer shall
be entitled to a refund of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which business was terminated.
(f) Every person required to file a return by this article shall attach to such return a
copy of the Internal Revenue Service schedule or form that said person uses to report the business
activity to the Internal Revenue Service.
341.05 PAYMENT OF TAX AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT.
(a) The Business Privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due and payable
on the first Monday of May of the year following the tax year.
(b) The Treasurer shall, upon payment to him of the Business Privilege Tax, give the
person paying the same a receipt therefore.
(c) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept “payment in protest” of the
amount of business privilege tax claimed to be due by the Tax Bureau in any case where the
taxpayer disputes the validity or the amount of the City’s claim for tax. Such payment must be
clearly marked as a “payment in protest” and must include the taxpayer’s name, address,
identification number, and tax period for which the payment is being made.
(d) If there is an underpayment of the tax, late payment of the tax, or a failure to pay the
tax due on or before the due date for filing a return and paying the tax, as set forth above, a penalty
of ten percent (10%) shall be added thereto, plus an additional penalty of one percent (1%) per
month or fractional part of a month until the tax is paid.
ARTICLE 341 7
341.06 LICENSE.
(a) Any person desiring to conduct, or to continue to conduct any business, as herein
defined, within the City shall file, prior to the commencement of such conduct, with the Tax
Administrator an application for a business privilege license and shall pay a fee of thirteen dollars
($13.00) for the initial license and thirteen dollars ($13.00) for each renewal thereof.
(b) The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which
the license is issued, and shall remain in effect for the license year or fraction of year for which the
license was issued.
(c) In cases where business is conducted in more than one place, a separate license
shall be issued for each place of business.
(d) Whenever any licensee under this article shall change the address of the business
for which such license is issued, the licensee shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator of
such change of address and the new address or location where the business will be conducted.
(e) Whenever the ownership of any such business shall be changed, the new owner,
upon taking possession thereof, shall notify the Tax Administrator of such fact within ten (10) days
after such change becomes effective.
(f) No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred or assigned
to any other person, firm or corporation.
(g) Any taxpayer who is in default of payment of tax due hereunder shall be refused a
license until such tax is paid in full.
(h) A City business which obtains a business privilege and mercantile tax license will
not be required to obtain a separate license to participate in any festival, fair, carnival, craft fair or
any other temporary place of business (referred to herein as a “Temporary Event”) so long as the
business conducted at such Temporary Event is the same as the business conducted at the license
holder’s regular place of business in Bethlehem.
(i) It shall be the duty and requirement of the sponsoring individual, group, association
or corporation (including non-profit organizations) of a Temporary Event to provide to all of its
vendors a City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License application and
further, to provide the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau with the following information at least
ninety (90) days prior to any such festival, fair, carnival, craft fair or any other temporary place of
business:
1) the Temporary Event's scheduled dates and times;
2) listing of all food, craft, and retail vendors;
ARTICLE 341 8
3) schedule of all vendor fees imposed by the sponsoring individual, group,
association, corporation or non-profit organization, including but not
limited to, registration fees, table fees, booth fees, utility fees, etc.
(j) When any such Temporary Event shall involve the issuance of tickets, coupons,
chips, or other form of "currency" exclusive to their event, it shall be the duty and requirement of
the sponsoring individual, group, association, corporation, or non-profit organization to provide
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau with an accounting of the ticket, coupon, chip or other form of
"currency" exchanged or "cashed in" by its vendors within sixty (60) days of the Temporary
Event's closure.
341.07 CONTINUING OFFENSE.
Each day on which a person violates any of the provisions of this article may be considered
as a separate offense and punishable as such as provided in Section 341.99.
341.08 DUTIES OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR AND TREASURER.
(a) The Treasurer is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving the taxes,
license fees, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer or his
delegates to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person paying the tax,
fees, and the date of such receipt.
(b) The Tax Administrator and his duly appointed deputies under the direction of the
Business Administrator are hereby empowered with the approval of the Business Administrator to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination and
correction of returns, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an
overpayment is claimed, or found to have occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of
this article and any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
(c) In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a return, then in
such case the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall assess the person or persons
on such an amount of whole or gross volume of business as the Tax Administrator or his deputies
deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Tax Administrator or his duly
appointed deputies shall give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade,
business, occupation or class and the amount of the Business Privilege Tax imposed or levied.
(d) The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will enable him
to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such accounts
and records must disclose in detail the gross receipts and other date pertaining to the taxpayer's
gross volume of business and must be sufficiently complete to enable the Tax Administrator or his
deputies to verify all transactions.
ARTICLE 341 9
(e) The Tax Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any person or persons subject to or supposed to be subject to-the tax imposed
by this article, in order to verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was made,
ascertain the tax due.
(f) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator shall have the right
to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other cases.
341.09 CONFIDENTIAL NATURE OF RETURNS, ETC.
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator, or any other official, agent or employee
of the City, as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or
authorized by this article, shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order or
as otherwise provided by law.
341.10 SUITS ON COLLECTION AND PENALTY.
(a) The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the power in the
name of the City to institute proceedings against any and all persons who violate the provisions of
this article.
(b) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the recovery of
any such tax, the person liable therefore, shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and
interest and penalties herein imposed.
341.11 SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY CLAUSES.
(a) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City to levy and
collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, business or any portion of any business not within
the taxing power of the City under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth.
(b) If the tax or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the provisions of
this article shall be held by any court of competent power or jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the Commonwealth or any other provision of the law, the
decisions of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose taxes, or the validity of the taxes
so imposed upon other persons herein provided.
(c) The provisions of this article are sever able, and if any of its provisions shall be held
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council that this
article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provisions had not been
included herein.
ARTICLE 341 10
341.12 DUTIES OF OTHER CITY DEPARTMENTS.
(a) Upon request by the Tax Administrator, it shall be the duty of any City employees
having access thereto to examine all places of business and persons within their respective
employment duties and territories subject to the provision of this Article, to determine whether the
license provisions of this Article have been complied with.
(b) The above requests shall be made to the various department heads responsible for
the supervision of said employees and those department heads shall report to the Tax
Administrator any license violations under the provisions of this Article.
341.99 PENALTY.
Any person who conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses subject to the tax
imposed by this article, without having first secured a business privilege license for the year, or
any person who fails to file a tax return as required by the provisions of this article, or any person
who willfully files a false return, shall, upon summary conviction before any Justice of the Peace,
be sentenced to pay a fine of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for any one offense, recoverable with
costs, or imprisoned not more than ninety days, if the amount of the fine and costs are not paid.
(Ord. 2230 §6. Passed 12/22/70; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89; Ord. 4130. Passed 4/16/02)
ARTICLE 342
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
342.01 Definitions.
342.02 Exemption Amount.
342.03 Exemption.
342.04 Notice to Taxpayers.
342.05 Procedure for Obtaining Exemption.
342.06 Termination.
342.07 Hearing Board.
342.08 Rules and Regulations.
342.09 Severability.
342.10 Contingency.
342.11 Default.
342.12 Appeal of Default.
CROSS REFERENCE
Resolution 10,051 passed 11/13/84; Resolution 10,365 passed 5/27/86.
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act - See 72 P.S. §4722 et seq.
342.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning
set forth below:
(1) "Becomes assessable" means immediately following issuance of the state
and local occupancy permits.
(2) "Deteriorated area" means that portion of the City which City Council has
determined to be physically blighted in Resolution No. 2017-136 pursuant to
Ordinance 2017-23 and Act 76 of 1977 of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended (72 P.S. 4722 et seq.)
and/or Resolution 2017-103, passed April 18, 2017 pursuant to Ordinance
2017-13, which amends Ordinance 2016-23, and Act 42 of 1977 of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as Amended (72
P.S. § 4711-101, et seq.).
(Editor’s Note: See Resolutions Nos. 10,051, 10,366, 10,487, 10,863,
11,430, 11,547, 13,043, 13,462, 13,501, 15,163, 2012-166, and 2017-103,
for prior boundaries of the deteriorated area.) (Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07;
Ord. 2012-28. Passed 10/2/12; Ord. 2016-23. Passed 9/6/16; Ord. 2017-13;
Ord. 2017-23. Passed 6/20/2017)
ARTICLE 342
2
(3) "Deteriorated property" means any industrial, commercial or other business
property owned by an individual, association or corporation, and located in a
deteriorating area, as provided by Resolution of Council, or any such
property which has been the subject of an order by the City requiring the unit
to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with
laws, ordinance or regulations. Buildings wherein at least 30% of the usable
gross floor area is utilized for industrial, commercial, or business use shall, if
otherwise qualified, be considered a "deteriorated property" within this
Article.
(4) "Improvement" means the construction of new building structures, new
additions to existing structures or substantial renovations to existing
structures which result in an increase in assessed valuation of the
deteriorated property. Such improvements shall have the effect of
rehabilitating a deteriorated property so that it becomes habitable or attains
higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity or is brought into
compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing such standards.
Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
(5) "Local taxing authority" means the City of Bethlehem, the Bethlehem Area
School District, the Saucon Valley School District, the County of
Northampton, or any other governmental entity having the authority to levy
real property taxes within the City of Bethlehem. (Ord. 3355. Passed
10/16/90; Ord. 3523. Passed 1/5/93; Ord 4446. Passed 10/16/07.)
(6) "Municipal governing body" means the City of Bethlehem.
342.02 EXEMPTION AMOUNT.
(a) The amount to be exempted shall be limited to that portion of the additional
assessment attributable to the actual cost of improvements.
(b) The exemption shall be limited to that improvement for which an exemption has been
requested in the manner set forth below, and for which a separate assessment has been made by the
Northampton County Board of Assessment Appeals. (Ord. 3355. Passed 10/16/90; Ord. 4446.
Passed 10/16/07.)
342.03 EXEMPTION.
Subject to the conditions, requirements, and limitations set forth in this Ordinance, taxpayers
making assessable improvements to deteriorated property located in the deteriorating area on the
South Side LERTA District, enacted June 20, 2017 and starting on 1/1/2018, may apply for and
may be granted a real estate tax exemption limited to the amounts in Section 342.02 above subject
to the following schedule:
ARTICLE 342
3
(a) For the first year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 100% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(b) For the second year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 90% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(c) For the third year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 80% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(d) For the fourth year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 70% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(e) For the fifth year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 60% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(f) For the sixth year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 50% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(g) For the seventh year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 40% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(h) For the eighth year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 30% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(i) For the ninth year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 20% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(j) For the tenth year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable, 10% of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(k) After the tenth year the exemption shall terminate.
(l) The exemption from taxes granted under this Ordinance shall be upon the property
and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property.
Subject to the conditions, requirements, and limitations set forth in this Ordinance, taxpayers
making assessable improvements to deteriorated property located in the deteriorating area on the
North Side LERTA District, enacted April 18, 2017 and effective 10/1/2017, may apply for and
may be granted a real estate tax exemption limited to the amounts in Section 342.02 above subject
to the following schedule:
(a) For the first year immediately following the date upon which the improvement
becomes assessable through the tenth year upon which the improvement becomes assessable, 10%
of the eligible assessment shall be exempted.
(Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07; Ord. 2017-13. Passed 4/18/2017; Ord. 2017-23. Passed 6/20/2017)
ARTICLE 342
4
342.04 NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS.
(a) There shall be placed on the form application for building, zoning and alteration
permits the following:
NOTICE TO TAXPAYERS
Under the provisions of City Ordinance No. 2959, as amended, you may be entitled
to a property tax exemption on your contemplated new construction. An application
for exemption may be secured from the City of Bethlehem and must be filed with
the City at the time a building permit is secured.
(b) At the time a building permit is secured for construction upon an existing
deteriorated property for which an exemption is requested, the taxpayer shall apply to the City of
Bethlehem or any successor agency thereto for the exemption provided for in this Ordinance. The
taxpayer shall be permitted to apply for the exemption provided in this Ordinance up to a period of
sixty (60) days from the date a final executed building permit is secured. Request for the exemption
must be in writing certified in full as prescribed by the City setting forth the following information:
(1) The date a final executed building permit was issued for said improvement.
(2) The type of improvement.
(3) The summary of the plan of the improvement.
(4) The cost of the improvement.
(5) That the property has been inspected and verified by the City of Bethlehem,
Bureau of Inspections.
(6) Any or all such additional information the City may require.
(Ord. 3355. Passed 10/16/90; Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07.)
342.05 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING EXEMPTION.
A copy of the request for exemption shall be forwarded to the Northampton County Board
of Assessment Appeals and the Bethlehem Area School District or the Saucon Valley School
District as would be applicable by the City. Upon completion of the improvement, the taxpayer
shall notify the City and the Northampton County Board of Assessment Appeals, so that the Board
may assess the improvements separately for the purpose of calculating the amount of assessment
eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits established in this Ordinance. The City will
then obtain from the Board the amount of the assessment eligible for exemption and will notify the
taxpayer. The Treasurer is authorized to make refunds, if applicable, only after the Northampton
County Board of Assessment Appeals has notified the Treasurer of its separate assessment upon the
ARTICLE 342
5
improvement for which an exemption is requested. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount
eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer of the City as provided by law. (Ord. 3355.
Passed 10/16/90; Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07.)
342.06 TERMINATION.
(a) This ordinance shall terminate on December 31, 2022 for the first defined LERTA
area adopted on June 20, 2017 pursuant to Resolution No. 2017-136 and Ordinance 2017-23.
(b) This ordinance shall terminate on December 31, 2023 for the deteriorated area(s)
adopted on April 18, 2017, pursuant to Resolution No. 2017-103, and Ordinance 2017-13.
(c) No later than the above-respective termination dates, the Mayor of the City of
Bethlehem shall submit a written report to the Council of the City of Bethlehem which shall inform
the Council as to how this Ordinance has been administered, the effects of this Ordinance on the
community and include any suggestions or recommendations for this Ordinance's reenactment,
modification or repeal.
(d) Nothing contained herein shall act to prohibit the Council of the City of Bethlehem
from enacting a similar ordinance after December 31, 2022 and December 31, 2023, respectively.
(e) Any property tax exemptions granted under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
permitted to continue according to the exemption schedule found in Section 342.03, unless any such
property tax exemption is rescinded in accordance with the default provisions of this Ordinance,
even if this Ordinance expires or is repealed.
(Ord. 3069 §3. Passed 5/27/86; Ord. 3205. Passed 8/2/88; Ord. 3355. Passed 10/16/90; Ord.
3519. Passed 12/15/92; Ord. 3642. Passed 11/1/94; Ord. 3771. Passed 10/1/96; Ord. 3905.
Passed 10/6/98; Ord. 4042. Passed 11/21/00; Ord. 4172. Passed 12/23/02; Ord. 4278. Passed
10/5/04; Ord. 4406. Passed 12/5/06; Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07; Ord. 2008-42. Passed 12/16/08;
Ord. 2010-26. Passed 12/7/10; Ord 2012-28. Passed 10/2/12; Ord. 2016-23. Passed 9/6/16; Ord.
2017-13. Passed 4/18/2017; Ord. 2017-23. Passed 6/20/2017)
342.07 HEARING BOARD.
A Tax Abatement Hearing Board shall consist of the Business Administrator of the City of
Bethlehem, the Director of the Department of Community and Economic Development of the City
of Bethlehem, the Director of Fiscal Affairs of the County of Northampton, the Assistant to the
Superintendent for Finance and Business Administration of the Bethlehem Area School District and
the Business Manager of the Saucon Valley School District, for resolution of differences between
the approving authority and the owner-taxpayer of the improved property on matters concerning
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 342
6
The Hearing Board shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear appeals from any person aggrieved by the application of this Ordinance.
(2) To make rules with regard to conducting its hearings.
(3) To make such findings of fact as may be required by the application of this
Ordinance.
(4) To decide questions presented to the Board.
(5) To affirm, revoke or modify the decision of the City of Bethlehem as to the
eligibility of a particular property for the Property Tax Abatement as provided for in
this Ordinance.
(6) The Board shall meet upon notice of the Chairman within thirty (30) days of the
filing of an appeal and shall render its decision within thirty (30) days after the
appeal hearing.
(7) Every action of the Board shall be by resolution and certified copies furnished to the
appellant.
(8) All hearings shall be public; and the appellant or any other person whose interests
may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(9) For the purposes of this Ordinance, every action of the Board shall require a simple
majority of the members in attendance. Attendance at the hearing by three (3)
members of the Board shall be required to constitute a quorum for a meeting and
for action on an appeal.
(Ord. 3069 §4. Passed 5/27/86; Ord. 3205 §4. Passed 8/2/88; Ord. 3355. Passed 10/16/90; Ord.
3519. Passed 12/15/92; Ord. 3642. Passed 11/1/94; Ord. 3771. Passed 10/1/96; Ord. 3905. Passed
10/6/98; Ord. 4042. Passed 11/21/00; Ord. 4172. Passed 12/23/02; Ord. 4278. Passed 10/5/04; Ord.
4406. Passed 12/5/06; Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07.)
342.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Director of the Department of Community and Economic Development is hereby
authorized and empowered to prepare, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations made pursuant
to the provisions of this Ordinance. Such rules and regulations shall have the full force and effect of
law unless modified, revoked or repealed by Council. (Ord. 3355. Passed 10/16/90.)
342.09 SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and if any of its sections, clauses or
sentences shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such provisions shall not affect or impair
ARTICLE 342
7
any of the remaining sections, clauses or sentences. It is hereby declared to be the intent of Council
that this Ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section,
clause or sentence had not been included herein.
342.10 CONTINGENCY.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, this Ordinance shall remain in full
force and effect conditioned upon the Bethlehem Area School District, the Saucon Valley School
District and the County of Northampton enacting similar ordinances or resolutions with identical
deteriorated areas as those designated by the Council of the City of Bethlehem.
(Ord. 3069. Passed 5/27/86; Ord. 3205. Passed 8/2/88; Ord. 3355. Passed 10/16/90; Ord. 3519.
Passed 12/15/92; Ord. 3642. Passed 11/1/94; Ord. 3771. Passed 10/1/96; Ord. 3905. Passed
10/6/98; Ord. 4042. Passed 11/21/00; Ord. 4172. Passed 12/23/02; Ord. 4278. Passed 10/5/04;
Ord. 4406. Passed 12/5/06; Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07.)
342.11 DEFAULT.
Tax abatement under this ordinance shall be available only for those properties for which
real estate taxes are promptly paid and discharged when due. Any property that is declared
delinquent as established by the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall lose the
LERTA benefits and any and all currently due and future taxes shall be due and payable at the
full unabated assessment and tax rate. (Ord. 4446. Passed 10/16/07.)
342.12 APPEAL OF DEFAULT.
Properties that have been declared delinquent may appeal the rescission of the LERTA
benefits by providing a written request to the Hearing Board providing a basis for the appeal and
the justification for the waiver of the requirements of Section 342.11. (Ord. 4446. Passed
10/16/07.)
ARTICLE 343
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance -
North Side Central Business District
343.01 Definitions.
343.02 Exemption Amount.
343.03 Exemption.
343.04 Notice to Taxpayers.
343.05 Procedure for Obtaining Exemption.
343.06 Termination.
343.07 Hearing Board.
343.08 Rules and Regulations.
343.09 Severability.
343.10 Contingency.
CROSS REFERENCE
Resolution 10,051 dated 11/13/84; Resolution 10,366 dated 5/27/86.
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act - See 72 P.S. §4722 et seq.
NOTE: Article 343, Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
(LERTA) - North Side Central Business District, was terminated on
December 31, 2006 and was not continued
ARTICLE 345
Tax Incremental Financing Plan
345.01 Definitions
345.02 Boundaries of the District
345.03 Creation and Term of District
345.04 Name of District
345.05 Legislative Findings
345.06 Approval of TIF Plan and Project Financing
345.07 Designation of Authority as Project Authority
345.08 Creation of Tax Increment Fund
345.09 Tax Increment Revenues to be Held in Trust for
Project
345.10 Application of Tax Increment Revenue
345.11 Procedures for Collection of Tax Increment
Revenues
345.12 Agreements for Financial Security for Project
Costs
345.13 Amendments to TIF Proposal and District
345.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth below:
a. “Act” - Act 113 of 1990 enacted by the General Assembly
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
b. “Authority” - Redevelopment Authority of the City of
Bethlehem
c. “City” - City of Bethlehem
d. “”Bethlehem Works” Redevelopment Area” or “District” -
The tax increment district created pursuant to this
Resolution in accordance with the provisions of Act 113
of 1990.
ARTICLE 345 2
e. “County” - County of Northampton
f. “Finance Officer” - The legally authorized agent (the
Treasurer of the Taxing Districts and the Tax Collector
for City of Bethlehem) responsible by law for receipt
and disbursement of the revenues for taxing bodies.
g. “Project Costs” - Such costs include any and all
eligible Costs undertaken within or for the benefit of
the Tax Increment District in accordance with the
express language defining Project Costs as contained in
the Act.
h. “Plan” (or TIF Plan) - The “Bethlehem Works”
Redevelopment Plan - Tax Incremental Financing Plan
(TIF Plan) prepared by the Redevelopment Authority of
the City of Bethlehem and any duly authorized
amendments thereto.
i. “School District” - The Bethlehem Area School District.
j. “Taxing Districts” - The City, County and School
District, collectively.
k. “Tax Increment” or “Tax Increment Revenues” - Tax
increment or Tax Increment Revenues shall be deemed to
include all revenues applicable to the Tax Increment
District as more fully defined in the definition of Tax
Increment contained in the Act.
l. “Tax Increment Fund” - The fund maintained by the
Authority into which are paid all Tax Increments and
into which are deposited all other revenues related to
the Tax Increment District and the TIF Plan and from
which money is disbursed to pay Project Costs related
to the District.
345.02 BOUNDARIES OF THE DISTRICT
The “Bethlehem Works” Redevelopment Area shall contain those
units of property assessed for real property tax purposes as
described on Map 1 (attached) in Exhibit “A”.
ARTICLE 345 3
345.03 CREATION AND TERM OF DISTRICT
The “Bethlehem Works” Redevelopment Area - Tax Incremental
District is hereby created as of the effective date of this
Ordinance. The “Bethlehem Works” Tax Increment District
shall continue in existence until such time as all Project
Costs are fully paid or until June 30, 2020 whichever
occurs first. The Authority currently estimates that the
duration of the District will be twenty (20) years or less.
The City hereby determines that the requisite time provided
for under the Act subsequent to the public hearing has
passed as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
345.04 NAME OF DISTRICT
The District shall be identified as “Bethlehem Works”
Redevelopment Area for all TIF Plan and identification
purposes.
345.05 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS
The City hereby determines, in accordance with the powers
conferred upon municipalities by the Urban Redevelopment Law
and by the Act, based upon extensive studies and examination
of the conditions currently existing within the Tax
Increment District, that:
a. The District is a contiguous geographic area within a
designated redevelopment area.
b. The improvements are likely to enhance significantly
the value of real property in the District.
c. The aggregate value of equalized taxable property of
the District, plus all existing tax increment
districts, does not exceed 10% of the total value of
equalized taxable property within the City.
d. The area comprising the District as a whole has not
been subject to adequate growth and development through
investment by private enterprise and would not
reasonably be anticipated to be adequately developed
without the adoption of the TIF Plan.
e. The TIF Plan conforms to the City master plan.
ARTICLE 345 4
f. The TIF Plan will afford maximum opportunity,
consistent with sound needs of the Taxing Districts as
a whole, for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the
District by private enterprise.
g. The District is a blighted area containing
characteristics of blight as described in the Urban
Redevelopment Law and the TIF Plan to be undertaken is
necessary to eliminate such conditions of blight.
345.06 APPROVAL OF TIF PLAN AND PROJECT FINANCING
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem hereby approves
the TIF Plan for the District prepared by the Authority and
authorizes the Authority to undertake any and all methods of
financing of Project Costs available pursuant to Section 9
of the Act, as modified by the Cooperation Agreement.
345.07 DESIGNATION OF AUTHORITY AS PROJECT AUTHORITY
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem hereby designates
the Authority as the Authority as being charged with
preparing, implementing, monitoring, and directing the TIF
Plan and as the issuer for any bonds or notes which may be
necessary to finance Project Costs for the District.
345.08 CREATION OF TAX INCREMENT FUND
The Authority will establish a Tax Increment Fund account
which shall hold all Tax Increment Revenues for the Project.
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem hereby requests
that the Finance Officers of the Taxing Districts to deposit
Tax Increment Revenues as specified in the TIF Plan received
from the Taxing Districts, into a Tax Increment Fund to be
created for such purposes by the Authority. The Treasurer
of the City is also authorized to accept or deposit into the
Tax Increment Fund any other gifts, appropriations, grants,
loans, or other revenues to be applied to the District for
the purposes of the Plan.
345.09 TAX INCREMENT REVENUES TO BE HELD IN TRUST FOR
PROJECT
The required Tax Increments specified in the TIF Plan and
Cooperation Agreement collected by the Finance Officers of
the Taxing Districts, from and after the date of settlement
ARTICLE 345 5
of such taxes, shall be paid to the Tax Increment Fund as
stated in Section 8 of the Cooperation Agreement and shall
be held in trust in favor of the District for purposes of
the TIF Plan.
345.10 APPLICATION OF TAX INCREMENT REVENUE
The Authority is hereby authorized to apply Tax Incremental
Revenues to Project Costs incurred in connection with the
TIF Plan for the District in accordance with the Act. The
Authority may undertake such expenditures, make such
appropriations, reimburse parties for prior expenditures
related to Project Costs, enter into such contracts and
agreements with respect to the TIF Plan and the District
which, in the sole judgment of the Authority, shall further
the purposes of the TIF Plan consistent with the provisions
of this Resolution. Any Tax Increment Revenues remaining in
the Tax Increment Fund after payment of all Project Costs
has been made or provided for shall be returned to the
Taxing Districts on a pro rata basis in the proportions that
the property tax millage of each taxing body bears to the
entire millage levied by all Taxing Districts at the time
that such funds remain.
345.11 PROCEDURES FOR COLLECTION OF TAX INCREMENT REVENUES
The Authority is hereby directed to establish such dates for
receipt of Tax Increment Revenues, provide for any necessary
reserve for tax revenues, and establish provisions for
collection and enforcement of payment of Tax Increment
Revenues to the extent permissible under the Act.
345.12 AGREEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL SECURITY FOR PROJECT COSTS
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem hereby agrees to
enter into the Cooperation Agreement with the other Taxing
Districts and to provide any form of assurances toward
payment of Project Costs as such agreements may be deemed
necessary by the Authority in consultation with the City.
ARTICLE 345 6
345.13 AMENDMENTS TO TIF PROPOSAL AND DISTRICT
The Authority may propose and the City may adopt, by
resolution or otherwise such amendments to the TIF Plan as
are deemed necessary and which are authorized by the Act.
(Ord. 4010 – Passed 6/6/00.)
ARTICLE 347
Municipal Claims for Delinquent Accounts -
Schedule of Attorneys Fees to be Added
347.01 Statement of Policies
347.02 Schedule of Fees
347.03 Collection Procedures
347.04 Related Action
347.01 Statement of Policies. In all matters where the
City undertakes recovery efforts by legal proceedings or
otherwise, to collect unpaid taxes, unpaid water/sewer accounts
and other municipal claims, liens and accounts, the cost of
attorneys fees, together with all other charges, expenses, fees
and costs incurred, shall be added to the total payable with
respect to such unpaid taxes, unpaid water/sewer accounts and
other unpaid municipal claims, liens and accounts.
347.02 Schedule of Fees.
(a) Subject to revision from time to time, the City
hereby approves the following schedule of attorney
fees for services rendered in connection with the
collection of unpaid taxes, unpaid water/sewer
accounts, unpaid municipal claims, liens and
accounts, which is hereby determined to be fair
and reasonable compensation for the services set
forth below:
(i) In matters for which a private attorney has
been retained by the Office of the City
Solicitor on a non-contingency fee basis,
attorneys fees as follows:
Legal Services Fee for Services
Initial review and sending first Demand $150.00
letter
File lien and mailing second Demand $150.00
letter
ARTICLE 347 2
Legal Services Fee for Services
Prepare Writ of Scire Facias $150.00
Re-issue Writ $ 25.00
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.R.C.P. $ 25.00
§237.1
Prepare Motion for Alternate Service $175.00
Prepare Motion for Summary Judgment $175.00
and related Judgment
Prepare Writ of Execution $750.00
Attendance at Sale; Review Schedule $400.00
of Distribution and Resolve Distribution
Issues
Services not covered above - An hourly rate to be determined by
the City Solicitor ranging from $85.00 to $225.00 per hour.
(ii) In matters for which a private attorney has
been retained by the Office of the City
Solicitor on a contingency fee basis, the
contingency fee shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the delinquent claim.
(iii)The Office of the City Solicitor shall have
authority to determine whether a matter shall
be handled on a contingency fee basis or a
non-contingent fee basis.
(b) There shall be added to the above amounts the
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses of counsel and
the City in connection with each of these
services, as itemized in the applicable counsel
bills, which shall be deemed to be part of the
costs.
(c) The amount of fees determined as set forth above
shall be added to the City’s claim in each
Account.
347.03 Collection Procedures. The City shall comply with
any procedures for collection specified in the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE 347 3
347.04 Related Action. The proper officials of the City
are hereby authorized and empowered to take such additional
action as they may deem necessary or appropriate to implement
this Ordinance.
(Ord. 3988 – Passed 12/21/99.)
ARTICLE 349
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE REPORTING AND EVALUATION
349.01 General Purpose.
349.02 Definitions.
349.03 Economic Development Incentive Cyclical Evaluation.
349.04 FAIR Hearings.
349.05 Fair Hearing Documents and Responsibilities.
349.06 Changes to Administration Documents.
349.07 Incentive Recipient Accountability.
349.08 Miscellaneous.
CROSS REFERENCES
Pennsylvania Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. §§67.101 et seq.
Third Class City Code, Act of June 28, 1951, P.L. 662, as amended
349.01 GENERAL PURPOSE
A. In the interests of fairness, maintaining community trust, increasing transparency, educating
the public, and promoting responsible stewardship of local tax revenue and City of Bethlehem (“City”)
resources, this Article contains provisions, including without limitation: (a) supporting more efficient City
resource allocation by establishing a system for periodic, evidence-based performance evaluations of
economic development incentives and related programs; (b) making the City budgeting process more
transparent and effective through regular reporting of economic development tax and other indirect
expenditures, thereby allowing the public and the City to track indirect expenditures, whereas previously
only direct expenditures were visible during the budgeting process; (c) improving transparency and
educating the public about the types of costs incurred in connection with economic development
incentives through online publication of incentive program summaries and tax expenditure information;
(d) supporting development of improved procedures for holding recipients of economic development
benefits accountable for complying with their City tax and other obligations; and (e) improving the
City’s capacity to collect economic development data in support of City efforts to help local businesses
and spur economic growth.
B. The City Council of the City of Bethlehem (“City Council”) intends that this Article and its
individual provisions shall be interpreted and administered consistent with the City’s need to operate in an
efficient and cost-effective manner given existing resource and staff constraints, the City’s interest in
maintaining a business and investment-friendly environment, and the City’s legal obligations, including
without limitation, to protect confidential information such as taxpayer and business records, trade
secrets, and proprietary information.
ARTICLE 349
2
349.02 DEFINITIONS (Selected)
(1) “Administration” means the Mayor or any City department, bureau, or other City agency,
designated by the Mayor from time to time, to perform functions under this Article.
(2) “Administration Documents” include: (a) Incentive Inventories; (b) Administration Reports; (c)
Program Summaries; (d) Tax Expenditure Spreadsheets; and (e) any other document required
from the Administration under this Article, if any.
(3) “Administration Reports” include the (a) Tax Expenditure Reports; (b) Evaluation Reports; and
(c) any other reports required from the Administration under this Article, if any.
(4) “Annual Fair Hearing” has the meaning set forth in 349.04 (A).
(5) “Article” means Article 349 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, as amended.
(6) “City administration of” or “City administered,” in connection with any Economic Development
Incentive, is evidenced by such incentive having any of the following attributes: (1) receiving a
City funding allocation and/or (2) requiring a City Council authorization. Additionally, City
administration of any such incentive may be evidenced by a legal requirement or authorization for
a City agency to undertake any of the following actions in connection with such incentive: (1)
promulgation of rules or regulations; (2) determination, review, or confirmation of eligibility or
qualifications; (3) entering into a contract with an Economic Development Purpose; (4)
facilitating management of such incentive by distributing funds to any non-City person, entity, or
government agency; or (5) Conducting oversight or substantial administrative functions when the
public purpose associated with such incentive is within the core mission of a City agency.
(7) “Change List” has the meaning set forth in 349.06 (B).
(8) “City agency” means any City department, bureau, or any other administrative unit.
(9) “City Website” means the primary City website and/or any other website maintained by or on
behalf of the City.
(10) “Committee” means the Community and Economic Development Committee of Bethlehem City
Council.
(11) “Effective Date” means the date on which City Ordinance 2018-01, passed in City Council on
February 6, 2018, takes effect pursuant to the “Third Class City Code," Act of June 28, 1951, P.L.
662, as amended. The Effective Date is February 27, 2018.
(12) “Economic Development Incentives” include: (a) Economic Development Tax Incentives; (b)
Non-Tax Incentives; and (c) Other Incentives, if any.
(13) “Economic Development Purpose” means a goal or purpose to increase or maintain business
activity beneficial to the City, including without limitation, any of the following: attracting new
businesses; retaining existing businesses; encouraging business expansion or investment;
increasing or maintaining hiring; or increasing business sales, revenue, or profit.
ARTICLE 349
3
(14) “Economic Development Tax Incentive” means a benefit provided through City tax policy that is
intended to alter, reward, or subsidize a particular action or behavior by the recipient in order to
promote an Economic Development Purpose, including without limitation the following tax
benefits:
(1) an exemption, deduction, credit, preferential rate, or other tax benefit that: (a) reduces
the amount of a tax that would otherwise be due to the City; (b) results in a tax refund in excess
of any tax due; or (c) reduces the amount of property or other taxes collected, and/or retained, or
that would otherwise be due to the City;
(2) dedication of City tax or other revenue to provide improvements or to retire bonds
issued to pay for improvements in an economic development area, a community revitalization
area, an enterprise or other zone, or a tax increment financing district.
(15) “Evaluator” means any City agency designated by the Mayor to produce any Evaluation Report
or other Administration Document or portion thereof.
(16) “Evaluation Report” has the meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(3)(a).
(17) “FAIR Program” has the meaning set forth in 349.03.
(18) “Feasibility Considerations” means reasonable Administration operational, financial, staffing,
resource, and/or legal considerations; information access constraints created by applicable law; or
situations wherein the efforts needed to collect certain information would materially compromise
a City agency’s ability to operate efficiently.
(19) “Incentive Inventories” has the meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(1)(a).
(20) “Inventory of Economic Development Tax Incentives” has meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(1)(a).
(21) “Inventory of Non-Tax Incentives” has the meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(1)(a).
(22) “Law and/or Policy” means any applicable law and/or regulation and/or City policy.
(23) “Material Change” has the meaning set forth in 349.06 (A).
(24) “Non-Tax Incentive” means any incentive and/or program with an Economic Development
Purpose that does not reduce and/or redirect City tax revenue.
(25) “Other Incentives” means any incentive and/or program not included in the definitions of
Economic Development Tax Incentive or Non-Tax Incentive and designated by the Committee to
have an Economic Development Purpose as its primary object.
(26) “Program Summary” has the meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(4)(a).
(27) “Recipient” means any person, association, corporation, joint venture, partnership, or other entity
that receives an Economic Development Incentive.
(28) “Tax Expenditure Report” has the meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(2)(a).
(29) “Tax Expenditure Spreadsheets” has the meaning set forth in 349.05 (B)(2)(d).
(30) “Third Party” has the meaning set forth in 349.08 (C).
ARTICLE 349
4
349.03. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE CYCLICAL EVALUATION
Pursuant to this Article, the Administration shall develop and implement the Financial
Accountability Incentive Reporting (FAIR) Program (“FAIR Program”) for the cyclical, evidence-based,
performance evaluation of Economic Development Incentives through production of Administration
Documents and submission of such documents to City Council. The Committee shall require, from time
to time, an Evaluation Report on any or all Economic Development Incentives. The Administration and
the Committee shall collaborate to develop evaluation plans and metrics customized for individual
Economic Development Incentives and any standardized report forms or other documents required by this
Article or necessary to carry out its provisions.
349.04. FAIR HEARINGS
A. Scheduling; Hearing Purpose. No later than October 31st each year, the Committee shall
conduct an annual public hearing (“Annual FAIR Hearing”) to evaluate the effectiveness of Economic
Development Incentives with a material fiscal, economic, or other impact on the City. Annual FAIR
Hearings shall assess whether existing Economic Development Incentives should be modified, continued,
amended, or repealed, subject to any authorizing legislation. The Committee may hold additional FAIRrelated
hearings as it may deem necessary from time to time. (Ord. 2019-26. Passed 9/3/2019)
B. Transparency. A public comment session shall be included in each Annual FAIR Hearing. The
hearing agenda shall be posted on a City Website prior to each Annual FAIR Hearing and hearing
minutes shall be posted on a City Website following each Annual FAIR Hearing. Commencing in 2019
and thereafter annually, the Administration shall post any Administration Reports approved by the
Committee on a City Website.
349.05. FAIR HEARING DOCUMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
A. City Council Documents and Responsibilities. Prior to the first Annual FAIR Hearing in 2018,
the Committee shall develop (1) a standard form Annual FAIR Hearing agenda and (2) Economic
Development Incentive evaluation due diligence questions (together, “Council Documents”). Prior to the
second Annual FAIR Hearing and any subsequent Annual FAIR Hearings, the City Clerk shall provide
Committee members with at least the following FAIR hearing background documents produced during
the preceding one (1) year period: (a) hearing agenda(s) and due diligence questions list; (b) meeting
handout(s), if any; (c) hearing minutes; and (d) Administration Documents submitted to City Council
and/or any City Council committee.
B. Administration Reports and Document Submissions. The Administration shall produce the
following Administration Documents in connection with each Annual FAIR Hearing:
1. Incentive Inventories - Administration Document Submissions 349.05 (B)(1)
(a) Submission Schedule. No later than March 1st each year, the Administration shall
submit the following standardized inventories to the Committee: (i) an inventory of Economic
Development Tax Incentives, in effect on January 1 of the current year (“Inventory of Economic
Development Tax Incentives”); (ii) an inventory of Non-Tax Incentives in effect on January 1 of the
current year (“Inventory of Non-Tax Incentives”); and (iii) any other inventories that may be requested by
the Committee, from time to time, upon reasonable prior notice (“Other Administration Inventories”).
Together, such inventories shall be referred to as “Incentive Inventories.” The Committee may modify the
submission schedule for any Incentive Inventory upon reasonable prior notice to the Administration.
ARTICLE 349
5
(b) Inventory Forms. The Committee shall collaborate with the Administration to design
the initial Incentive Inventory standardized forms. The Administration shall submit initial draft Incentive
Inventories to the Committee by March 1, 2018 for their review and approval. (Ord. 2019-26. Passed
9/3/2019)
(c) Inventory Content. Each Incentive Inventory shall include at least the following
content unless excepted by the Committee: (1) name of Economic Development Incentive; (2) references
to any authorizing legislation and year of enactment, or the initial year of availability where no
authorizing legislation exists; (3) any expiration, sunset or other critical dates; and (4) any other content
requested by the Committee, from time to time upon reasonable prior notice, to carry out the purpose of
this Article.
2. Tax Expenditure Reporting - Administration Document Submissions 349.05 (B)(2)
(a) Submission Schedule. No later than march 31st each year, the Administration, shall
submit a separate tax expenditure report to the Committee for each Economic Development Tax Incentive
listed in the current-year Inventory of Economic Development Tax Incentives (each a “Tax Expenditure
Report”). Each such report shall contain the Tax Expenditure Report Content (defined below). The
Committee may modify the submission schedule for any Tax Expenditure Report and add or delete tax
incentives subject to reporting from time to time upon reasonable prior notice to the Administration.
(Ord. 2019-26. Passed 9/3/2019)
(b) Tax Expenditure Report Forms. The Committee shall collaborate with the
Administration to design initial standardized Tax Expenditure Report forms for each Economic
Development Tax Incentive. The Administration shall submit initial report forms to the Committee by
March 1, 2018 for their review and approval.
(c) Tax Expenditure Report Content. The Committee shall collaborate with the
Administration to set reporting periods and design standardized report information fields and content
individualized for each Economic Development Tax Incentive. Tax Expenditure Reports shall include at
least the following information for each Economic Development Tax Incentive subject to reporting in a
given year: (1) the amount of City tax revenue forgone or redirected; (2) a citation of the statutory or
other legal authority for the applicable tax incentive; (3) the year in which it was enacted or the tax year in
which it became effective; and (4) any other report content, document, and/or information requested by
the Committee from time to time upon reasonable prior notice to the Administration (together, such
content being “Tax Expenditure Report Content”). Tax Expenditure Reports may contain additional
information which the Administration considers relevant to City Council’s consideration and review of
individual incentives.
(d) Tax Expenditure Spreadsheets. No less than two (2) weeks prior to each Annual FAIR
Hearing, the Administration shall submit to the Committee a separate spreadsheet, in electronic format,
for each Economic Development Tax Incentive listed in the most current Inventory of Economic
Development Tax Incentives (together, the “Tax Expenditure Spreadsheets”). The Administration shall
submit initial Tax Expenditure Spreadsheet forms to the Committee by March 1, 2018 for their review
and approval.
3. Evaluation Reports - Administration Document Submissions 349.05 (B)(3)
(a) Submission Schedule. No later than March 31st each year, the Administration, shall
submit to the Committee a separate incentive evaluation report for each Economic Development Incentive
listed in the current year Incentive Inventories (each report being an “Evaluation Report”) unless the
Committee exempts any such incentive from the reporting requirements in this subsection. The
ARTICLE 349
6
Committee may modify the submission schedule for any Evaluation Report from time to time upon
reasonable prior notice to the Administration. (Ord. 2019-26. Passed 9/3/2019)
(b) Evaluation Report Forms. The Committee shall collaborate with the Administration
to design initial standardized report forms for evaluating each Economic Development Incentive. The
Administration shall submit initial report forms to the Committee by March 1, 2018 for their review and
approval.
(c) Evaluation Criteria and Metrics. Standardized evaluation criteria and metrics shall be
developed for each Economic Development Incentive through collaboration between the Administration
and the Committee. To the fullest extent possible, such criteria and metrics shall be standardized from
year to year to facilitate accurate cross-incentive and inter-period comparisons.
(d) Evaluation Report Content. The Committee shall collaborate with the Administration
to design standardized report content, report forms, and set reporting periods for each Economic
Development Incentive. Each Evaluation Report shall contain the Evaluation Report Content (defined
below). “Evaluation Report Content” includes the information elements set forth in EXHIBIT A to this
Article.
4. Program Summaries - Administration Document Submissions 349.05 (B)(4)
(a) Public Education. On an annual basis and subject to the submission schedule below in
this section, the Administration shall submit to the Committee a separate standardized summary
document, for each Economic Development Incentive, designed to educate the public about key features
of each such incentive program and the types of direct and indirect costs incurred by the City in
connection with each such incentive (each such incentive summary being a “Program Summary,” and if
consolidated in a single document, such document being the “Program Summaries document”). The
Administration shall post the most current Program Summaries document on a City website.
(b) Submission schedule. No later than March 31st each year, the Administration, shall
submit to the Committee the Program Summary for each Economic Development Incentive listed in the
current year Incentive Inventories unless the Committee exempts any such incentive from this submission
requirement. (Ord. 2019-26. Passed 9/3/2019)
(c) Program Summary Forms; Content. The Committee shall collaborate with the
Administration to design standardized Program Summary forms, content, and information fields for Each
Economic Development Incentive and periodically collaborate to improve the Program Summaries. The
Administration shall submit initial draft Program Summaries to the Committee by March 1, 2018 for their
review and approval.
(d) Administration Presentation of Program Summaries. During each Annual FAIR
Hearing, the Administration shall present highlights from each Program Summary.
349.06. CHANGES TO ADMINISTRATION DOCUMENTS
A. Material Changes to Administration Documents. Any Material Change (defined below) to an
Administration Document, as compared to the last submitted version of such document, shall be subject
to the approval of the Committee. The following modifications to an Administration Document shall be
deemed a “Material Change” under this section, as applicable: (1) deletion of any Economic Development
Incentive from an Incentive Inventory; (2) deletion of a required information field and/or associated
content; (3) change of source document for any required figure and/or ratio between an audited and an unaudited
document; (4) change between use of an actual and estimated figure; (5) any material change to
ARTICLE 349
7
the calculation methodology for a required figure and/or ratio; (6) material change to a previously stated
financial assumption; (7) where an account reference number is required in an Administration Document,
a change to a different account reference number or a change, addition, or deletion of any subaccount
serving as an input into any required account reference number. The Committee may deem a change to an
Administration Document, not specified above in this subsection, to be a Material Change.
B. Notice of Material Changes; Change List. Commencing in 2019 and annually thereafter, when
submitting any Administration Document under this Article, the Administration shall include in a
transmittal memorandum an itemized list (“Change List”) identifying any Material Change as compared
to the last submitted version of such document.
349.07. INCENTIVE RECIPIENT ACCOUNTABILITY
A. Accountability Improvement Recommendations. In the interest of improving the City’s
capacity for ensuring that Recipients of Economic Development Incentives comply with their tax and
other financial obligations to the City, the Administration shall: (a) investigate the incidence of Recipient
non-compliance with such obligations; (b) assess whether cost-effective options exist to improve
Recipient monitoring and/or compliance; and (c) if such cost-effective options exist, develop
recommendations to improve Recipient monitoring and/or compliance subject to the Feasibility
Considerations. The Administration shall report to the Committee on any such recommendations at any
time upon reasonable prior notice, or as part of a FAIR hearing.
B. Enhanced Recipient Reporting Documents. The Administration and the Committee shall
periodically collaborate to design enhanced Recipient reporting documents and requirements to increase
the City’s capacity to collect and analyze Economic Development Incentive performance data from
Recipients and other sources. The Administration alternatively may adopt reporting documents and
requirements of any state or federal statutes and regulations enabling or applicable to a state or federal
EDI program (“EDI” defined below) to increase the City’s capacity to collect and analyze Economic
Development Incentive performance data from Recipients and other sources.
C. Economic Development Incentive Recipient Reporting Obligation. The Recipient of an
Economic Development Incentive (“EDI”) shall comply with rules or regulations issued by the City, or
included in any agreement entered with the City, requiring a Recipient to supply reports with EDI
performance data used by the City to assess the program’s fulfillment of its purposes and those intended
by this Article. The City may modify, suspend or revoke a Recipient’s EDI benefits and continuing
eligibility for an EDI program when the Recipient fails to comply with reporting requirements; and may
reinstate benefits and program eligibility when the City deems appropriate under the circumstances.
349.08. MISCELLANEOUS
A. New, Modified, and Continued Tax Incentives. Any bill proposed by the Administration for
City Council consideration, following the Effective Date, that creates, renews, continues, or materially
modifies an Economic Development Incentive, must include a reasonably detailed statement of intent that
clearly provides the purpose of such incentive and one or more standards or goals against which its
effectiveness may be empirically assessed. In preparing any such proposed bill, the Administration shall
(a) consider whether adequate protections exist in the bill to reasonably ensure the fiscal impact of the
incentive does not increase substantially beyond the City’s expectations in future years; and (b) consider
whether the bill or existing state, federal, and/or local laws contain reasonably adequate provisions to (i)
facilitate Recipient data reporting and (ii) encourage Recipient compliance with the terms of the incentive
and City financial and other obligations.
ARTICLE 349
8
B. Cooperation; Additional Information Requests. The Committee may request any additional
documents, information, and/or reports (together, “Other Administration Information”) from the
Administration in order to carry out the purposes of this Article.
C. Engagement of Third Parties. The Administration may engage third-parties, including without
limitation consultants or other vendors, non-profits, and/or educational institutions (each, referred to as a
“Third Party”), to conduct research, analysis, and/or to produce any information or document required
from the Administration under this Article.
D. External Assistance Opportunities; Institutional Partnerships. In order to facilitate continual
FAIR Program improvement and sustainability, the Administration shall make reasonable efforts to
periodically identify and take advantage of operationally feasible and cost-effective external assistance
opportunities, including without limitation, potential grants and other external funding options, technical
assistance programs, and institutional partnerships with colleges, universities, researchers, and/or other
institutions.
E. Open Data Program. Subject to the Feasibility Considerations, the Administration shall make
reasonable efforts to publish and periodically update Economic Development Incentive information on
the City’s open data website established by City Ordinance 2017-34, passed in City Council on
November 8, 2017 (“Open Data Ordinance”). If requested by the Committee, the Administration shall
discuss their progress integrating the Open Data Program (defined in the Open Data Ordinance) and the
FAIR Program during each Annual FAIR Hearing.
F. Contracting and Procurement. Subject to the Feasibility Considerations, the Administration
shall periodically coordinate with applicable City agencies to develop rules and procedures for supporting
the FAIR Program through applicable City contracting and purchasing procedures, including without
limitation, placing requirements in applicable City contracts with vendors engaged to collect and/or
produce information necessary for production of any Administration Document. The foregoing shall not
prohibit the negotiation of contract terms which do not include such requirements where deemed
reasonably necessary by the Administration.
G. Data Collection Improvement. Subject to the Feasibility Considerations, the Administration
shall periodically review its data collection practices, software, and information technology systems to
identify potential cost-effective options for improving Recipient data collection practices to support the
FAIR Program and other purposes of this Article.
H. Discontinuance of Publication. The City reserves the right to amend or discontinue any policy
or practice regarding availability of any information made available for public review, on a City Website
or otherwise, under this Article, and to withdraw any such published information after notice to and
consultation with the Committee, unless the amendment or discontinuance is required by law, in which
case only notice is required.
I. Legal Provisions.
1. Compliance; Confidentiality. Any documents produced under this Article and disclosed to
the public shall comply with all applicable Laws and/or Policies, including without limitation, those
related to the confidentially and disclosure of taxpayer information and/or records. Nothing in this Article
shall be construed to supersede any such provision with respect to the confidentiality of taxpayer records.
Any documents produced pursuant to this Article and made available to the public shall not disclose any
proprietary or otherwise confidential taxpayer information.
ARTICLE 349
9
2. No private right of action. This Article shall not create any private rights or any private
right of action to enforce its provisions. Failure to comply with this Article shall not result in any liability
to the City, its employees, agents, contractors, or counterparties to any data-sharing or other agreements.
3. Immunities and defenses preserved. Nothing in this Article or any City policy or act
attributable to a City official or employee shall be construed to waive any privilege, right, defense, or
immunity arising out of any applicable governmental immunity laws, statutes, rules, regulations, or
common law.
4. Pennsylvania Right to Know Law. Adoption of this Article is neither intended nor to be
interpreted to alter, narrow or invalidate exceptions and exemptions from disclosure of records under the
Pennsylvania Right to Know Law, 65 P.S. §§67.101 et seq., as amended, or any other Law and/or Policy.
5. Defined Terms in Exhibits. Any terms appearing in exhibits or schedules to this Article
shall have the definitions stated in the body of this Article, or if undefined, shall have their plain meaning.
6. Severability. The provisions of this Article are severable. If any part of this Article is
declared illegal or otherwise invalid, the other provisions of this Article shall remain in effect to the
fullest extent permitted by law.
J. City Rules and Regulations. The City Council and Administration shall have the authority to
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to implement and enforce the requirements of this Article.
K. Ongoing Collaboration. The format, design, and content of the various documents, reports,
schedules, etc. set forth herein may be revised from time to time by the Committee in a manner consistent
with this Article and following consultation with the Administration.
L. City Council Oversight. The Committee shall report regularly to City Council on the FAIR
Program, so that City Council may consider appropriate guidance and legislation.
M. Incorporation. Any schedules and/or exhibits to this Article shall be incorporated herein.
(Established by Ord. 2018-01. Passed 2/6/2018)
[Remainder of page intentionally blank]
ARTICLE 349
10
EXHIBIT A
EVALUATION REPORT CONTENT
Exhibit to Article 349, section 349.05 (B)(3)(d)
Exhibit Date: ___________
To the extent applicable, the following required Evaluation Report Content shall be included in any
Evaluation Report produced pursuant to Article 349. For purposes of this Exhibit A only, the Economic
Development Incentive subject to an Evaluation Report shall be referred to as the “incentive.”
1. DESCRIPTIVE INFORMATION
(a) Name and description of the incentive;
(b) Statutory reference(s) to any authorizing legislation;
(c) Enactment date, term of the incentive, and any sunset or other critical dates;
(d) Legislative purpose, if stated;
(e) Eligibility requirements; and
(f) Reference(s) to relevant policy or other City documents, if any.
2. TAX EXPENDITURE DATA
Where the incentive is included in the current-year Inventory of Economic Development Tax Incentives,
defined in section 349.05 (B)(1)(a), include the following information:
(a) Number of taxpayers who received the incentive, itemized by taxpayer type, using North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes or similar codes, if available; and
(b) Total dollar value of such incentive received by taxpayers, including amounts eligible to be
carried forward into future tax years, if any.
3. ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY IMPACT
For the last reporting period and reasonable projections where possible, include the following to the
extent applicable:
(a) “Return on investment calculation” analyzing the costs of providing the incentive and the
benefits realized by the City;
(b) Total value of investment resulting from the incentive;
(c) Number of projects planned, started, and completed;
(d) Changes in property value assessments directly or indirectly related to the incentive;
(e) Number of jobs and other direct economic benefits resulting directly from the incentive;
(f) Estimate/discussion of the indirect economic or other benefits or activity stimulated by the
incentive, including without limitation, changes to social and real estate indicators; and
ARTICLE 349
11
(g) Discussion of quantifiable and non-quantifiable community impact effects the Evaluator
believes relevant.
4. RECOMMENDATIONS; OTHER INFORMATION
(a) Recommendations for improving future evaluations and Administration Documents;
(b) Where data constraints significantly limited the Evaluator’s ability to provide required
information and/or measure incentive performance, include recommendations for changing
City law and/or practices that could mitigate such constraints in future years;
(c) Recommendations for potential legislative action, including continuing, amending,
terminating, or otherwise modifying the incentive; and
(d) An assessment of whether adequate protections are in place to ensure the fiscal impact of the
incentive does not increase substantially beyond the City’s expectations in future years.
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF BETHLEHEM
PART FIVE - TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE ONE - Traffic Code
Article 501. Short Title and Definitions.
Article 503. Traffic Division.
Article 505. Citizens' Traffic Safety Committee.
Article 509. Enforcement and General Penalty.
ARTICLE 501
Short Title and Definitions
501.01 Short Title.
501.02 Definitions generally.
CROSS REFERENCES
Vehicle Code definitions - See Vehicle Code §102
Snow emergency definitions - See TRAF. Art. 523
Bicycle defined - See TRAF. Art. 543
501.01 SHORT TITLE.
This Part Five - Traffic Code shall be known and may be cited as the
Bethlehem Traffic Code. (Ord. 1769 §1. Passed 11/13/62.)
501.02 DEFINITIONS GENERALLY.
In this Traffic Code the terms used shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, except
as herein otherwise defined, or the meanings ascribed to them in the
"Manual on Classification of Motor Vehicle Traffic Accidents" issued by the
National Safety Council. (Ord. 1769 §2. Passed 11/13/62.)
ARTICLE 503
Traffic Division
503.01 Traffic Division; Establishment.
503.02 Enforcement Of Traffic Laws And Regulations.
503.03 Installation Of Traffic Control Devices
503.04 Records Of Traffic Violations.
503.05 Accident Investigation; Prosecution.
503.06 Traffic Accident Studies.
503.07 Emergency And Experimental Regulations.
503.08 Authority To Install Traffic Control Devices; Conformity.
503.09 Erection Of Traffic Signs.
503.10 Crosswalks And Safety Zones.
503.11 Designation Of One-Way Streets.
503.12 Direction Of Movement On Streets Restricted During
Certain Periods.
CROSS REFERENCES
Accidents and accident reports - See Vehicle Code Sec. 3741 et seq.
Local police powers - See Vehicle Code §6109(a)
Traffic signs and signals - See Vehicle Code §6121 et seq.
Establishment of meter zones - See TRAF. Art. 533
Designation of bus and taxi stands - See TRAF. Art. 537
503.01 TRAFFIC DIVISION; ESTABLISHMENT.
There is established in the Police Department, a Traffic Division to be
under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly
responsible to the Commissioner of Police. (Ord. 2623 §1. Passed 10/3/78.)
503.02 ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce the street
traffic regulations of the City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to
ARTICLE 503 2
street traffic in the City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents and to cooperate with a City traffic engineer and other officers of
the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties especially
imposed upon the Division by this Traffic Code and other ordinances of the
City. (Ord. 1769 §3. Passed 11/13/62.)
503.03 INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
It shall be the general duty of the Department of Public Works in
collaboration with the Traffic Division to determine the installation, proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering
analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct
engineering investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic
on the streets and highways of the City, to cooperate with other City officials
in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the
City. (Ord. 1769 §3. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
503.04 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
(a) The Police Department or the Traffic Division shall keep a record
of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the City or of the State vehicle
laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the
final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so
maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The
record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period; from that time on
the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year
period.
(b) All such records and reports shall be public records, except an
opinion formulated by an officer as a result of his investigation. (Ord. 1769
§3. Passed 11/13/62.)
503.05 ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION; PROSECUTION.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, assisted by other police
officers, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the
ARTICLE 503 3
prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to such accidents. (Ord. 1769 §3. Passed 11/13/62.)
503.06 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous,
the Traffic Division shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine
remedial measures. (Ord. 1769 §3. Passed 11/13/62.)
503.07 MONTHLY TRAFFIC REPORT.
(Repealed by Ord. 3352. Passed 10/2/90.)
503.07 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
(a) The Commissioner of Police and the Director of Public Works are
empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions
of this Traffic Code and to make and enforce temporary or experimental
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary
or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety days.
(Ord. 2623 §2. Passed 10/3/78; Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
(b) The Department of Public Works shall be empowered to test
traffic control devises under actual conditions of traffic. (Ord. 1769 §3.
Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
503.08 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES; CONFORMITY.
(a) The Department of Public Works shall place and maintain traffic
control signs, signals and devices as required. (Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
(b) All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
State Manual as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation. (Ord. 1769 §5. Passed 11/13/62.)
ARTICLE 503 4
503.09 ERECTION OF TRAFFIC SIGNS.
The Department of Public Works shall be empowered, after
engineering and traffic studies, to erect signs to control direction and limit
the speed of vehicular traffic, to control the use of vehicles and the driving
and parking thereof where special hazards may exist. (Ord. 1769 §6. Passed
11/13/62; Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
503.10 PLAY STREETS.
Repealed by Ordinance 4024 Passed August 1, 2000.
503.10 CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
The Department of Public Works is empowered to:
(a) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is a
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other
places as it may deem necessary;
(b) Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
(c) Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway
where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. (Ord. 1769 §6. Passed
11/13/62.)
(Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
503.11 DESIGNATION OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
Whenever the Department of Public Works designates any one-way
street, it shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof; no such
regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating
the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 1769
§7. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
ARTICLE 503 5
503.12 DIRECTION OF MOVEMENT ON STREETS
RESTRICTED DURING CERTAIN PERIODS.
The Department of Public Works is empowered to designate streets,
parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall
proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during
another period of the day; it shall place and-maintain appropriate markings,
signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The Department of
Public Works may erect signs temporarily regardless of the center line of the
roadway. (Ord. 1769 Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 4024. Passed 8/1/00.)
ARTICLE 505
Citizens' Traffic Safety Committee
505.01 Establishment.
505.02 Duties.
CROSS REFERENCE
Traffic Division - See TRAF. Art. 503
505.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
(a) There is established a Citizens' Traffic Safety Committee to consist
of not more than twenty citizens of the City, who shall serve without
compensation. Committee members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of Council to serve on the Committee during terms of
membership not to exceed four consecutive years in length.
(b) Terms shall be staggered to ensure appointment of five members
annually. Appointments of members to vacancies occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be for the unexpired period, and shall be filled in
the same manner as the original appointment. (Ord. 2623 §3. Passed
10/3/78.)
505.02 DUTIES.
It shall be the duty of the Citizens' Traffic Safety Committee to create
public support for the Traffic Division and to recommend ways and means
of coordinating traffic activities. (Ord. 1769 §3. Passed 11/13/62)
ARTICLE 509
Enforcement and General Penalty
509.01 Duty To Enforce
509.02 Direction Of Traffic
509.03 Unnecessary Noise By or From a Motor Vehicle a Nuisance
509.99 General Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Prosecution under local ordinance superseded by State law - See Vehicle
Code §6301
Authority of police officer - See Vehicle Code §6308 (b)
Local police enforcement - See Vehicle Code §6505 (b), (c)
Parking generally - See TRAF. Art. 531
Parking meters - See TRAF. Art. 533
Impounding - See TRAF. Art. 535
Bicycle violations - See TRAF. Art. 543
509.01 DUTY TO ENFORCE.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce this Traffic
Code and all ordinances and regulations of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 1769 §4. Passed 11/13/62.)
509.02 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC.
(a) The Police Department including fire police and/or auxiliary
police, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or other signals. In
the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may
require.
(b) Members of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity. (Ord. 1769 §4. Passed 11/13/62.)
ARTICLE 509 2
509.03 UNNECESSARY NOISE BY OR FROM A MOTOR
VEHICLE A NUISANCE
(a) The making of unnecessary noise, by or from a motor vehicle
upon, near or adjacent to the streets or other public places in the City by
horns, engine whistles, bells, sirens, radios, amplifying systems or otherwise,
is declared to be a public nuisance. Prohibited conduct shall include, but not
be limited to the following:
(1) No person shall operate or allow to be operated a radio,
stereo, boom box, tape and/or CD player or any other
type of sound reproduction device at a sound level which
is audible at a distance of greater than forty (40) feet
from the location of such motor vehicle.
(2) No person shall operate or allow to be operated a motor
vehicle unless the vehicle is equipped with a muffler or
other effective noise suppressing system in good working
order and in constant operation. Further, no muffler or
exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or
similar device so as to cause unnecessary noise.
(3) No person shall operate or allow to be operated a motor
vehicle or any equipment attached thereto on a public
right of way at any time in such a manner that the sound
emitted by the motor vehicle or any equipment attached
thereto exceeds the levels set forth in Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Regulations Title 67,
Chapter 157, Subchapter B, 67 Pa. Code § 157.11, and all
amendments thereto.
(4) No person shall cause or allow the making of more than
one false alarm within twenty-four (24) hours by a motor
vehicle alarm.
(b) The provisions of this Section 509.03(a) shall not apply to:
(1) Police, Fire and Ambulance Vehicles or Devices.
The emission of sound, including radios, public address
ARTICLE 509 3
systems or other communications devices from a police,
fire and/or ambulance vehicle.
(2) Municipal and Utility Services Vehicles or Devices.
The emission of sound from a municipal and/or utility
services vehicle or device.
(3) Places of Religious Worship.
The sound of any bell or chime used in conjunction with
places of religious worship.
(4) Political and Labor Rallies, Athletic Events or City of
Bethlehem Licensed, Permitted or Authorized Events.
The use of devices such as public address systems,
amplifying systems, bull horns, musical instruments, tape
messages or similar devices which are used at political or
labor rallies, or athletic events or other City of Bethlehem
licensed, permitted or authorized events to the extent
already protected by law.
(5) Construction and Improvements
The operating of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling or demolition work, provided that
such work does not occur between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. unless a special permit is obtained from the
Community and Economic Development Director or his
designated representative.
(6) Emergencies
The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons
to the existence of an emergency or emitted in response
to an emergency.
(c) The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, including Title
ARTICLE 509 4
18 and Title 75, Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes. If more stringent
requirements are contained elsewhere the more stringent rules or regulations
shall apply. Any sound measurements required to be made on a sound level
meter shall be performed, and required calibrations shall be made, pursuant
to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Regulations Title 67, Chapter
157, and all amendments thereto.
(Ord. 4399. Passed 11/8/06.)
509.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) First violation - A fine of not less than $50.00 nor more
than $100.00;
(2) Second violation - A fine of not less than $100.00 nor
more than $300.00;
(3) Third and Each Subsequent Violation - A fine of not less
than $500.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 2623 §6. Passed 10/3/78; Ord. 4399. Passed 11/8/06.)
ARTICLE 521
Operation of Vehicles
521.01 Funerals and authorized processions.
521.02 Permits required for parades and processions.
521.03 Driving across property to avoid traffic control device.
CROSS REFERENCES
Vehicles moving at less than normal speed - See Vehicle Code §3301 (b)
Following vehicles - See Vehicle Code §3310
Installation of traffic control devices - See TRAF. Art. 503
521.01 FUNERALS AND AUTHORIZED PROCESSIONS.
(a) A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles may, upon
request, be accompanied by a police escort.
(b) A fee shall be charged for a police escort of a funeral or
other authorized procession, in accordance with the fee schedule as is
set forth from time to time by resolution of Council of the City of
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
(c) The funeral home shall pay the fee directly to the City of
Bethlehem.
(d) Requests for a police escort shall be made by the funeral
director to the Traffic Division within reasonable time to provide
scheduling.
(e) The funeral director shall furnish printed instructions to each
driver in the procession regarding proper procedures and notifying
them of the liabilities involved.
(f) Each vehicle in the procession shall be identified by the
display of a pennant upon the outside of the vehicle or by other
ARTICLE 521 2
identifying insignia approved by the Traffic Division. The last vehicle
in the procession shall be identified as such.
(g) Each driver in the procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
(h) Each vehicle shall be driven with low beam headlights
turned on and four way flashers.
(i) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in
motion and properly designated as required.
(j) For other authorized processions the person in charge of the
processions shall be authorized to act as indicated for funeral directors
above. All rules for funeral processions shall also apply to other
authorized processions.
((Ord. 2252 §1. Passed 6/22/71; Ord. 2011-40. Passed 12/21/11)
521.02 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND
PROCESSIONS.
No procession or parade, except funerals and the Armed Forces of the
United States or of this State, shall occupy, march or proceed along any
street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Traffic Division.
(Ord. 1769 §8. Passed 11/13/62.)
521.03 OPERATION ON PLAY STREETS.
Repealed by Ordinance 4025 passed 4/1/2000.
521.03 DRIVING ACROSS PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle through a service station or any
other property to avoid stopping for any traffic control device. (Ord. 2199
§1. Passed 6/16/70.)
ARTICLE 523
Snow Emergency Routes
523.01 Definitions
523.02 General provisions
523.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Tire studs prohibited - See Vehicle Code §4525(c)
Tire chains - See Vehicle Code §4525(d)
Impounding - See TRAFFIC Article 535
523.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) "Snow" shall mean any precipitation depositing any
accumulation on the streets, including snow, sleet, hail, ice and
freezing rain. (Ord. 1773 §1. Passed 11/13/62.)
(b) "Snow Emergency Coordinator" shall mean any City
employee designated from time to time by the Mayor as the Snow
Emergency Coordinator. (Ord. 2623 §8. Passed 10/3/78.)
(c) "Snow Emergency" shall mean that street conditions are
hazardous and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and so
declared by the Snow Emergency Coordinator or his designee.
(d) "Snow Emergency Route" is a city street that has been so
designated and when a snow emergency is declared, the police start
removing vehicles and the plow trucks open the street wide enough
so as to provide for a free flow of traffic when vehicles are
permitted to return to the allowed parking areas on the street.
(e) "Chains" shall mean full chains, strap chains or other
types of chains mounted on all power driving wheels of the vehicle.
(Ord. 1773 §1. Passed 11/13/62.)
(f) "Mud and Snow Tires" shall mean tires having treads
designed for use in snow, which tires must be in such condition as
to serve the purpose for which they are designed.
A "mud and snow passenger tire" means a tire which, when
compared with conventional rib type passenger tires, has a
relatively aggressive tread pattern and is designed primarily to
provide additional starting, stopping and driving traction in mud
and snow. Such tires shall have the words "MUD", "SNOW" or "MUD
and SNOW" or any contraction using the letter of "M" and "S" on the
side walls. "All Weather" tire shall also be included in this
category of tire. All tires must meet the minimum Pennsylvania
inspection standards.
ARTICLE 523 2
(g) "Vehicles" shall mean all self-propelled motorized
vehicles using City streets and highways, excluding public
transportation conveyances. (Ord. 1773 §1. Passed 11/13/62.)
523.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) The Director of Public Works shall, by regulation,
designate streets which are heavily traveled and are necessary
thoroughfares for the movement of vehicular traffic through the
City as snow emergency routes. (Ord. 2623 §10. Passed 10/3/78.)
(b) All streets designated as snow emergency routes shall be
posted with suitable signs or markers at intervals not exceeding
600 feet, which signs or markers shall bear the words snow
emergency route. (Ord. 1838 §1. Passed 12/17/63.)
(c) When, in the opinion of the Snow Emergency Coordinator,
the actual or expected precipitation of snow will create hazardous
or dangerous highway conditions for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, he shall have authority to declare a snow emergency.
(1) The Snow Emergency Coordinator shall immediately inform
the public of the snow emergency by issuing a press
release to the local radio, television and news
services.
(2) Such declaration of a snow emergency shall not go into
effect until at least four hours after being announced,
and shall remain in effect until terminated by the
Mayor, Snow Emergency Coordinator or their designee.
(Ord. 2623 §11. Passed 10/3/78.)
(d) Four hours after a snow emergency has been declared, and
during its existence:
(1) No vehicle shall be parked on a snow emergency route
unless the snow emergency route signs permit such
parking as hereafter described in Article 523.02 (d) (4
and 5).
(2) Any person who drives a vehicle without chains or
passenger mud and snow tires upon any street designated
as a snow emergency route and such vehicle becomes
stalled or incapable of moving under its own power or
anyone who leaves such vehicle unattended shall be in
violation of this article and shall be subject to the
penalty therefor.
(3) Any vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under
its own power or left unattended upon any street
designated as a snow emergency route may be removed or
ARTICLE 523 3
towed away to any other location by the Police
Department or any person authorized by the Snow
Emergency Coordinator.
(4) The Snow Emergency Coordinator may declare any snow
emergency route or any part of a snow emergency route to
be free from the restrictions herein imposed when, in
his opinion, the weather or street conditions warrant
such an exclusion. The Snow Emergency Coordinator shall
give notice of this determination in the manner provided
for in subsection (c) (1) above.
(5) While a declaration of emergency is in effect, no person
shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
portion of a snow emergency route in accordance with the
following:
(A) On the even number side of a route, vehicles will
be towed Monday, Wednesday and Friday starting at
7:00 AM for a period of 24 hours unless otherwise
signed.
(B) On the uneven or odd number side of a route,
vehicles will be towed Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday
and Sunday starting at 7:00 AM for a period of 24
hours unless otherwise signed.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit
parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by
other provisions of law. (Ord. 2623 §12. Passed
10/3/78.)
523.99 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $ 50.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $ 150.00, or sixty day
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $
300.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3127. Passed
7/7/87.)
(Ord. 3669. Passed 2/7/95.)
ARTICLE 531
Parking Generally
531.01 Prohibitions in Specified Places.
531.02 Additional Parking Regulations.
531.03 Handicapped Persons and Disabled Veterans.
531.04 Parking Trucks and Trailers.
531.05 Displaying Vehicles for Sale.
531.06 Greasing and Repairing.
531.07 Parking in Tow-Away Zones.
531.08 Blocking Garages.
531.09 Zone Overtime.
531.10 Unattended Vehicles on Private Property.
531.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Prohibited parking places - See Vehicle Code §3353
Additional regulations - See Vehicle Code §3354
Power to regulate - See Vehicle Code §6109(a)(1)
Meters - See TRAF. Art. 533
Impounding - See TRAF. Art. 535
Taxi and bus parking - See TRAF. Art. 540
531.01 PROHIBITIONS IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
General Rule. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to protect the
safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device, no person shall:
(a) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of
a street.
(2) On a sidewalk.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) On a crosswalk.
ARTICLE 531 2
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within thirty feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by official traffic control devices.
(6) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(7) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
(8) On any railroad tracks.
(9) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
(10) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(11) Other than in an established or designated parking area in Saucon Park.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in violation of posted
prohibitions and directions or in disobeyance of directions by a City
authorized attendant. (Ord. 2015-23. Passed 5/5/2015.)
(b) Stand or park any vehicle:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway.
(2) Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant.
(3) Within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(4) Within thirty feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(5) Within twenty feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, when
properly sign posted, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within seventy-five feet of the entrance.
(6) Where the vehicle would prevent the free movement of a streetcar.
(7) On a limited access highway unless authorized by official traffic control
devices.
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
ARTICLE 531 3
(9) In the front yard of any property, except in accordance with the following
requirements:
a. The vehicle is parked on a solid surface parking pad constructed of
either macadam or concrete;
b. The vehicle must be parked in such a way so as to not obstruct other
driveways, sidewalks, or the right-of-way; and
c. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vehicle may be temporarily parked in
a front yard of a residence found within a residential zoning district for
the purpose of loading and unloading items for a period not to exceed
1 hour per week, as measured from Sunday, 12:01 am through
Saturday, 11:59 pm.
(Ord. 2016-29. Passed 10/18/2016)
(c) Park a vehicle:
(1) Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(2) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(d) No person shall park or leave on the streets, highway or public property of the
City or Bethlehem Parking Authority any mechanically inoperable vehicles or
vehicles without current registration plates or current inspection stickers.
(e) No person shall park or leave on the streets, highways or public property of the
City or Bethlehem Parking Authority any vehicle without a current inspection
sticker unless the vehicle is legally parked in front of, or in close proximity to, an
official Pennsylvania State Inspection Station which identifies said vehicle by
work order specifying a state inspection will be performed within twenty-four (24)
hours. Additional work orders beyond the initial twenty-four hour period are
prohibited.
(Ord. 2623 §14. Passed 10/3/1978; Ord. 4447. Passed 11/7/2007.)
531.02 ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
(a) Two-way Highways. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle
standing or parked upon a two-way highway shall be positioned parallel to and with the right-hand
wheels within twelve inches of the right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
ARTICLE 531 4
(b) One-way Highways. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle
standing or parked upon a one-way highway shall be positioned parallel to the curb or edge of the
highway in the direction of authorized traffic movement with its right-hand wheels within twelve
inches of the right-hand curb, or in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the right edge of
the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve inches of the left-hand curb, or in
the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
(c) Angle Parking. Local authorities may permit angle parking on any highway after an
engineering and traffic study has determined that the highway is of sufficient width to permit angle
parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic, except that on a State-designated
highway prior approval of the State Department of Transportation shall also be obtained. (Ord.
2623 §15. Passed 10/3/1978.)
531.03 HANDICAPPED PERSONS AND DISABLED VETERANS.
(a) When a motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to handicapped persons or
disabled veterans as prescribed in the State Vehicle Code is being operated by or for the
transportation of the handicapped person or disabled veteran, the driver shall be relieved of any
liability for parking for a period of sixty minutes in excess of the legal parking period permitted by
local authorities except where local ordinances or police regulations provide for the accommodation
of heavy traffic during morning, afternoon and evening hours.
(b) At the request of any handicapped person or severely disabled veteran, the Bethlehem
Parking Authority may erect on the highway, as close as possible to their place of residence, a sign
or signs indicating that the place is reserved for a handicapped person or severely disabled veteran,
that no parking is allowed there by others, and that any unauthorized person parking there shall be
subject to a fine. (Ord. 2623. Passed 10/3/1978; Ord. 3402. Passed 3/5/1991.)
(c) At the request of any handicapped person or severely disabled veteran for whom a
handicap sign has been erected pursuant to this ordinance, the Bethlehem Parking Authority may
issue to that person a numbered handicap permit and the handicap sign shall be numbered to
correspond with the permit. The numbered space may only be occupied by the vehicle bearing the
corresponding numbered permit. The Bethlehem Parking Authority shall erect a sign on or near the
handicap sign indicating the restricted nature of the handicap parking space.
(d) Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped or severely
disabled veteran registration plate or displaying a handicapped or severely disabled veteran
parking placard when such vehicle is being operated by or for the transportation of a
handicapped person or severely disabled veteran, no person shall park a vehicle on public or
private property reserved for a handicapped person, a severely disabled veteran, or a side-lift
vehicle, which property has been posted in accordance with this ordinance. (Ord. 4134. Passed
7/16/2002.)
(Ord. 3402. Passed 3/5/1991; Ord. 3929. Passed 1/5/1999.)
ARTICLE 531 5
531.04 PARKING TRUCKS AND TRAILERS.
(a) No person shall park a truck trailer or trailer upon any street without having attached
thereto a means of mechanical traction so constructed or designed for the purpose of pulling or
drawing such trailer.
(b) No person shall stand or park a truck tractor, truck tractor and trailer or tri-axle dump
truck upon any street that lies within a residential, institutional or commercial zone of the City of
Bethlehem, except as provided in Section (d) below. For the purposes of this Article, such area shall
include all streets that either lie within or are abutting these zones, as defined by the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem. Any other vehicle that is not a truck tractor, truck tractor and
trailer or tri-axle dump truck, but is twenty (20) feet or more in length shall not stand or park on any
street that lies within a residential, institutional or commercial zone of the City of Bethlehem for
more than seventy-two (72) hours; after seventy-two (72) hours said vehicle must be removed from
the unit block upon which it stood or was parked, for a minimum of two (2) hours.
(c) The parking of any truck tractor, truck tractor and trailer or tri-axle dump truck within
areas that are industrially zoned, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem, is
hereby specifically authorized for the purposes of this Article; such areas shall include only those
streets lying wholly within that zone.
(d) Nothing in this Article shall be intended to prohibit the parking of any truck tractor,
truck tractor and trailer or tri-axle dump truck for the purpose of the delivery or pick-up of
merchandise, material, or goods from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., provided that:
(1) the parking of said vehicle shall terminate immediately upon
conclusion of the delivery or pick-up of merchandise, material or goods; and
(2) such parking shall be limited to a period of no longer than one hour.
(e) Nothing in this Article shall be intended to prohibit the parking of any vehicle
specifically permitted by the City of Bethlehem Police Department, or to vehicles responding to
emergencies, or to any vehicle involved in the moving of household goods, provided that a permit
has previously been issued by the City pursuant to Article 309.01 of the City of Bethlehem
Ordinances for the moving of household goods.
(f) The City of Bethlehem Police Department shall place notification on the windshield of
vehicles of twenty (20) feet or more in length suspected to be in violation, indicating that if the
vehicle is not moved, a parking violation will occur as set forth in Section 531.99(b)(8). The
notification requirement set forth herein shall not be required, and shall not apply to violations by
truck tractors, truck tractors and trailers or tri-axle dump trucks. (Ord. 3996. Passed 3/7/2000; Ord.
2011-12. Passed 5/18/2011.)
(Ord. 3671. Passed 2/21/1995; Ord. 3929. Passed 1/5/1999.)
ARTICLE 531 6
531.05 DISPLAYING VEHICLES FOR SALE.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying
such vehicle for sale. (Ord. 2623 §18. Passed 10/3/1978.)
531.06 GREASING AND REPAIRING.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of greasing or
repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 2623 §19. Passed
10/3/1978.)
531.07 PARKING IN TOW-AWAY ZONES.
No person shall park a vehicle in any area designated as a "Tow-Away Zone" during times
prohibited by the Police Department. (Ord. 2432 §1. Passed 7/16/1974.)
531.08 BLOCKING GARAGES.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time in front of, opposite to or in such a position as to
block entrance to or exit by a vehicle from a garage. (Ord. 2623 §20. Passed 10/3/1978.)
531.09 ZONE OVERTIME.
(a) The Bethlehem Parking Authority is empowered to establish vehicular TIME ZONE
AREAS. The Bethlehem Parking Authority shall designate by means of appropriate signs the
location of such time zone areas, and the time period during which a vehicle may be parked in any
such zoned area.
(b) No vehicle shall be parked in any such zoned area in excess of the time period
designated.
(c) Except as otherwise provided herein, any vehicle caused to be moved or reparked
within the same unit block shall be deemed not to have been removed and shall thereby be subject
to penalty.
(d) A vehicle shall be deemed to have been removed from a unit block only if it has been
continuously absent from said unit block for a period in excess of two (2) hours. (Ord. 3618. Passed
6/7/1994.)
531.10 UNATTENDED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(a) No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property without the
consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of the property, except in the case of
emergency or disablement of the vehicle, in which case the operator shall arrange for the removal of
the vehicle as soon as possible.
ARTICLE 531 7
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to private parking lots unless such lots are
posted to notify the public of any parking restrictions and the operator of the vehicle violates such
posted restrictions. For the purpose of this section "private parking lot" means a parking lot open to
the public or used for parking without charge; or a parking lot used for parking with charge.
(c) The owner or other person in charge or possession of any property on which a vehicle is
parked or left unattended in violation of the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) may remove or
have removed the vehicle at the reasonable expense of the owner of the vehicle. Such person who
removes a vehicle left parked or unattended in violation of the provisions of this section shall have a
lien against the vehicle, in the amount of the reasonable value of the costs of removing the vehicle.
(Ord. 3692. Passed 6/20/1995.)
531.99 PENALTY
(a) Notice of Parking Violations. Any police officer or Bethlehem Parking Authority
enforcement officer or duly authorized City employee shall place on a vehicle operated in violation
of any provision of Article 531, a notice for the owner or operator to report to the Bethlehem
Parking Authority in regard to a violation.
(b) Waiver; Other Parking Violations. For violation of any provision of Article 531, the
owner shall pay the applicable fine designated herein.
(1) For parking within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant or within twenty feet of a
crosswalk, the owner of a vehicle shall pay a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00)
within fourteen (14) days of the violation; thereafter, until a citation is
issued, forty dollars ($40.00); and, after the issuance of a citation, sixty
dollars ($60.00).
(2) For handicapped parking violations, the owner of a vehicle shall pay a fine
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) within fourteen (14) days of the violation;
thereafter, until a citation is issued, one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00);
and, after the issuance of a citation, not less than one hundred forty dollars
($140.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(3) For violations which involve official signs prohibiting stopping, standing or
parking, the owner of a vehicle shall pay a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00)
within fourteen (14) days of the violation; thereafter, until a citation is
issued, forty dollars ($40.00); and, after the issuance of a citation, sixty
dollars ($60.00).
(4) For violations involving unattended vehicles on private property, the owner
of a vehicle shall pay a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) within fourteen (14)
days of the violation; thereafter, until a citation is issued, forty dollars
($40.00); and, after the issuance of a citation, sixty dollars ($60.00).
ARTICLE 531 8
(5) For violations which involve inoperable vehicles or vehicles without current
registration or inspection stickers, the owner of the vehicle shall pay a fine of
twenty dollars ($20.00) within fourteen (14) days of the violation; thereafter,
until a citation is issued, forty dollars ($40.00); and, after issuance of a
citation, sixty dollars ($60.00).
(6) For violation of any other provision of this Article, the owner shall pay a
fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) within fourteen (14) days of the violation;
and, until a citation is issued, forty dollars ($40.00); and, after the issuance
of a citation, sixty dollars ($60.00).
(7) Every owner who fails to pay the applicable fine shall, upon summary
conviction, be fined the applicable amount specified above and, in default
of the payment of fine and costs, imprisoned for not more than ten (10)
days.
(8) For each violation of Section 531.04, Parking Trucks and Trailers, the
owner shall pay a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) within fourteen (14) days of
the violation; and, thereafter until a citation is issued, seventy dollars
($70.00); and, after issuance of a citation, not less than ninety dollars
($90.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(9) For violations of Article 531.01(a)(11) applicable to Saucon Park the
owner of the vehicle shall pay a fine of thirty dollars ($30.00) within
fourteen days of the violation; thereafter, until the issuance of a citation,
forty-five dollars ($45.00); and, after the issuance of a citation, sixty-five
dollars ($65.00).
(Ord. 2842. Passed 7/20/1982; Ord. 3208. Passed 9/6/1988; Ord. 3402.
Passed 3/5/1991; Ord. 3618. Passed 6/7/1994; Ord. 3929. Passed 1/5/1999;
Ord. 3996. Passed 3/7/2000; Ord. 4447. Passed 11/7/2007; Ord. 2010-10.
Passed 5/19/2010; Ord. 2015-23. Passed 5/5/2015; Ord, 2020-01. Passed
1/6/2020)
(c) Special Condition. When the City Council shall declare, by Resolution, a Special
Condition to exist for a designated period of time and within a designated area, the fine for violation
of the provisions of this Article 531 set forth below during the designated time and within the
designated area shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) if paid within fourteen days of such violation;
thereafter, until the issuance of a citation, forty-five dollars ($45.00); and, after the issuance of a
citation, sixty-five dollars ($65.00). This section shall apply to violations of the following: Section
531.01(a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (8), (9), (10); Section 531.01(b)(1), (2), (3), (4), (8); Section 531.01(c)(2);
Section 531.02(a), (b); Section 531.08; Section 531.09; and Section 531.10. Every owner who fails
to pay the applicable fine shall, upon summary conviction, be fined sixty-five dollars ($65.00), and,
in default of the payment of fine and costs, imprisoned for not more than ten (10) days. For
violations of Section 531.99 (b) (2), handicapped parking violations, the fines shall be as follows:
the owner of a vehicle shall pay a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) within fourteen days of
ARTICLE 531 9
the violation; thereafter, until a citation is issued, one hundred forty dollars ($140.00); and after
the issuance of a citation, not less than one hundred sixty ($160.00) nor more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 3136. Passed 8/4/1987; Ord. 3402. Passed 3/5/1991; Ord. 3618.
Passed 6/7/1994; Ord. 3895. Passed 7/7/1998; Ord. 2010-18. Passed 7/6/2010; Ord. 2012-24.
Passed 9/19/2012.)
(d) Request for Hearing; Fine. An owner aggrieved by the receipt of a notice of violation
issued pursuant to subparagraph (a) hereof may, within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
violation, notify the Bethlehem Parking Authority in person or in writing, that he or she desires a
hearing before a district justice on the alleged violation. If an owner has made a timely request for a
hearing, the owner shall, upon conviction, be assessed the minimum fine specified by the Article for
the violation alleged. This provision shall not apply to summary appeals to the Courts of Common
Pleas of Northampton and Lehigh Counties. (Ord. 3799. Passed 2/4/1997.)
ARTICLE 533
Parking Meters
533.01 Establishment of meter zones.
533.02 Installation of meters; Use of tokens.
533.03 Operation of meters.
533.04 Meter instructions.
533.05 Definition of meter space.
533.06 Rules governing use of meter spaces.
533.07 Deposit of coins; Time limits.
533.08 Meter overtime parking.
533.09 Other restrictions.
533.10 Use of slugs prohibited.
533.11 Tampering with meter.
533.12 Application of proceeds; Parking Revenue Account.
533.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Overtime parking defined - See Vehicle Code §102
Local ordinances on overtime parking - See Vehicle Code §6302(d)
Traffic Division - See TRAF. Art. 503
Impounding - See TRAF. Art. 538
533.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF METER ZONES.
The Bethlehem Parking Authority shall recommend changes in meter rates after which
the Mayor or his designated representative shall hold a public hearing. After review, the Mayor
directs whether such rate changes shall be implemented or rejected.
The Bethlehem Parking Authority shall have available on file for the public a complete
list of all meter locations and applicable rates and times.
(Ord. 2611. Passed 4/4/1978; Ord. 2671. Passed 9/4/1979; Ord. 2715. Passed 10/7/1980; Ord.
2772. Passed 4/7/1981; Ord. 2928. Passed 2/22/1984; Ord. 3147. Passed 11/17/1987; Ord. 3215.
Passed 9/20/1988; Ord. 3076. Passed 7/15/1986; Ord. 3443. Passed 11/19/1991.)
ARTICLE 533 2
533.02 INSTALLATION OF METERS; USE OF TOKENS.
(a) In those areas designated by the Mayor, the Bethlehem Parking Authority shall
install parking meters in the parking meter zones established, as provided in this article,
immediately adjacent to each designated parking space. The meters shall be capable of being
operated, either automatically or mechanically, upon the deposit of a coin of United States
currency. (Ord. 2611. Passed 4/4/1978; Ord. 3443. Passed 11/19/1991.)
(b) Certain meters, to be installed by the Bethlehem Parking Authority in areas
designated by the Mayor, shall be capable of being operated by tokens, as herein provided. Such
tokens shall be legal for use under regulations of the United States Treasury Department and
shall be redeemable by the Bethlehem Parking Authority in cash for their face value through a
person, organization or corporation certified as financially responsible by the Executive Director.
(Ord. 1970. Passed 3/15/1966; Ord. 3443. Passed 11/19/1991.)
(c) In Sections 533.03, 533.04, 533.06, 533.07, 533.08 and 533.13 of this Article the
word "coin" means "coin or token as herein provided," and the word "coins" means "coins or
tokens as herein provided." (Ord. 1970. Passed 3/15/1966.)
533.03 OPERATION OF METERS.
Each parking meter shall be so designed, constructed, installed and set that upon the
expiration of the time period registered, by the deposit of one or more coins, as provided herein,
it will indicate by an appropriate signal that the lawful parking meter period has expired, and
during such period of time and prior to the expiration thereof will indicate the interval of time
which remains of such period. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/1962.)
533.04 METER INSTRUCTIONS.
Each parking meter shall bear thereon a legend indicating the days and hours when the
requirement to deposit coins therein shall apply, the value of the coins to be deposited and the
limited period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which
such meter is located. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/1962.)
533.05 DEFINITION OF METER SPACE.
A parking meter space shall be twenty-two (22) feet from the point of installation of the
meter within the block and twenty (20) feet at the ends of a block or driveways. (Ord. 1769.
Passed 11/13/1962; Ord. 3443. Passed 11/19/1991.)
ARTICLE 533 3
533.06 RULES GOVERNING USE OF METER SPACES.
No person shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking meter space, during the
restricted or regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter is
located, so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond
the markings designating such space, except that a vehicle which is of a size too large to be
parked within a single designated parking meter zone shall be permitted to occupy two adjoining
parking meter spaces when coins shall have been deposited in the parking meter for each space
so occupies as is required in this Article for the parking of other vehicles in such space. (Ord.
1769. Passed 11/13/1962.)
533.07 DEPOSIT OF COINS; TIME LIMITS.
No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space upon a street alongside of and next to
which a parking meter has been installed, during the restricted and regulated time applicable to
the parking meter zone in which such meter is located, unless a coin or coins of United States
currency of the appropriate denomination as provided in this Article shall have been deposited
therein, or shall have been previously deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time, and the
meter has been placed in operation. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/1962.)
533.08 METER OVERTIME PARKING.
(a) No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in any such parking
meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in
which such meter is located, while the parking meter for such space indicates by signal that the
lawful parking time in such space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of
parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin or coins
in such meter. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/1962.)
(b) No person shall park a vehicle in any parking meter space for a greater period of time
than that initially provided for on the meter, irrespective of the number or amount of the coins
deposited in such meter. In addition thereto, any person removing or causing to be removed a
vehicle from one parking meter and thereafter reparking or causing to be reparked such vehicle
in the same block area or within a radius of 500 feet shall be deemed not to have removed the
vehicle and will thereby be subject to penalty for overtime parking. (Ord. 2440. Passed
10/29/1974.)
533.09 OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
The provisions of this Article shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other
and more restrictive provisions of this Traffic Code and the State Vehicle Code prohibiting or
limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
(Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/1962.)
ARTICLE 533 4
533.10 USE OF SLUGS PROHIBITED.
No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any slug, button or any
other device or substance as substitutes for coins of United States currency, except for the tokens
as specified in Section 533.02. (Ord. 1970. Passed 3/15/1966.)
533.11 TAMPERING WITH METER.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter. (Ord. 1769 §13. Passed 11/13/1962.)
533.12 APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS: PARKING REVENUE ACCOUNT.
(a) The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this article are
levied and assessed as fees to cover the regulation and control of parking upon public streets, the
costs of parking meters, their installation, inspection, supervision, operation, repair and
maintenance, control and use of parking spaces, and regulating the parking of vehicles in parking
meter zones, and the costs of acquiring, establishing, improving, maintaining and operating
public off-street parking facilities.
(b) The coins deposited in parking meters shall be collected by the Bethlehem Parking
Authority. The proceeds of the operation of parking meters shall be deposited in the Bethlehem
Parking Authority Account. (Ord. 2611. Passed 4/4/1978; Ord. 3443. Passed 11/19/1991.)
533.99 PENALTY.
(a) Notice of Parking Violations. Any Bethlehem police officer or Bethlehem Parking
Authority enforcement officer or duly authorized City employee shall place on a vehicle
operated in violation of any provisions of Article 533, a notice for the owner or operator to report
to the Bethlehem Parking Authority in regard to a violation. (Ord. 3443. Passed 11/19/1991.)
(b) Waiver; Overtime Parking Violations.
(1) For violation of any provision of Article 533, the owner shall pay the
applicable fine designated. Within fourteen days of the violation, the owner shall pay a fine of
fifteen dollars ($15.00); thereafter, until a citation is issued, thirty five dollars ($35.00); and
after the issuance of a citation, fifty five dollars ($55.00). Every owner who fails to pay the
applicable fine shall, upon summary conviction, be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) and, in default of
the payment of fine and costs, imprisoned for not more than ten days. (Ord. 2729. Passed
12/16/1980; Ord. 3209. Passed 9/6/1988; Ord. 3403. Passed 3/5/1991; Ord. 3619. Passed
6/7/1994; Ord. 4448. Passed 11/7/2007; Ord. 2010-19. Passed 7/6/2010; Ord. 2020-02. Passed
1/6/2020)
ARTICLE 533 5
(c) Request for Hearing; Fine. An owner aggrieved by the receipt of a notice of violation
issued pursuant to subparagraph (a) hereof may, within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
violation, notify the Bethlehem Parking Authority in person or in writing, that he or she desires a
hearing before a district justice on the alleged violation. If an owner has made a timely request
for a hearing, the owner shall, upon conviction, be assessed the minimum fine specified by the
Article for the violation alleged. This provision shall not apply to summary appeals to the Courts
of Common Pleas of Northampton and Lehigh Counties. (Ord. 3800. Passed 2/4/1997.)
ARTICLE 534
Residential Permit Parking
534.01 Purpose.
534.02 Residential Permit Parking Program.
534.03 Designation of Central Business District.
534.04 Designation Criteria.
534.05 Designation Process.
534.06 Issuance of Parking Permits.
534.07 Display of Permit.
534.08 Permit Parking Exemption.
534.09 Application for and Duration of Permit.
534.10 Permit Fees.
534.11 Revocation of Permit.
534.12 Residential Parking Permit Areas.
534.13 Regulations and Procedures.
534.99 Penalties.
CROSS REFERENCES
Parking meters - See TRAF. Art. 533
Parking Authority Law, Act of June 5, 1947 (P.L. 458)
534.01 PURPOSE.
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem considers it to be in the
interest of the citizens of the City of Bethlehem to provide for the
establishment of a Residential Permit Parking (RPP) Program in order to
alleviate the hardship experienced by residents in obtaining on-street parking
space, to preserve the residential quality of neighborhoods and to provide for
improvement in air quality. The powers and duties as contained in this Article
shall be performed by the Parking Authority.
534.02 RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM.
The Parking Authority is hereby authorized to designate, as herein
provided, certain streets and other public areas within the City of Bethlehem
as Residential Permit Parking areas in which resident vehicles displaying valid
parking permits may stand or be parked without limitation by parking time
ARTICLE 534 2
restrictions established by this Article. Vehicles not displaying valid parking
permits may stand or be parked for a limited time not to exceed the time
specified upon adequately posted signs.
534.03 DESIGNATION OF CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
The Central Business District as used in this Ordinance is defined as
follows:
(a) On the north side of the Lehigh River, the area bounded on the west
by Main Street, on the north by Union Boulevard, on the east by Linden Street
and on the south by Church Street.
(b) On the south side of the Lehigh River, the area bounded on the north
by Third Street, on the east by Hayes Street, on the south by Morton Street
and on the west by the streets of Brodhead to Fourth to Broadway to
Wyandotte to Third.
534.04 DESIGNATION CRITERIA
A residential area shall be deemed impacted and thereby eligible for
Residential Permit Parking provided that the following criteria are satisfied:
(a) In areas zoned other than Central Business District, the following
criteria must be met:
(1) At least fifty (50%) percent of the street level, front footage use
is residential or non-business related.
(2) During any period between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 10:00
P.M. on weekdays, except holidays, the number of vehicles parked and/or
standing, legally or illegally, at on-street parking spaces is equal to seventy
(70%) percent or more of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area. For
purposes of this evaluation, a legal parking space shall be twenty (20) linear
feet.
(3) During the same time period as specified above, twenty-five
(25%) percent or more of the vehicles parking and/or standing, on the streets
in the area are not registered in the name of a person residing within three (3)
blocks, with the exception of those vehicles registered to residents living on
ARTICLE 534 3
an adjacent street having been zoned RPP, within a three (3) block area who
are otherwise eligible for permits.
(4) On streets where there are parking meters and/or time restricted parking
in Section 534.04 (a) (2) and (3) are not criteria for designation.
(b) In areas zoned Central Business District, the following criteria must
be met:
(1) At least seventy (70%) of the street level front footage
abutting the street designated have a residential or non-business related use.
(2) During any period between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 10:00
P.M. on weekdays except holidays, at least seventy (70%) percent of all
occupied on-street parking spaces are occupied by vehicles registered in the
name of a person residing within a three (3) block distance of the location at
which the vehicle is parked.
(Ord. 3896. Passed 7/7/98.)
534.05 DESIGNATION PROCESS.
(a) If the area in question is not an approved Residential Permit Parking
Zone and a majority of residents have requested to be a Residential Permit
Parking zone or if the Parking Authority determines the criteria are met then
the Parking Authority will schedule and administer a public hearing. Notice of
said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Parking Authority at
points deemed sufficient by the Parking Authority within the proposed
Residential Permit Parking zone to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected area shall be posted at least one (1) week prior to the date of the
hearing. On the basis of testimony taken, and in consideration as to whether
the criteria set forth in 534.04 has been met, the Parking Authority shall or
shall not recommend to City Council the designation of the area as an official
Residential Permit Parking area. The area in question shall not be an approved
residential permit parking zone until City Council approves by resolution the
designation of the area for inclusion into the residential permit parking
program. (Ord. 3432 - Passed 9/17/91.)
(b) On blocks or portions thereof within a Residential Parking Permit
zone where parking meters and/or time restricted parking already exists, the
Parking Authority may designate the area as a Residential Permit Parking
block.
ARTICLE 534 4
(c) On blocks or portions thereof within a Residential Parking Permit
zone where no parking meters and/or time restricted parking exists, the
following process is to be followed:
(1) A block or portion thereof may be considered as a potential
residential parking block or portion thereof upon the receipt by the Parking
Authority of verified petitions from the residents of that block or portion
thereof. A separate petition must be filed for each block.
(2) The Parking Authority shall in its discretion conduct surveys of
potential residential parking blocks to determine the following:
(a) The number of legal on-street parking spaces available on
each block in the area.
(b) The number of legal on-street spaces occupied by parked
vehicles during an average week-day on each block in the area. Two (2)
surveys will be made on different days of the week and at different times of
the day. One observation will be made in the early part of the day and the
other later in the day.
(c) The number of parked vehicles in the block which are
registered to addresses of persons who do not live in the area.
(3) If all designation criteria for a particular block has been satisfied,
the Parking Authority shall cause to be erected, signs on the designated block
indicating that parking beyond the stipulated number of hours is by permit
only.
534.06 ISSUANCE OF PARKING PERMITS.
The Parking Authority may issue appropriate permits and shall cause
parking signs to be erected in the area indicating the times and conditions
under which parking shall be allowed. A permit shall be issued upon
application and payment of the applicable fee, only to the owner or operator
of a motor vehicle registered at an address in the appropriate Residential
Permit Parking area. Any applicant having outstanding parking violations
shall provide evidence of payment or pay said outstanding parking violations
prior to the issuance of a permit. A separate permit shall be required for each
motor vehicle. Commercial vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 10,000
pounds are not eligible for permits. Eligibility for a permit shall be as follows:
ARTICLE 534 5
(a) Residents - The resident must prove residency and vehicle
ownership or evidence of having a leased or company owned vehicle. A
separate application shall be required for each vehicle and each application
shall be accompanied by a permit fee.
(b) Visitors - Special permits may be issued to visitors for a period of
time not to exceed fourteen (14) days in any calendar year. No resident of a
Residential Permit Parking area shall be issued more than two (2) visitor
permits at any time.
(c) Students - The Parking Authority shall develop, from time to time,
regulations to provide for students residing in Residential Permit Parking
areas who are operators of motor vehicles not registered in the appropriate
Residential Permit Parking area; provided, however, that said permits shall
not exceed two (2) per residential address.
(d) Employees or Business Owner/Operator - The Parking Authority
shall from time to time develop regulations to provide for the issuance of
permits to those persons who provide proof of employment and/or business
ownership in the City of Bethlehem, who are operators of motor vehicles not
registered in the appropriate Residential Permit Parking Area; provided,
however, that the number of spaces available for permits will not exceed 60%
of the vacant parking spaces per block to be determined from time to time
after completed surveys and provided further that said permits will not be
valid for areas where meters are located and will be valid only from 8:00 AM
to 4:00 PM, Mondays through Fridays. (Ord. 3322 §1. Passed 3/6/90.)
(e) Summer Students - May be issued to students and shall be valid
from June 1 through and including August 31 of the issue year designated.
Summer permits shall not exceed two (2) per residential address.
(Ord. 3896. Passed 7/7/98.)
(f) Special Permit - Permits may be issued to persons living upon a
residential street in the Residential Permit Parking Zone provided such
persons are employed on a full time basis within the City of Bethlehem and
such persons maintain permanent residence outside the City of Bethlehem.
The person requesting such permit must provide proof of full-time
employment within the City of Bethlehem either by producing current pay
documentation indicating their weekly/bi-weekly hours of employment,
ARTICLE 534 6
and/or a statement from their employer verifying their full-time employment
within the City of Bethlehem. Further, such person shall produce an additional
form of identification verifying the address at which they are residing within
the city limits of Bethlehem. (Ord. 3969. Passed 10/19/99.)
534.07 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
Various permits to be issued shall be displayed as follows:
(a) Residents and Students - Permits for residents and students shall be
displayed inside the vehicle on the lower left corner of the rear window
(driver's side). An exception to this placement location can be made if the
vehicle's structure does not allow for proper placement or visibility. The
alternate location must be approved by the Authority.
(b) Employee/Business Owner - Permits for Employees/Business
Owners shall be displayed on the side rear window behind the driver. An
exception to this placement location can be made if the vehicle's structure
does not allow for proper placement or visibility. The alternate location must
be approved by the Authority. (Ord. 3322 §2. Passed 3/6/90.)
(c) Visitor Permit, Contractor, and All-City Permits - Are hang-tag type
permits which shall be displayed by hanging from the rearview mirror.
(d) Summer Student Permits - shall be displayed inside the vehicle on
the lower left corner of the rear window (driver's side). An exception to this
placement location can be made if the vehicle's structure does not allow for
proper placement or visibility. The alternate location must be approved by
the Authority.
(Ord. 3986.Passed 7/7/98.)
534.08 PERMIT PARKING EXEMPTION.
A resident vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit as
provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the Residential
Permit Parking area for which the permit has been issued without being
limited by time restrictions established pursuant to this Article. However, said
resident's vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or prohibitions
established pursuant to authority other than this Article including Article 531,
Stopping and Parking, Street Sweeping, of the Codified Ordinances as well as
loading zones, five minute parking zones, handicapped zones and other
ARTICLE 534 7
special parking restrictions. All other motor vehicles parked within a
Residential Permit Parking area shall be subject to the time restrictions
adopted as provided in this Article as well as the penalties provided for herein.
A Residential Parking Permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the
holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated Residential
Permit Parking area.
534.09 APPLICATION FOR AND DURATION OF PERMIT.
Residential, student (excluding summer permits), and
employee/business permits shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of
issuance. Permits acquired after the normal renewal period shall be pro-rated
accordingly. Permits may be renewed annually upon reapplication in the
manner required by the Parking Authority. Each application or reapplication
for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the
applicant, his residence address or address of real property owner or leased
within a Residential Parking area, vehicle registration for which application is
made and proof of financial responsibility, and such other information that
may be deemed relevant by the Parking Authority. If a resident sells or
otherwise transfers a vehicle bearing a removable parking permit, he shall
remove the sticker before transfer and return it to the Parking Authority. If a
resident sells or otherwise transfers a vehicle bearing a non-removable permit
parking sticker he shall provide the Parking Authority with proof of the
transfer and an affidavit attesting to the non-use of the sticker. The Parking
Authority shall in either case provide, at no cost, a new sticker which shall
expire at the same time as the original sticker. The provisions of this Section
shall also apply for permits issued to Employee/Business Owners pursuant to
Section 534.06 of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 3322 §3. Passed 3/6/90; Ord. 3896. Passed 7/7/98.
534.10 PERMIT FEES.
Various parking permit fees shall be as follows:
(a) Residents/Students - The initial cost for Residential Parking Permit,
including those who are students residing in Residential Parking Permit Areas
who are operators of motor vehicles not registered in the appropriate
Residential Permit Parking Area shall be $20.00, and for each annual renewal,
the cost will be $10.00.
ARTICLE 534 8
(b) Employee/Business Owner - The initial cost for each
Employee/Business Owner will be $50.00, and each renewal will be $40.00.
A deposit of $10.00 will be required for each permit issued, which will be
refunded when the permit holder moves from the area or otherwise
relinquishes his or her space.
(c) Special Permit - The initial cost for each Special Permit shall be
$20.00, and each renewal thereof shall be $10.00. (Ord. 3969. Passed
10/19/99.)
The Parking Authority may make such changes to said fees, from time
to time, as it sees fit. (Ord. 3322 §4. Passed 3/6/90.)
534.11 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The Parking Authority is authorized to revoke the Residential Parking
Permit of any person found to be in violation of this Article and, upon
written notification thereof, the person shall surrender such permit to the
Parking Authority. Failure, when so requested, to surrender a Residential
Parking Permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of law and of this
Article.
534.12 RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT ZONES.
The following areas are to be Residential Parking Permit Zones:
(a) Residential Parking Permit Zone "A".
Area bounded on the north by Broad Street to Eighth Avenue, on the
west by Eighth Avenue south to Prospect Avenue, on the south by Prospect
Avenue to First Avenue and on the east from First Avenue to Broad Street.
The streets that comprise the boundary area, both sides of the street will be
included within a designated zone.
(b) Residential Parking Permit Zone "B".
Area bounded on the north by Broad Street to Thirteenth Avenue, on
the west by Thirteenth Avenue, on the south by Prospect Avenue to Eighth
Avenue, north to Broad Street. The streets that comprise the boundary area,
both sides of the street will be included within a designated zone.
ARTICLE 534 9
(c) Residential Parking Permit Zone "C".
Area bounded on the south by Broad Street, on the west by Eighth
Avenue, on the north by Union Boulevard, on the east by First Avenue. The
streets that comprise the boundary area, both sides of the street will be
included within a designated zone.
(d) Residential Parking Permit Zone "D".
Area bounded on the south by Broad Street, on the west by Thirteenth
Avenue, on the north by Union Boulevard, on the east by Tenth Avenue.
Tenth Avenue to North Street, North Street east to Ninth Avenue and Ninth
Avenue south to Broad. The streets that comprise the boundary area, both
sides of the street will be included within a designated zone.
(e) Residential Parking Permit Zone "E"
Area bounded on the west by Monocacy Creek, on the north by Goepp
Street, on the east by Center Street, on the south by Broad Street. The streets
that comprise the boundary area, both sides of the street will be included
within the designated zone.
(Ord. 3705. Passed 8/22/95.)
(f) Residential Parking Permit Zone "F"
Area bounded on the west by Center Street, on the north by Goepp
Street, on the east by Maple Street, on the south by Broad Street. The streets
that comprise the boundary area, both sides of the street will be included
within a designated zone.
(g) Residential Parking Permit Zone "G".
Area bounded on the west by Main Street, on the south by Church
Street, on the east by Center Street, on the north by Broad Street. The streets
that comprise the boundary area, both sides of the street will be included
within a designated zone.
ARTICLE 534 10
(h) Residential Parking Permit Zone "H".
Area bounded on the west by Center Street, on the south by Church
Street, on the east by Maple Street, and on the north by Broad Street. The
streets that comprise the boundary area, both sides of the street will be
included within a designated zone.
(i) Residential Parking Permit Zone "I"
Area bounded on the south by East and West Goepp Street, on the west
by the Monocacy Creek, on the north by Aurora Avenue to Lenox Avenue,
continuing on the north by West Greenwich Street from Lenox Avenue to
Linden Street, on the east by Lenox Avenue from Aurora Avenue to West
Greenwich Street, and continuing on the east by Linden Street from East
Greenwich Street to East Goepp Street. (Ord. 3705. Passed 8/22/95.)
(j) Residential Parking Permit Zone "J"
Area bounded north by West Third Street, on the west by Wyandotte
Street, on the west by Vernon Street, on the south by West 10th Street, on the
east by Carlton Avenue, on the south by West 9th Street, on the east by
Montclair Avenue, on the south by West 8th Street, on the east by Brodhead
Avenue, on the north by Packer Avenue, on the east by Vine Street, on the
south by West Morton Street, and on the east by South New Street. (Ord.
3896. Passed 7/7/98.)
(k) Residential Parking Permit Zone "K".
On the north by East Third Street; on the east by Hayes Street, Hayes
Street south to Mountain Drive, west on East Eighth Street to Hillside Avenue
to Stoneman Street, south on Stoneman to First Terrace; west on Meade Street
to Thomas Street, north on Thomas to Hillside, west on Hillside to Fillmore
Street north to East Third Street. The entire length of First Terrace, and the
900 block of East Fifth Street are to be included in this zone. (Ord. 3339 §1.
Passed 5/1/90; Ord. 4277 – Passed 10/5/04.)
(1) Residential Parking Permit Zone "L".
North by East Third Street, on the west by New Street, south to East
Morton Street, east to Webster Street, south on Webster Street to Packard
Avenue; Packard Avenue east to Fillmore Street; Fillmore Street north to East
ARTICLE 534 11
Third Street. (Ord. 3339 §2. Passed 5/1/90.)
534.13 REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.
(a) Time Restriction on Parking - Except as otherwise designated, onstreet
parking will be restricted to a one to three hour time limit on streets that
now have legal, on-street parking except for metered areas. Vehicle bearing
valid Residential Parking Permit stickers to this area shall be exempt from the
one to three hour time limit and meter requirements. The Parking Authority
will erect, or cause, to be erected, signs. These signs shall indicate the one to
three hour time limit and the exclusion for vehicles with Residential Permit
Parking stickers or shall indicate the exclusion of said vehicles from meter
requirements. The one to three hour time limit shall be enforced at such times
as the Parking Authority shall from time to time see fit.
(b) In areas with existing parking meters, operators with valid
Residential Parking Permits will be allowed to be parked at meters within the
designated area without the need to deposit coins.
(c) Existing Parking Regulations - All existing parking regulations shall
remain in effect. These include but are not limited to: prohibited parking
areas, street cleaning restrictions, five (5) minute parking areas, loading zones.
Holders of Residential Permit Parking stickers will not be exempt from these
regulations.
(d) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for a person to
falsely represent himself as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish
information in an application therefor.
(e) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for a person
holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or
display of such permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit
is issued. Such conduct shall constitute an unlawful act and violation of this
Article both by the person holding the valid parking permit and the person
who so uses or displays the permit on a motor vehicle other than that for
which it is issued.
(f) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to
copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit in order to evade time limitations or parking applicable in a
Residential Permit Parking area.
ARTICLE 534 12
(Ord. 3896. Passed 7/7/98.)
534.99 PENALTIES.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(1) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or
both;
(2) Second violation - A fine of $200.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or
both;
(3) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $300.00, or ninety
days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3260 §1. Passed 4/18/89; Ord. 3896. Passed 7/7/98.)
ARTICLE 535
Residential Permit Parking Board of Appeals
535.01 Purpose; Establishment.
535.02 Board Membership.
535.03 Procedure for Appeal.
535.04 Decision of Board.
535.05 Judicial Remedies.
535.01 PURPOSE; ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby created a Residential Permit Parking Board of Appeals
whose function it shall be to hear and decide appeals from:
(a) Residents who live within designated Residential Parking Permit zones
who have been adversely affected causing an extreme hardship as a result of
Ordinance 3260 (Residential Permit Parking Program); Article 534; Section 534.06
(a), (b) and (f). (Ord. 3970. Passed 10/19/99.)
(b) Students, relatives of residents, or persons caring for residents who live
within a designated Residential Parking Permit" zone, who have been adversely
affected causing an extreme hardship as a result of Ordinance 3260 (Residential
Permit Parking Program); Article 534; Section 534.06 (a) and (b).
535.02 BOARD MEMBERSHIP.
(a) The Board of Appeals shall consist of three (3) members and three (3)
alternates appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council.
Each member and alternate is to be. appointed for a period of one (1), two (2), and
three (3) years respectively or until his successor has been appointed. Board
members may succeed themselves if duly reappointed. Members shall receive no
compensation for the services rendered to the Board.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall be comprised of two (2) members and two
(2) alternates being residents of a designated zoned area. One (1) member and one
1) alternate shall be residents in a non-zoned area.
ARTICLE 535 2
(c) Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
place becomes vacant, and the Mayor may remove any member for cause. The
member may request a Public Hearing before being removed.
(d) Any member currently serving on the Board of Appeals shall continue to
serve until his current term expires at which time the vacancy shall be filled in
accordance with Section 535.02 (a).
535.03 PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL.
(a) When any person wishes to appeal Ordinance 3260, Section 534.06,
Section (a) or (b) a written request must be filed with the Bethlehem Parking
Authority. Documentation in the form of physician medical statements shall be
included or any other documents pertinent to the appeal.
(b) Application for appeal may be made when it is felt the Residential
Parking Permit program has created an undue hardship for a resident.
(c) Appeal hearings shall be scheduled on an as needed basis. However, no
longer than thirty (30) days shall pass for hearing on any appeal.
(d) Hearings shall be open to the public. The Board shall elect a Chairperson
and prescribe such rules as may be necessary as to place and conduct of hearings.
The Board may in such rules make provisions for a filing fee for appeals in the
amount of $10.00, which shall be paid to the Bethlehem Parking Authority. The
Board shall be provided with the services of a secretary from the Parking Authority
who will take minutes of the meeting and transcribe same. The costs of providing
the secretary shall be borne by the Authority.
(e) The Board shall affirm, modify or waive certain requirements as required
by Ordinance No. 3260 (Residential Permit Parking Program) by concurring votes
of two (2) members and an alternate in attendance. Failure to secure two (2)
concurring votes shall be deemed a denial of the appeal request. Attendance by no
less than two (2) members and alternate of the Board shall be required to constitute
a quorum.
(f) The Secretary shall forthwith transmit copies of the appeal to the Director
of the Parking Authority.
ARTICLE 535 3
535.04 DECISION OF BOARD.
The Board shall render its decision at a public meeting within seven business
days after the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall state the findings of
the Board with respect to the material fact and shall reference the provisions of the
Ordinance. In reaching its decision, the Board shall consider the expressed intent
of the Ordinance.
535.05 JUDICIAL REMEDIES.
This Article shall not be construed to limit or deny any judicial remedies to
which a party may be entitled by law or equity, but any aggrieved party having an
appeal under this Article must first avail himself or herself of the appeal. Any costs
incurred by the Appeals Board shall be borne by the Parking Authority.
(Ord. 3354. Passed 10/2/90.)
ARTICLE 536Error! Bookmark not defined.
COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY PERMIT PARKING
536.01 Purpose.
536.02 College/University Permit Parking Program.
536.03 Designation Criteria.
536.04 Issuance of Parking Permits.
536.05 Display of Permit.
536.06 Permit Parking Exemption.
536.07 Application for and Duration of Permit.
536.08 Permit Fees.
536.09 Revocation of Permit.
536.99 Penalties.
CROSS REFERENCES
536.01 PURPOSE.
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem considers it to be
in the interest of the citizens of the City of Bethlehem to
provide for the establishment of a College/University Permit
Parking Program (CUPP) in order to alleviate the hardship
experienced by college and university faculty and staff in
obtaining on-street parking space, to preserve the quality of
neighborhoods and to provide for improvement in air quality. The
powers and duties as contained in this Article shall be performed
by the Bethlehem Parking Authority (the "Parking Authority").
536.02 COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM.
Upon request of a college or university, the Parking
Authority is hereby authorized to designate, as herein provided,
certain streets or parts thereof within the City of Bethlehem as
College/University Permit Parking areas in which only vehicles
displaying valid parking permits may stand or be parked during
time periods established by the Parking Authority.
536.03 DESIGNATION CRITERIA.
An area shall be deemed impacted and thereby eligible for
College/University Permit Parking provided that the following
criteria are satisfied:
ARTICLE 536 2
(a) All property on both sides of the designated street is
owned or leased by the college or university; or written consent
is obtained from all other property owners on the designated
street; and
(b) The Parking Authority determines that the parking
situation on the designated street is such that implementation of
the permit program is necessary or convenient for the
administration, supervision and enforcement of an efficient
system of on-street parking regulation.
(c) City Council approves by resolution the designation of
the street or part thereof for inclusion in the
College/University Permit Parking Program.
536.04 ISSUANCE OF PARKING PERMITS.
The Parking Authority may authorize the issuance of
appropriate permits by a college or university and shall cause
parking signs to be erected in the area indicating the times and
conditions under which parking shall be allowed. The college or
university shall issue permits to the faculty and staff members
upon application and payment of the applicable fees by the
college or university and compliance with the terms of this
Ordinance. The applicant shall set forth in the application the
name, address, vehicle make, model and license number for each
permit holder. Promptly upon issuance of a permit, the college
or university shall provide the Parking Authority with a copy of
the application therefor. The number of spaces designated for
permit parking on a designated street shall not exceed 90% of the
available on-street parking spaces on said street, which number
shall be established by the Parking Authority. A separate permit
shall be required for each motor vehicle. Commercial vehicles
exceeding a gross weight of 10,000 pounds are not eligible for
permits.
536.05 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
Permits shall be displayed from either the rear bumper of a
vehicle or from the rear view mirror on a vehicle so as to be
readily visible to enforcement personnel.
536.06 PERMIT PARKING EXEMPTION.
A vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit as
provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in
the College/University Permit Parking area for which the permit
has been issued during the time periods established by the
Parking Authority. However, said vehicle shall not be exempt
from parking restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to
ARTICLE 536 3
authority other than this Article including Article 531, Stopping
and Parking, Street Sweeping, of the Codified Ordinances as well
as loading zones, five minute parking zones, handicapped zones
and other special parking restrictions. All other motor vehicles
parked within a College/University Permit Parking area shall be
subject to the time restrictions adopted as provided in this
Article as well as the penalties provided for herein.
A College/University Parking Permit shall not guarantee or
reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within
the designated College/University Permit Parking area.
536.07 APPLICATION FOR AND DURATION OF PERMIT.
Each parking permit issued shall be valid for one (1) year
from the date of issuance. Permits may be renewed annually upon
reapplication in the manner required by the Parking Authority.
Each application or reapplication for a parking permit shall
contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, his
residence address, and the license number of the motor vehicle
for which application is made, and such other information that
may be deemed relevant by the Parking Authority. If a permit
holder sells or otherwise transfers a vehicle bearing a parking
permit sticker, he or she shall remove the sticker before the
transfer. If a permit holder transfers a vehicle bearing a valid
permit parking sticker and acquires another vehicle, he or she
shall provide the college or university which issued the permit
with proof of the transfer and an affidavit attesting to the
removal of the sticker. The college or university may then
provide a new sticker which will expire at the same time as the
original sticker.
536.08 PERMIT FEES.
The initial cost for each College/University Parking Permit
space shall be Seventy-five and 00/100 ($75.00) Dollars and each
annual renewal cost will be Seventy-five and 00/100 ($75.00)
Dollars. (Ord. 3691. Passed 6/20/95; Ord. 3885. Passed
6/2/98)
536.09 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The Parking Authority is authorized to revoke the
College/University Parking Permit of any person found to be in
violation of this Article and, upon written notification thereof,
the person shall surrender such permit to the Parking Authority.
Failure, when so requested, to surrender a College/University
Parking Permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of law and
of this Article.
ARTICLE 536 4
536.99 PENALTIES.
(a) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article
for a person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a
parking permit or to furnish information in an application
therefor.
(b) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article
for a person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant
hereto to permit the use or display of such permit on a motor
vehicle other than that for which the permit is issued. Such
conduct shall constitute an unlawful act and violation of this
Article both by the person holding the valid parking permit and
the person who so uses or displays the permit on a motor vehicle
other than that for which it is issued.
(c) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article
for a person to copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a
facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time
limitations or parking applicable in a College/University Permit
Parking area.
(d) For violation of any provisions contained in paragraphs
(a), (b) and (c) of this Article the person committing the
unlawful act shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty
days imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second violation - A fine of $200.00, or sixty
days imprisonment, or both;
(3) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$300.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
The College/University Permit Parking Program shall remain in
effect through June 2, 1999.* (Ord. 3427 - Passed 8/6/91, Ord.
3559 - Passed 7/6/93, Ord. 3627 - Passed 7/19/94, Ord. 3691 -
Passed 6/20/95, Ord. 3754 - Passed 6/18/96, Ord. 3826 - Passed
6/17/97, Ord. 3870 - Passed 2/17/98, *Ord. 3885 - Passed 6/2/98).
ARTICLE 538
Impounding Illegally Parked Vehicles
538.01 Authority to remove and impound.
538.02 Approved storage garages.
538.03 Garage owner insurance requirement.
538.04 User fee.
538.05 Notification to owners.
538.06 Payment of charges without protest.
538.07 Payment of charges under protest; appeal.
538.08 Records of vehicles impounded.
538.09 Liability for fine or penalty.
538.10 Restrictions upon removal.
538.11 Hours for claiming impounded vehicles.
538.12 Unlawful redemption.
538.98 Enforcement remedies.
538.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Removal by or at discretion of police - See Vehicle Code §3352
Power to establish removal and impounding procedures - See
Vehicle Code §6109 (a)(22)
Impounding in snow emergency - See TRAF. Art. 523
Parking generally - See TRAF. Art. 531
538.01 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND.
(a) The Police Commissioner and/or the Executive Director
of the Parking Authority is authorized to remove and impound or
to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on any
of the streets of the City in violation of any provisions of law,
including but not limited to the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code,
75 Pa. C.S.A. 3351, 3352 and 3353, or any ordinance of the City.
(Ord. 2010-11 - Passed 5/19/10.)
(b) Any vehicle (as defined in the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code) whose owner is delinquent in payment of fines for
five (5) or more parking tickets as a result of his or her
violation of parking laws of the City or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall be prohibited from parking on City streets and
may be seized, removed and impounded or immobilized by the Police
Commissioner or the Parking Authority.
(Ord. 2010-11 – Passed 5/19/10.)
(c) The Police Commissioner is authorized to enter into
contracts with all qualified Tow Operators, who meet the
ARTICLE 538 2
objective standards set out in the Tow Operator contract. The
Tow Operators shall provide vehicle removal and impounding
services pursuant to terms of such contract. The Parking
Authority is authorized to enter into contracts with not more
than six (6) qualified Tow Operators, who shall meet the
objective standards set out in the Parking Authority contracts.
The Tow Operators shall provide vehicle removal and impounding
services pursuant to the terms of such contracts.
(d) The Police Department towing contracts will run for a
one year period commencing January 1 and ending December 31.
Applications for Police Department towing contracts must be
received by the City no later than sixty (60) days prior to the
commencement of the contract term. For the purpose of the 1996
contract term only, applications from any tow operator not
currently under contract with the City will be accepted up until
January 15, 1996. The contracts for tow operators currently
towing for the City will commence on January 1, 1996. New tow
operator contracts will commence the date the contract is fully
executed. All contracts for the 1996 term will expire on
December 31, 1996.
(Ord. 3500 - Passed 11/17/92; Ord. 3717 - Passed 12/05/95.)
538.02 APPROVED STORAGE GARAGES.
Every Tow Operator which contracts with the City of
Bethlehem as provided above, shall provide and maintain a single
facility for the storage of at least ten (10) full sized
automobiles and a building capable of housing and securing at
least one (1) other vehicle. Such facilities shall be within the
limits of the City of Bethlehem. All vehicles towed under the
provisions of this Agreement shall be stored within City limits,
upon or within the facility maintained by each Tow Operator.
(Ord. 3116 §2. Passed 3/3/87.)
538.03 GARAGE OWNER INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
Every Tow Operator which contracts with the City of
Bethlehem as provided above, shall maintain at its own expense
during the full term of the contract, public liability insurance
in the minimum amounts of Current Requirements for personal
injury damage, and Current Requirements for each accident, and
Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) aggregate for property
damage. In addition, such policies of insurance shall name the
City of Bethlehem as an additional insured.
(Ord. 3116 §3. Passed 3/3/87.)
ARTICLE 538 3
538.04 USER FEE
The City and the Parking Authority are authorized to charge
a reasonable fee to cover administrative duty costs incurred by
the City in connection with each vehicle tow.
(Ord. 3116 - Passed 3/3/87; Ord. 3204 - Passed 8/2/88;
Ord. 3444 - Passed 12/3/91; Ord. 3717 - Passed 12/5/95.)
538.05 NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS.
Within twelve hours from the time of the removal of any
vehicle under authority granted by this Article, notice of the
fact that the vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by the
Police Department to the owner of record of that vehicle. Such
notice shall set forth the location from which the vehicle was
removed, the reason for its removal and impounding, the storage
garage in which it has been impounded and where it can be
claimed. The notice shall also inform the owner of record that a
written notice of protest and demand for hearing may be filed if
the owner feels that the vehicle was removed contrary to
authority. If any vehicle has not been claimed nor notice of
protest filed within fifteen days of the mailing date of such
notice to the owner, the Police Department may, upon request from
the storage garage where the vehicle is impounded, declare the
vehicle abandoned, as provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(Ord. 2428 §4. Passed 7/2/74; Ord. 3177 §2. Passed 4/19/88.)
538.06 PAYMENT OF CHARGES WITHOUT PROTEST.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized
by this Article shall, unless a written notice of protest is
filed and that protest is upheld at hearing, be final and
conclusive, and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover
the money so paid. (Ord. 1769 §12. Passed 11/13/62;
Ord. 3177 §3. Passed 4/19/88.)
538.07 NOTICE OF PROTEST; HEARING.
If the owner of record of any vehicle removed and impounded
under authority granted by this Article shall file a written
notice of protest and demand for hearing with the Police
Department, the owner shall be entitled to a hearing within
twenty-four (24) hours of the filing of the notice of protest and
demand for hearing, before a Hearing Officer designated by the
City of Bethlehem. If the Hearing Officer shall uphold the
protest, the owner shall be entitled to recover possession of the
vehicle immediately, without payment of any towing and storage
charges. If the Hearing Officer shall deny the protest, the
ARTICLE 538 4
owner shall be entitled to recover possession of the vehicle only
upon payment of all applicable towing and storage charges. The
rights of notice, appeal, and waiver of hearing shall be afforded
to any protestant under this Article, such as is provided by the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code in other cases of summary
offenses. (Ord. 3177 §4. Passed 4/19/88.)
538.08 RECORDS OF VEHICLES IMPOUNDED
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles
impounded and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish
the owners or agents of the owners thereof with information as to
the place of storage of such vehicles.
(Ord. 2428 §5. Passed 7/2/74.)
538.09 LIABILITY FOR FINE OR PENALTY.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate
to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability
for any fine or penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance
on account of which the vehicle was removed and impounded.
(Ord. 1769 §12. Passed 11/13/62.)
538.10 RESTRICTIONS UPON REMOVAL.
Deleted by Ordinance 2670, passed 9/14/79.
538.11 HOURS FOR CLAIMING IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
Every Tow Operator which contracts with the City of
Bethlehem and as provided above, shall release any vehicle towed,
at any hour, within the first twelve (12) hours of the tow.
Thereafter, vehicles will be released between 8:00 A.M. and
5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, and between 8:00 A.M. and Noon
Saturday, except holidays. Between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.,
Monday through Friday, and between 8:00 A.M. and Noon Saturday,
except holidays, there will be no charge for the release of any
vehicle. An additional charge of $10.00 will be added to the
towing fee for a release at any other hour.
(Ord. 3116 §5. Passed 3/3/87.)
538.12 UNLAWFUL REDEMPTION.
No person shall move a vehicle after it has been towed to an
approved storage garage without payment of all applicable towing
and storage charges, except as otherwise provided in this
Article.
(Ord. 2048 §2. Passed 11/14/67; Ord. 3177 §5. Passed 4/19/88.)
(Ord. 3354. Passed 10/2/90 changed Article No. only)
ARTICLE 538 5
538.98 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
Where any Tow Operator breaches terms of the contract, in
addition to pursuing legal recourse to collect monies owed the
City, the City may terminate the contract. (Ord. 3717. Passed
12/5/95.)
538.99 PENALTY.
Whoever moves a vehicle after it has been towed to an
approved storage garage without payment of the towing and storage
charges shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
the first offense and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
subsequent offense. (Ord. 3371. Passed 11/20/90.)
ARTICLE 540
Buses and Taxicabs
540.01 Designation of stops and stands.
540.02 Regulations for stopping, standing, parking.
540.03 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands by other vehicles.
CROSS REFERENCES
Bus, taxicab defined - See Vehicle Code §102
Stand defined See Vehicle Code §102
Regulations for stopping, standing, parking - See Vehicle Code §3351
Traffic Division - See TRAF. Art. 503
Parking generally - See TRAF. Art. 531
540.01 DESIGNATION OF STOPS AND STANDS.
The Department of Public Works is empowered to establish bus stops,
bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier
motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as it
shall determine. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand
shall be designated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/62; Ord.
4026. Passed 8/1/00.)
540.02 REGULATIONS FOR STOPPING, STANDING,
PARKING.
(a) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
(b) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so
designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
(c) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped
ARTICLE 540 2
to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right
front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches from the curb
and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic.
(d) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle
upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated. This
provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any
place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/62.)
540.03 RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS
BY OTHER VEHICLES.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zones. (Ord. 1769. Passed 11/13/62.) (Ord. 3354. Passed
10/2/90 changed Article No. only)
TITLE SEVEN - Pedestrians and Bicycles
Article 541. Pedestrians.
Article 543. Bicycle Registration.
ARTICLE 541
Pedestrians
541.01 Obedience to signals.
CROSS REFERENCES
Obedience of pedestrians to traffic control devices - See Vehicle Code §3541
Blind pedestrians - See Vehicle Code §3549
Power to regulate - See Vehicle Code §6109 (a)(16), (17)
Crosswalks and safety zones - See TRAF. Art. 503
541.01 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
Pedestrians shall be subject to signals that control vehicular traffic
and, at such controlled intersections, shall cross the roadway on green signal
only and within the crosswalks, except where "Walk" lights are in operation.
At such intersections both right angle and diagonal crossings may be made
when "Walk" light indicates "Walk." (Ord. 1769 §11. Passed 11/13/62.)
ARTICLE 543
Bicycle Registration
543.01 Definition
543.02 Registration
543.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Pedalcycle defined - See Vehicle Code §102
Attachment to moving vehicles - See Vehicle Code §3711
543.01 DEFINITION.
The words "bicycle" and "pedalcycle" for purposes of this Traffic
Code are interchangeable and mean a vehicle propelled solely by humanpowered
pedals. (Ord. 2623 §27. Passed 10/3/78.)
543.02 REGISTRATION.
(a) No resident of the City shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any
public way within the City unless such bicycle has been properly registered
and tagged in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Every owner of any bicycle within the City shall file with
the Police Commissioner or his authorized representative a
complete description of the bicycle and show evidence of
ownership, which filing shall constitute a registration of
the bicycle.
(2) Any resident who acquires ownership of any bicycle shall
file for registration within two weeks following such
acquisition.
(3) Each registration shall be consecutively numbered and kept
on file by the Police Commissioner in his office as a public
record.
ARTICLE 543 2
(4) A fee of fifty cents ($.50) shall be charged for registration.
(5) Immediately upon the registration of a bicycle the Police
Commissioner or his authorized representative shall issue
an identification tag, serially numbered to correspond to the
bicycle registration, which shall thereupon be affixed to the
bicycle in accordance with the instructions of the Police
Commissioner. The Police Commissioner shall also supply
the owner at the time of registration with a registration
card showing the registration number and a printed sheet
or booklet which contains all laws and ordinances
applicable to the operation of a bicycle within the City
together with whatever information may, in the judgment of
the Police Commissioner, assist the operator in the safe
operation of a bicycle.
(6) Within one week after the sale or dismantling of any
registered bicycle, such information shall be reported to
the Police Commissioner by the person in whose name the
bicycle was registered.
(7) Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling
new or used bicycles shall make a written report within five
days to the Police Commissioner of every bicycle purchased
or sold giving a complete description of the bicycle
together with the names and addresses of the persons from
whom the bicycles were purchased or to whom they were
sold.
(8) Bicycles owned by any rental agency are subject to this
section.
(9) No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy,
mutilate or alter the identification device, frame number of
the bicycle or the registration card issued to the owner.
(10) All bicycles shall be re-registered once a year at locations
provided by the Police Department. A fee of fifty cents
($.50) will be charged for each registration and at the time
ARTICLE 543 3
of registration. Failure to re-register will result in
enforcement of the penalty provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 2429 §3. Passed 7/2/74; Ord. 2567 §1-3 Passed
6/7/77.)
543.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of Section 543.02 is guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than fifteen dollars ($15.00), except that, any person violating
subsection (a) (9) thereof (pertaining to tampering with identification
devices) shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2623 §29. Passed 10/3/78.)
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF BETHLEHEM
PART SEVEN - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
ARTICLE 701
Advertising
701.01 Posting Prohibited
701.02 Posting Declared A Nuisance
701.03 Scattering Advertisements, Paper, Samples
701.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Trees and Shrubs - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 910
Signs - See ZON. Art. 1320
701.01 POSTING PROHIBITED.
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or cause the
same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster,
advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of
the public to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone
or any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any
lamppost, electric light, telegraph or telephone pole, railway structure,
hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders,
railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct or other public
structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm or
police telegraph system, or any vehicle, not the property of the person
posting, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the
United States or the State, and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
City. (Ord. 1481 §1Passed 7/23/57; Ord. 3195 §1. Passed 6/7/88.)
701.02 POSTING DECLARED A NUISANCE.
The posting, sticking, stamping, painting or otherwise affixing, or
causing the same to be done, of any notice, placard, bill, card, poster,
ARTICLE 701 2
advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of
the public to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone
or other portion or part of any public way or public place, or on any
lamppost, electric light, telegraph or telephone pole, railway structure,
hydrant, shade tree or tree-box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders,
railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct or other public
structure or building, or upon any pole, box, or fixture of the fire alarm or
police telegraph system, or any vehicle, not the property of the person
posting, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the
United States or the State, and the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
City, are declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 1481 §2. Passed 7/23/57; Ord.
3195 §2. Passed 6/7/88.)
701.03 SCATTERING ADVERTISEMENTS, WASTE PAPER,
SAMPLES.
No person shall cast or place in the streets of the City, or on the
pavements, sidewalks or footways thereof, or into the vestibules, yards or
upon the porches of any dwelling or other outbuilding within the City, any
papers, advertisements, handbills, circulars, waste papers or samples of any
description. Nothing herein contained shall be held to apply to newspapers,
mailed matter and addressed envelopes. (1946 Code C. 19 §18).
701.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $600.00, or ninety
days imprisonment, or both;
(Ord. 1768 §1. Passed 11/13/62; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 705
Disorderly Conduct
705.01 Disorderly Conduct; Peace Disturbance
705.02 Fights, Intoxication
705.03 Enticing Minor Into Vehicle
705.04 Disorderly Houses
705.05 Obstructing Travel, Etc.
705.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Disorderly establishments or practices - See 3rd Class § 2403(24),
[53 P.S. §37403(24)]
Disorderly conduct - See 3rd Class §2403(55) [53 P.S. §37403(55)]
Unnecessary noises - See GEN. OFF. Art. 717
705.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; PEACE DISTURBANCE.
Whoever willfully makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous
and unseemly noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable
residents nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley,
park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or
the traveling public is annoyed, is guilty of the offense of disorderly
conduct. (Ord. 1786 §1. Passed 12/27/62.)
705.02 FIGHTS; INTOXICATION.
Whoever wrongfully strikes another or is engaged in any fight or
affray, or who shall be or appear in a drunken or intoxicated condition in any
public street, park or public place within the City, is guilty of the offense of
disorderly conduct. (Ord. 1786 §2. Passed 12/27/62.)
ARTICLE 705 2
705.03 ENTICING MINOR INTO VEHICLE.
Any person who shall solicit or entice any minor person to accompany
him in a vehicle in the City is guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 3009 §1. Passed 9/3/85.)
705.04 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
No person shall visit, occupy or frequent any house or building of any
sort or description in the City, and behave therein in a loud, tumultuous or
disorderly manner to the disturbance of the peaceable residents nearby. (Ord.
3009 §1. Passed 9/3/85.)
705.05 LOITERING
(a) No person shall loiter in a public place, as hereinafter defined, in
such manner as to obstruct any public street, public sidewalk, public bridge,
or other public place or public building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles or
pedestrians.
(b) No person shall commit in or upon any public street, public
sidewalk, public bridge, or other public place or public building any act
which obstructs or interferes with the free and uninterrupted use of property
of the lawful conducting of any business by any one in or upon or facing or
fronting on any such public street, public sidewalk, public bridge, or other
public place or public building, in such manner as to hinder or impede or
tend to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted ingress and egress
thereto.
(c) Definitions, for purposes of this section are as follows:
(1) "Loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location
or lingering or standing around without purpose either alone or
in consort with others.
(2) "Public Place" shall mean any place to which the public
has access and shall include any public street or public
sidewalk, as well as the front of and the area immediately
ARTICLE 705 3
adjacent to any parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern, or other
place of business.
(d) When any person causes or commits any of the conditions
enumerated in Subsections 705.05(a) or (b) hereinabove, a law enforcement
officer for the City of Bethlehem shall order that person to stop causing or
committing such condition. If any person receiving any such order from a
law enforcement officer fails or refuses to obey the same, that person shall
be guilty of a violation of this Section 705.05, and shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in Section 705.99 of the Codified Ordinances of the
City of Bethlehem. (Ord. 2668. Passed 8/8/79; Ord. 3178 §1. Passed
4/19/88.)
705.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $600.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both;
(Ord. 1768 §1. Passed 11/13/62, Ord. 1786 §4. Passed 12/27/62;
Ord. 3242 Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 709
Dogs
709.01 Definitions
709.02 License Required
709.03 Running At Large; Impounding
709.04 Notice To Owner, Payment Of Charges
709.05 Destroying Of Clog; Fee
709.06 Sale Or Destroying Of Unclaimed Dogs
709.07 Running At Large Of Certain Dogs
709.08 Observation For Rabies
709.09 Proclamation Of Hydrophobia By Mayor
709.10 Interference With Officers
709.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Animals running at large - See 3rd Class §2403(8) [53 P.S. §37403(8)]
Power to destroy dogs. - See 3rd Class §2403(9) [53 P.S. §37403(9)]
Cruelty to animals - See Penal Code §942, 944
Fowl and other animals - See HLTH. Art. 1159
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in new
Article 1159, Animals.
(Ord. 4238 – Passed 12/16/03)
ARTICLE 711
Law Enforcement
711.01 Crossing Police Lines
711.02 False Reports To Police Department
711.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
Rewards re false fire alarms - See FIRE PREV. Art. 1503
711.01 CROSSING POLICE LINES.
No person shall cross a police line without the express permission of
the Police Department. A "police line" is defined as the boundary of an area
which has been temporarily isolated or set apart by ropes, barricades or other
methods by the police in pursuance of official duties, and which boundary or
line is plainly marked by a sign bearing the inscription "POLICE LINE - DO
NOT CROSS." (Ord. 1839 §1. Passed 12/17/63.)
711.02 FALSE REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
No person shall knowingly make, or cause to be made, any false
report or misleading call or request for any of the services of the Police
Department. (Ord. 2058 §1. Passed 12/19/67.)
711.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. (Ord. 1839 §2. Passed
12/17/63.)
ARTICLE 713
Gambling
713.01 Use Of Premises For Unlawful Gambling
713.02 Frequenting Unlawful Gambling House; Participating, Promoting
713.03 Letting Premises For Unlawful Gambling
713.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Gambling, cock or dog fighting - See 3rd Class §2403(24)
[53 P.S. §37403(24)]
Gambling devices prohibited - See BUS. REG. Art. 305 and 307.
713.01 USE OF PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL GAMBLING.
No person shall use or permit to be used any premises, house,
building, outhouse, room, tent, booth or any part thereof, or any other place
of any sort or description, indoors or in the open, for the purpose of unlawful
gambling by means of any game, scheme or enterprise, or any device,
instrument or thing whatsoever at or by which any money or other valuable
thing is waged, staked or bet, or in any other manner. (1946 Code C. 19 §14;
Ord. 3009 §2. Passed 9/3/85.)
713.02 FREQUENTING UNLAWFUL GAMBLING HOUSE;
PARTICIPATING, PROMOTING.
No person shall visit or frequent any of the places mentioned in
Section 713.01 for the purpose of unlawful gambling in any manner, or there
or elsewhere promote, manage or in any way participate, persuade, entice or
solicit others to do so, in any game, scheme or enterprise at or by which any
money or other valuable thing is waged, staked or bet. (Ord. 3009 §2. Passed
9/3/85.)
ARTICLE 713 2
713.03 LETTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL GAMBLING.
No owner, lessee or sub-lessee of any premises, house, building,
outhouse, room, tent, booth or any part thereof, shall knowingly let or sublet
such premises, house, building, outhouse, room, tent, booth or any part
thereof, for the purpose of unlawful gambling in any manner. Upon notice
from any person that such premises, house, building, outhouse, room, tent,
booth, or any part thereof, are so used, such owner, lessee or sub-lessee shall
immediately direct the gambling to cease. Any owner, lessee or sub-lessee
who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be construed to
be a promoter or manager of gambling, game, scheme or enterprise, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished as hereinafter provided. (Ord.
3009 §2. Passed 9/3/85.)
713.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(Ord. 1801 §1. Passed 3/11/63; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 715
Pawnbrokers and Second Hand Dealers
715.01 Reports to Bethlehem Police Department.
715.99 Penalty.
715.01 REPORTS TO BETHLEHEM POLICE DEPARTMENT
All pawnbrokers, jewelers, or merchants of any kind, buying or
taking in to pawn second-hand jewelry, coins, precious metals, or
second-hand goods of any kind, shall keep complete and accurate
records, on forms provided by the Bethlehem Police Department, of
any and all items taken in pawn, exchanged, and/or purchased by
them. These records shall, at a minimum, include all of the
following:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the
individual pawning or selling the item.
B. Proof of the individual's positive identification, e.g.
Pennsylvania's Driver's License Number or Pennsylvania
Non-Driver's License Identification Number.
C. Description and serial number (where applicable) of the
item pawned or sold.
D. The price for which the item was pawned or sold.
In the event that the individual pawning or selling the item
is under the age of eighteen years, he/she shall be accompanied by
a parent or legal guardian. The parent or legal guardian must also
provide proof of positive identification, the same being recorded
in the merchant's records.
If the item purchased is to be changed in any way, including,
but not limited to, melting, or smelting, the purchaser/pawnbroker
shall photograph the object and immediately notify, by telephone,
the Bethlehem Police Investigative Bureau. Such notification
ARTICLE 715 2
shall include a description of the item. The item shall not be
altered within the forty-eight (48) hours following the
notification.
A legible, accurate, and complete copy of these records shall
be delivered to the Police Commissioner or his designee at his
office every Tuesday before 10:00 a.m.
Upon demand, inventory records shall be open to the Bethlehem
Police Department.
715.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be
fined not more than Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars or imprisoned
not more than ninety (90) days or both.
(Ord. 3777, Passed 11/19/96.)
ARTICLE 717
Noises
717.01 Unnecessary noise a nuisance.
717.02 Peddlers.
717.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Preventing noises - See 3rd Class §2403(25) [53 P.S. §37403(250]
Peddlers declared a nuisance - See BUS. REG. Art. 311
Disturbing the peace -See GEN. OFF. Art. 705
Noisy houses - See GEN. OFF. Art. 705
717.01 UNNECESSARY NOISE A NUISANCE
(a) The making of unnecessary noise, while residing or occupying or present in or
around a dwelling, building or other structure in the City by a person, animal, musical
instrument, amplifying systems or otherwise, is declared to be a public nuisance. Prohibited
conduct shall include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) No person shall operate or allow to be operated a radio, stereo, boom box,
tape and/or CD player or any other type of sound reproduction device in
any area within the City at a sound level which is audible at a distance of
greater than forty (40) feet from the location of any such sound
reproduction device.
(2) No person or animal shall be permitted to create any sound or noise which
endangers or injures the safety or health of another person or animal,
which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or
which endangers or injures personal or real property or a property right or
interest.
(3) No person shall make unnecessary noise in the handling of ash, trash,
garbage receptacles, either in loading or unloading, and whether full or
empty.
(b) The provisions of section 717.01(a) shall not apply to:
(1) Police, Fire and Ambulance Vehicles, Devices or Buildings.
ARTICLE 717 2
The emission of sound, including radios, public address systems or other
communications devices, from a police, fire and/or ambulance vehicle,
device or building.
(2) Municipal and Utility Services Vehicles, Devices or Buildings.
The emission of sound from a municipal and/or utility services vehicle,
device or building.
(3) Places of Religious Worship.
The sound of any bell or chime used in conjunction with places of
religious worship.
(4) Political and Labor Rallies, Athletic Events or City of Bethlehem
Licensed, Permitted or Authorized Events.
The use of devices such as public address systems, amplifying systems,
bull horns, musical instruments, tape messages or similar devices which
are used at political or labor rallies, or athletic events or other City of
Bethlehem licensed, permitted or authorized events to the extent already
protected by law.
(5) Construction and Improvements
The operating of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling or
demolition work, provided that such work does not occur between 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless a special permit is obtained from the
Community and Economic Development Director or his designated
representative.
(6) Emergencies
The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence
of an emergency or emitted in response to an emergency.
(7) Facilities that offer entertainment between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and
12:00 a.m. in outdoor venues located in an Industrial Redevelopment
District and an Industrial Redevelopment – Residential District. (Ord.
2014-28. Passed 9/16/14.)
(Ord. 3946. Passed 3/16/99; Ord. 4400. Passed 11/8/06.)
ARTICLE 717 3
717.02 PEDDLERS
No peddler, who plies a trade or calling of whatsoever nature on the streets, shall use any
horn, bell or other sound instrument, or make any noise tending to disturb the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood for the purpose of directing attention to his wares, trade or calling on Sunday,
nor before 7:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M. on other days of the week. No peddler shall cry his
wares within a distance of 150 feet of any school, church or building in which religious services
are held, during school hours or hours of public worship.
717.99 PENALTY
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) First violation - A fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00;
(2) Second violation - A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00;
(3) Third and Each Subsequent Violation - A fine of not less than $500.00, or
thirty days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3946. Passed 3/16/99; Ord. 4400. Passed 11/8/06.)
ARTICLE 721
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
721.01 Definitions.
721.02 Obstructions, Projections or Activities.
721.03 Removal of Snow, Ice or Rubbish.
721.04 Projecting Gates or Doors.
721.05 Street and Sidewalk Vendors.
721.06 Sidewalk Sales / Outdoor Dining.
721.07 Municipal Events.
721.08 Non-Vending Activities.
721.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to prohibit street obstructions - See 3rd Class §2403(16) [53 P.S. 37403(16)]
Malicious injury to sidewalks - See Penal Code §958
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Snow emergency routes - See TRAF. Art. 523
Blocking garages - See TRAF. Art. 531
Scattering papers on sidewalks - See GEN. OFF. Art. 701
Street improvements - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 905
Sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 909
Health nuisances - See HLTH. Art. 1161
721.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:
Director: The Director of Public Works for the City of Bethlehem.
Food: Solid food and beverages allowed to be sold in accordance with this ordinance.
Motor Vehicle: Motor vehicle is defined as any vehicle used for the displaying, storing or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor, which is required to be licensed and registered
by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
Person: Person is defined as any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or
corporation, in his or its own capacity or an administrator, conservator, executor, trustee, receiver,
or other representative appointed by a court. Whenever the word “person” is used in any section of
this ordinance prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall
ARTICLE 721
2
include the partners (both general and limited) or members thereof and such word as applied to
corporations shall include the officers, agents, or employees thereof who are responsible for any
violation of said section.
Pushcart: Pushcart is defined as a wheeled vehicle propelled solely by a single human.
Stand: Stand is defined as any table, showcase, bench, booth, rack, pushcart, or any other wheeled
vehicle or fixture which may be removed without the assistance of a motor and which is not
required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles, used for displaying,
storing or transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor.
Vending: Vending is defined as the act of selling, offering for sale, transferring, or offering to
transfer to another for pecuniary gain.
Vendor: Vendor is defined as any person engaged in the selling or offering for sale of food,
beverages, services or merchandise on the public streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements,
footways or rights-of-way from a stand or motor vehicle.
721.02 OBSTRUCTIONS, PROJECTIONS OR ACTIVITIES.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall permit to remain, or hereafter erect
or place any stand, stall, booth or showcase, vending machine, trash receptacle, banner, awning,
awning post, swinging sign, post, pole, board, frame, or any other device or thing occupying, or in
any manner projecting over or upon any portion of any of the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys,
pavements, footways or rights-of-way of the City, or stand or place or cause to be stood or placed
any barrels, boxes, wares, goods, merchandise, brick, stone, lumber or any other thing of any kind
or description, whether for sale or otherwise, in or upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys,
pavements, footways or rights-of-way of the City. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
projection over and above any street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or right-of-way in
the City of any temporary awning which is at least seven and one-half clear feet above the street,
sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or right-of-way at its lowest point. (Ord. 3009. Passed
9/3/1985.)
B. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall obstruct the streets, sidewalks,
lanes, alleys, pavements, footways or rights-of-way.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall sell or offer for sale any food,
beverage, service or merchandise on any street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or rightof-
way or public park within the City from any wagon, truck, auto push cart, stand or vehicle or in
any other manner whatsoever upon streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements, footways or
rights-of-way or parking lots of the City.
D. The Director of Public Works, as authorized by the Mayor, shall review, schedule
and grant final approval to all activities on streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements, footways
or rights-of-way except for block parties and parades which require temporary closing of the
ARTICLE 721
3
street and redirection of traffic. Such events shall be permitted and controlled by the Department
of Police.
E. Nothing herein shall prevent the necessary loading and unloading of vehicles, and
the delivery of goods and material to residences and business houses, or for building operations.
The foregoing activities are subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of
Public Works and/or the Police Commissioner.
F. Activities which may be conducted upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys,
pavements, footways or rights-of-way are those which would: enhance its appearance; generate
citizen interest, community spirit and vitality. Subject activities will in no way interfere with the
health, safety or welfare of the community, and may include the right without the necessity of a
permit to the peaceful, orderly exercise of freedom of speech as granted by the First Amendment
of the United States Constitution.
721.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE OR RUBBISH.
No person owning, controlling or occupying any lot adjoining or fronting upon any of the
streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements, footways or rights-of-way in the City shall allow or
permit any mud, sand, gravel, leaves, snow, ice or rubbish of any sort or description to be or remain
upon the pavements, sidewalks, footways or rights-of-way in front of or adjoining such lot for a
period longer than twenty-four hours after the rain, snow, sleet or hail which is the cause thereof has
ceased to fall or after the same has been deposited thereon in any manner.
Any person owning, controlling or occupying such lot who neglects to remove the mud,
sand, gravel, leaves, snow, ice or rubbish of any sort or description from the pavement, sidewalks,
footways or rights-of-way in front of or adjoining his lot within the time specified in this section,
shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in
Section 721.99.
Any person owning, controlling and/or plowing an off street parking lot area, a sidewalk
and/or any other property adjoining or fronting upon any street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement,
footway or right-of-way in the City who plows or causes to place snow, mud, sand, gravel, leaves
or rubbish of any sort or description into the street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or
right-of-way or repositions such materials from the parking lane to the traffic lane of a street or
cartway which causes an obstruction to the normal flow of vehicular traffic shall be guilty of
maintaining a nuisance and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in Section
721.99. (Ord. 2463. Passed 3/18/1975; Ord. 3731. Passed 2/6/1996.)
721.04 PROJECTING GATES OR DOORS.
No person shall construct any gate, door or other movable structure used for the purpose of
egress or ingress to private property which, when opened or closed, projects over the building line
and into or over the street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or right-of-way of the City.
(1946 Code C. 28 §5)
ARTICLE 721
4
721.05 SIDEWALK VENDORS
A. For any vending activity in excess of twenty-one (21) days in any given calendar
year, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, service or merchandise on any
City street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or right-of-way from any wagon, truck, auto,
push cart, stand or vehicle or in any other manner whatsoever if not duly licensed pursuant to this
section.
B. Standards and Requirements
(1) License Requirements
The application for a vendor’s license shall be filed with the Community
and Economic Development Department and include the following:
(a) The name, home and business address of the applicant and the
name and address of the owner and/or operator, if other than the
applicant, of the vending business.
(b) A description of the type of food, beverage or fresh flowers to be
sold. Only applications for sales of food, beverage or fresh flowers
will be accepted.
(c) The place where applicant proposes to operate, which shall be
limited to a commercial zoning district within the City of
Bethlehem. Written permission of the landlord or property owner
must be presented at the time of application.
(d) A description and photograph of any stand, cart, vehicle or
equipment to be used in the operation of the business, including the
license and registration number of any motor vehicle used in the
operation of the business. Photograph shall be of stand, cart,
vehicle, or equipment in operational mode.
(e) Three (3) two-inch (2”) by two-inch (2”) prints of a full-face
photograph, taken not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date
of the application, of any person who will sell, or offer for sale,
any food, service, or merchandise on any street or sidewalk within
the City.
(f) Applicant must provide a self-generated criminal record check and
child abuse check for himself and any employee to the Community
and Economic Development Department.
ARTICLE 721
5
(g) Vendor shall provide a Certificate of Insurance from a company
acceptable to the Law Bureau providing liability coverage to the
vendor and naming of the City as an additional insured. The amount
of the insurance coverage shall be One Million Dollars ($1,000,000).
(h) Sidewalk vendors will be required to obtain a right of way usage
permit and a Business License prior to opening and will be
required to pay Occupational Privilege Tax for all employees.
Those selling food will be required to obtain a Health License.
(i) No person not a legal title owner or lessee to the premises utilized,
or employee of the lessee, shall be permitted to conduct any
activities as permitted by Section 721.05.
(2) Denial of Application
(a) An application shall be denied and the applicant ineligible to
participate in the vending selection if:
(i) The application proposes the sale of anything other
than food, non-alcoholic beverages, or fresh flowers.
(ii) The proposed vending stand does not comply with
the applicable design criteria, standards or
specifications and/or applicable health codes;
(iii) The applicant, or any natural person having not less
than a thirty-three-percent interest in the entity
making application has:
(1) An interest in another vending license;
(2) Within the past five years held or had an
interest in a vending license that had been
revoked;
(3) Any city tax liability being more than 10
days overdue; or
(4) Within the past 10 years been convicted of
selling, offering to sell or possession with
intent to sell a controlled substance.
ARTICLE 721
6
(iv) Non-compliance with regulations.
(b) If an application is denied, the applicant shall be notified, in
writing, of the reason therefor.
(3) Stand Design Standards / Vending Cart Design Standards
All stands and carts must be clean, sanitary, attractive and be designed
consistent with guidelines promulgated by the Department of Community
and Economic Development. The design of all stands and carts located in
the Historic Districts must be approved by the applicable Historic and
Architectural Review Board of the City of Bethlehem.
(a) The carts should be designed of quality materials that enhance the
integrity of Bethlehem and the activities, location, and appearance of
the carts shall be subject to the review of a committee comprised of the
Historic Review Officer, the members of the HARB or the members of
the Historic Conservation Commission - South Bethlehem and Mount
Airy depending upon the applicant’s location. All applications in City
Wards 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, and 17 shall be reviewed by the
committee comprised of members of the Historic Conservation
Commission – South Bethlehem and Mount Airy and City Wards 6, 7,
8, 9, 14, and 15 shall be reviewed by the committee and members of
HARB. The applicable Historic Board shall notify City Council of the
recommendation for a Certificate of Approval. Following notification
from the applicable Historic Board to City Council of the
recommendation for a Certificate of Approval, City Council shall
place the Resolution for a Certificate of Approval on an Agenda for a
vote.
(4) Award of License
Following review and issuance of permits by the applicable City Departments and
Bureaus, and the applicable Historic Review Board the Engineering Bureau shall
award licenses to any vendor approved by City Council after the vendor pays the
first annual fee of $250. The check, and all subsequent annual fees, shall be made
payable to the City of Bethlehem, and presented to the Cashier. All fees shall be
non-refundable.
ARTICLE 721
7
(5) Operation Standards
(a) Days and hours of operation. All vendor activities involving arrival on
site, unloading, setup, sales, breakdown and departure must be confined
to the following regular hours of operation: 6:00 AM to 6:00 PM
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday; and 6:00 AM to 4:00 AM
Thursday, Friday, Saturday/Sunday. Other times of operation may be
approved by City Council upon request of a vendor.
(b) Daily removal. Vending stands and all related equipment, supplies and
packaging materials used or resulting from the vending activities shall
be removed daily.
(c) Safe and sanitary condition. Vending stands shall be maintained in
a safe, clean and sanitary condition at all times. Vending stands
licensed hereunder to sell food products shall:
(1) Be subject to inspection at any time by the Health Officer
and/or his inspectors and shall at all times be licensed under
and be in compliance with the Health Code of the city.
(2) If using portable heating or cooking facilities, be subject to
inspection at all times by the Fire Marshal and shall comply
with all applicable requirements of the Fire Code of the
city.
(d) Quiet operations. Vending shall be conducted in a quiet and
peaceable manner, and there shall be no hawking of merchandise
or solicitation of pedestrians or motorists, or other
business/property owners.
(e) Sign. No sign shall be permitted except an identification of the
vendor’s business name.
(f) Use and maintenance of sidewalk. All sales and related activity
shall be conducted from the vending stand during which times the
vending stand shall not be moved from the assigned vending
location. No products shall be stored or displayed nor trash
receptacles placed on the sidewalk, street, or any adjacent outside
area by the vendor. The sidewalk and street in the immediate
vicinity of the vending stand shall be kept and maintained free of
trash, recyclables, litter, debris or spillage by the stand vendor.
Vendor shall supply a recycling container approved by the
Recycling Bureau.
ARTICLE 721
8
C. Suspension or Revocation of License.
(a) Grounds. A vending license shall be subject to suspension or revocation
for any of the following causes:
(1) The violation of any provision of this article, the regulations
promulgated hereunder or orders issued pursuant hereto;
(2) Where the license holder has knowingly made a false, misleading
or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a
license;
(3) When the license holder fails to renew or pay the annual fee within 10
days of the anniversary date of license issuance; or
(4) If the vending license is for sale of food products, when the vendor
violates the provisions of or fails to maintain any license or permit
required by any applicable city or state health codes;
(5) When the license holder violates any conditions of the license; or
(6) Abandonment, neglect, or such lack of regular occupancy and use
of the license as is inconsistent with the purposes of this section.
A vending license shall be subject to revocation should the vendor
operate in any location other than the licensed location.
(b) Procedure, notice and hearing.
(1) Prior to the suspension or revocation of a vending license becoming
effective, the Department of Community and Economic Development
shall notify the licensee, in writing, of the suspension or revocation,
the reasons therefor, his right to a hearing before City Council’s
Community Development Committee if desired and that unless a
request for a hearing is filed in writing within 15 days of the date of
the notice of suspension or revocation, the suspension or revocation
shall then become effective without further action. Such notice shall be
served upon the licensee by delivering the same personally or by
registered mail, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the licensee at his
or her place of business or residence as shown on the license
application.
(2) If a hearing is requested before City Council’s Community Development
Committee, it shall be conducted by the Committee within 20 days of
the request and shall be conducted in accordance with the Local Agency
Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105). If following the hearing the suspension or
revocation is upheld, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing and
delivered to the licensee by ordinary mail. A decision upholding or
sustaining the suspension or revocation shall result in such suspension or
revocation becoming effective and not subject to further stay except
upon order of court.
ARTICLE 721
9
D. Renewal.
A license issued under this section shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the
date of issuance of the license. Each licensee is eligible to renew his license an
indefinite number of times, but annual fee will increase to $400, upon the application of
vendor’s second and subsequent years, and is subject to review by City Council at any
time. Vendor’s fees may not change except upon the date of their re-application. If no
substantial changes are made to the application and revocation is not under
consideration, City Council’s Community Development Committee may recommend
that City Council approve the license renewal. If any substantial changes are made in
the application, as assessed by the Community Development Committee, the
application shall be submitted before the Community Development Committee.
E. Regulations.
(a) City Council may promulgate such regulations, specifications, and/or
conditions as are necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of
this Article.
F. Ice Cream Trucks and non-stationary vendors that need only to stop their vehicles
from time to time to sell goods shall be required to obtain a permit, pay a One Hundred Dollar
($100.00) fee, and provide a Certificate of Insurance from a company acceptable to the Law Bureau
providing liability coverage to the applicant and naming of the City as an additional insured. The
amount of the insurance coverage shall be One Million Dollars ($1,000,000).
G. No person shall conduct any vending activity unless first having obtained a license
or permit provided for by this section. Each day that anyone continues to operate without a license
after having received notice of a violation either in person or by posting at the site of the violation
shall be a separate violation punishable in accordance with Section 721.99.
(Ord. 2012-12. Passed 3/20/2012.)
721.06 SIDEWALK SALES / OUTDOOR DINING.
A. Retail Merchants may have a sidewalk sale from time to time that occupies the
public right-of-way which is an extension of the primary business of the adjoining property. For all
sidewalk sales that occupy the public right-of-way a permit must be obtained for twenty-five dollars
($25.00) from the Department of Public Works subject to the rules and regulations issued with the
permit. A minimum of 5 feet of clear walkway must be maintained at all times on the sidewalk.
There can be no sidewalk sales during Municipal Sponsored or Sanctioned Events unless the
Department of Public Works permits said activity. (Ord. 3420. Passed 6/4/1991; Ord. 3684. Passed
4/18/1995; Ord. 2010-30. Passed 12/21/2010.)
B. Restaurateurs may have outdoor dining that occupy the public right-of-way
adjoining its property. For all outdoor dining that occupies the public right-of-way a permit must be
ARTICLE 721
10
obtained for twenty-five dollars ($25.00) from the Department of Public Works subject to the rules
and regulations issued by the Department. A minimum of five (5) feet of clear walkway must be
maintained at all times on the sidewalk. There can be no outdoor dining during Municipal
Sponsored or Sanctioned Events, unless the Department of Public Works permits said activity. For
locations of outdoor dining within any historic district as established by the City of Bethlehem, the
furnishings and equipment, if any, for outdoor dining shall be subject to review by the Committee
and City Council as set forth in Section 721.05. (Ord. 2010-30. Passed 12/21/2010.)
C. No person shall dispense alcoholic beverages unless they have been issued a
Restaurant or Liquor License by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and have received
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board approval for sales outside their premises.
D. No person shall conduct any sidewalk sales or maintain any outdoor dining in the
public right-of-way unless first having obtained a permit provided for by this Section. Each day that
anyone continues to operate without a permit required by this section after having received notice of
a violation either in person or by posting at the site of the violation shall be a separate violation
punishable in accordance with Section 721.99.
721.07 MUNICIPAL EVENTS.
For all Municipal Sponsored or Sanctioned Events that occupy the right-of-way a permit to
operate within the portion of the right-of-way occupied by the event must be obtained at no cost
from the Department of Public Works, subject to conditions, rules, and regulations, if any, attached
by the Department of Public Works.
721.08 NON-VENDING ACTIVITIES.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, all persons wishing to conduct nonvending
activities or place temporary structures upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys,
pavements, footways or rights-of-way shall make application to the Director of Public Works for a
permit to conduct activities which shall be issued upon the payment of a One Hundred Dollar
($100.00) fee, where applicable, and compliance with the regulations established by the Director.
B. The application for permit shall:
(I) describe the activity which is contemplated;
(II) describe in detail the location, dimensions, and type of construction of any
structure to be used;
(III) provide a Certificate of Insurance from a company acceptable to the
Director providing liability coverage to the applicant and naming of the
City as an additional insured. The amount of the insurance coverage shall
be One Million Dollars ($1,000,000);
ARTICLE 721
11
(IV) be filed with the Director no later than Five (5) days nor more than Sixty
(60) days prior to the commencement of the activity;
(Ord 3684. Passed 4/18/1995.)
(V) be granted only to those persons who have legal title to the land directly
abutting the area of the street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or
right-of-way to be utilized or are lessees of such abutting land under a
lease entered into at least Sixty (60) days prior to the day of application.
C. The issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Works to occupy a location in
the street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement, footway or right-of-way shall not in itself supersede
other applicable City Ordinances, such as those of Health and Fire.
D. For permits applicable to containers/dumpsters, building supplies, construction
equipment, etc, which are temporarily placed upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements,
footways or rights-of-way:
(I) The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
(II) Application for the permit shall be filed with the Director of his designee
not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than Thirty (30) days prior
to the placement of the item;
(III) The applicant must be the legal title property owner, or the contractor who is
under the contract with the legal title property owner;
(IV) All such permits shall be approved by the Traffic Bureau, Police Department
prior to the issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 3684. Passed 4/18/1995; Ord. 2010-30. Passed 12/21/2010; Ord. 2017-52. Passed 12/19/2017.)
E. For permits applicable to signs which are temporarily placed upon the streets,
sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements, footways or rights-of-way:
(I) The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00);
(II) The applicant must be the legal title property
owner of the land directly abutting the area of
the street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement,
footway or right-of-way to be utilized or are
lessees of such abutting land under a lease
entered into at least sixty (60) days prior to the
day of application.
ARTICLE 721
12
(III) All such permits shall be approved by the Zoning
Officer prior to the issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 2010-30. Passed 12/21/2010; Ord. 2017-52. Passed 12/19/2017.)
F. For permits applicable to banners which are temporarily placed upon poles along
or across the streets, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, pavements, footways or rights-of-way:
(I) The fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for
banners mounted on poles along the street and one hundred dollars
($100.00) for banners across the street;
(II) Approved banners must be delivered to the
Electrical Bureau at least two weeks prior to the placement date;
(III) Banners can only be placed at locations
designated by the Department of Public Works;
(IV) Banner material specifications are provided with
the permit application package.
(Ord. 2010-30. Passed 12/21/2010.)
G. Prohibited Acts
Except as otherwise provided in this Article:
(I) No person not a legal title owner, lessee or license or permit holder shall
be permitted to conduct any activities set forth in this Section.
(II) No person shall conduct any covered activity unless first having obtained
the permit provided for by this section.
(II) Each day that anyone continues to operate without a permit after having
received notice of a violation either in person or by posting at the site of
the violation shall be a separate violation punishable in accordance with
Section 721.99.
(IV) No person shall dispense alcoholic beverages unless they have been issued
a Restaurant or Liquor License by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
and have received Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board approval for sales
outside their premises.
ARTICLE 721
13
(V) No person shall place any container for construction waste materials or for
any other reason in the public right-of-way without obtaining a Right-of-
Way Permit from the Director or his designee.
(VI) No person shall place a sign in the street, sidewalk, lane, alley, pavement,
footway or right-of-way without securing a permit from the Director.
721.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for each separate violation, together with costs, or imprisoned not more than
ninety days if the amount of said fine and costs should not be paid.
(Ord. 1758. Passed 11/13/1962; Ord. 3184. Passed 5/3/1988; Ord. 2009-39. Passed 12/22/2009.)
ARTICLE 723
Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places
723.01 Definitions.
723.02 Prohibited Behavior.
723.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Pennsylvania Liquor Code - 47 P.S. §1-101 et seq.
Article 941 - Parks
723.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein.
(a) "Public Place" shall mean any place to which the public
has access, and includes any public street, highway, alley,
parking lot, sidewalk, the front of and the area immediately
adjacent to any store, restaurant, tavern, or other place of
business, and any cemetary. City Parks, which are subject to
Article 941 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem,
are specifically excluded from the definition of "public place"
hereunder.
(b) "Alcoholic Beverage" shall mean liquor and malt or
brewed beverages as said terms are defined in the Pennsylvania
Liquor Code, 47 P.S. §1-101 et seq.
723.02 PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any
alcoholic beverage or carry or possess any opened vessel
containing any alcoholic beverage on or about any public place,
or in any automobile or other vehicle parked upon any public
place within the City of Bethlehem.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages at a function or activity for
which a special occasion permit has been issued by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, or an appropriate permit
issued by the City of Bethlehem, or in any dully licensed
establishment whose Certificate of Occupancy and liquor license
extends upon a sidewalk or other outdoor area.
ARTICLE 723 2
723.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First Violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second Violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$600.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3430 - Passed 8/20/91.)
ARTICLE 725
Weapons
725.01 Discharging Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions
725.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Discharge of weapons - See 3rd Class §2403(26) [53 P.S. §37403(26)]
725.01 DISCHARGING FIREARMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
(a) Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein assigned to them:
(1) “Discharge” means the expulsion of a projectile from a firearm or from the
operation of a firearm in such a manner so as to lead one to reasonably
conclude, by sight or sound, that a projectile was expelled from a firearm.
If the firearm used is capable of the expulsion of a projectile, its firing
alone shall be sufficient to constitute a discharge and no further proof of
the expulsion of a projectile shall be necessary to establish a violation of
this Article.
(2) “Firearm” means any weapon which is designed to or may readily be
converted to expel any projectile by the action of an explosive; or the
frame or receiver of any such weapon. The term “firearm” shall not
include any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, or any
implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet of any kind with a
force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm. [Crossreference
PA Crimes Code 18 Pa.C.S. § 5515 and § 6120.]
(b) Discharge of firearms prohibited. No person shall discharge any firearm within
the City except as provided in subsection (c).
(c) Exceptions. The following acts shall not constitute violations of this Article:
(1) The discharge of a firearm by a law enforcement officer or military
personnel acting within the line of duty, including, but not limited to,
active operations, training exercises and ceremonies.
(2) The discharge of a firearm for purposes of hunting or other activities
regulated by and conducted in compliance with the Pennsylvania Game
and Wild Life Code.
(3) The discharge of a firearm within a properly constructed and legally
permitted firing range duly established within the City of Bethlehem and
under circumstances such that the firearm is discharged in such a manner
as not to endanger persons or property, and the firing range is constructed
and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the projectile from
traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such range.
(4) The discharge of a firearm where such discharge is justified pursuant to 18
Pa.C.S. §§ 501-510 (relating to use of force in defense of persons and
property).
(5) The discharge of a firearm where no projectile is expelled by an honor
guard at a military funeral or to start a sports competition.
(6) The discharge of a firearm where no projectile is expelled at a public
celebration, memorial or exhibition and the discharge is directed away
from the nearest persons and property.
(d) Construction and enforcement. This Article shall not be construed or enforced to
regulate or infringe upon the lawful ownership, possession, transfer or
transportation of firearms as permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United
States and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In addition, this Article shall
not be construed or enforced to regulate firearms to the extent prohibited by 53
Pa.C.S. §2962 and 18 Pa.C.S. § 6120. [Cross-reference Third Class City Code, 53
P.S. § 37423] (Ord. 2015-11. Passed 3/17/15)
725.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six hundred dollars
($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both. (Ord. 1768 §1. Passed
11/13/62; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
1
ARTICLE 729
Recreation Fees and Charges
729.01 Payment Of Fee Required
729.02 Proof Of Payment
729.03 Transfer Of Proof Of Payment
729.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Recreation Commission - See ADM. Art. 133 Parks - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 941
729.01 PAYMENT OF FEE REQUIRED.
Where there is an admission or other fee charged by the City for the
use of recreational facilities, no person using such facilities shall fail or
refuse to pay such admission charge or other fee. (Ord. 2031 §1 Passed
5/23/67.)
729.02 PROOF OF PAYMENT.
Where there is an admission or other fee charged by the City for the
use of recreational facilities, proof of payment of such fee must be presented
to any officer or employee of the City authorized to request proof of such
payment. (Ord. 2031 §1. Passed 5/23/67.)
729.03 TRANSFER OF PROOF OF PAYMENT.
Where the City has established special rates for multiple use of such
facilities, the use of any card, ticket or similar material or device issued by
the City by a person other than the person to whom such card, ticket or other
device is issued is prohibited. The permitting of the use by another of such
card, ticket or other material or device or the lending to another of such card,
ticket or other device by a person to whom such ticket is issued similarly is
prohibited. (Ord. 2031 §1. Passed 5/23/67.)
ARTICLE 729 2
729.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $300.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $600.00, or ninety
days imprisonment, or both;
(Ord. 2031 §1. Passed 5/23/67; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 731
Public Nudity
731.01 Public Nudity Prohibited.
731.02 Definition.
731.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
731.01 PUBLIC NUDITY PROHIBITED.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public
place, appear in a state of nudity. This Section shall not
apply to public nudity necessarily incident to breast feeding a
child.
731.02 DEFINITION.
As used in this Article, "Nudity" means the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast
with a less than fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or the showing of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
731.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First Violation - A fine of $250.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second Violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3469 - Passed 3/4/92)
ARTICLE 733
Obscene Materials Involving Minors
733.01 Sale Or Exhibition To Minors Under Seventeen
733.02 Offers And AdmissionTickets; Exceptions
733.03 Definitions
733.04 Severability
733.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
Sale or loan to persons over seventeen - See Act 269 of July 31, 1968
(18 P.S. §4524)
733.01 SALE OR EXHIBITION TO MINORS UNDER
SEVENTEEN.
No person shall knowingly offer to sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give
away or show to any person under the age of seventeen years:
(a) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture
film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to
persons under the age of seventeen years; or
(b) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in subsection (a) hereof, or explicit and detailed
verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement,
sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a
whole, is harmful to persons under the age of seventeen years.
(Ord. 2154 §1. Passed 6/17/69.)
ARRTICLE 733 2
733.02 OFFERS AND ADMISSION TICKETS; EXCEPTIONS.
No person shall knowingly offer to exhibit to a person under the age
of seventeen years or knowingly offer to sell to a person under the age of
seventeen years an admission ticket or pass or knowingly admit a person
under the age of seventeen years to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion picture show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to
persons under the age of seventeen years, except that the foregoing shall not
apply to any person under the age of seventeen years accompanied by his
parent. (Ord. 2154 §1. Passed 6/17/69.)
733.03 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article:
(a) "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the
nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
(b) "Sexual conduct" means acts of masturbation, homosexuality,
sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or
unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person be
a female, breast.
(c) "Sexual excitement" means the condition of the human male or
female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(d) "Sadomasochistic abuse" means flagellation or torture by or
upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume,
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
(e) "Harmful to persons under the age of seventeen years" means that
quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of
nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic
abuse, when it:
ARRTICLE 733 3
(1) Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid
interest of persons under the age of seventeen years;
(2) Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for persons under the age of seventeen years; and
(3) Is utterly without redeeming social importance for persons
under the age of seventeen years.
(f) "Knowingly" means having general knowledge of, or reason to
know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further
inspection or inquiry or both:
(1) The character and content of any material described herein
which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the
defendant, and
(2) The age of the person under the age of seventeen years,
provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute
an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of
such person under the age of seventeen years. (Ord. 2154
§1. Passed 6/17/69.)
733.04 SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this article are severable, and, if any of its
provisions shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of
the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this
article. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council that this article
would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
provisions had not been included herein. (Ord. 2154 §1. Passed 6/17/69.)
733.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) or imprisoned not more than ninety days, or both.
(Ord. 2154 §4. Passed 6/17/69; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 735
Emergency Alarm System
735.01 Definitions
735.02 Approved Alarm Companies
735.03 Registration Required; Transferability; False Statements; And Registration for
Apartment Complexes
735.04 Alarm System Use
735.05 Alarm Installation and Monitoring
735.06 Alarm System Performance Reviews
735.07 Suspension of Response
735.08 Revocation of Alarm Permit
735.09 Appeal from Denial or Revocation of an Alarm Permit
735.10 Reinstatement of Permit
735.11 Fees
735.99 Penalties
735.01 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:
“Abort Window” means a period of time after a sensor initiated alarm condition that
allows the user additional time to disarm the system before an alarm is transmitted.
“Alarm Administrator” means the City of Bethlehem Department of Community and
Economic Development (DCED).
“Alarm Company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring an Alarm System in an
Alarm Site. An Alarm Company must be licensed as a Telecommunication Installer as outlined
in Article 1703 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and possess a valid City of
Bethlehem Business Privilege License as per City of Bethlehem Business Privilege & Mercantile
Tax Regulations.
“Alarm Dispatch Request” means a notification to the Police Communications Center
that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at the location where the alarm is
installed.
“Alarm Registration” or “Permit” means authorization granted by the Alarm
Administrator to an Alarm User to operate an Alarm System.
ARTICLE 735 2
“Alarm Site” means a single fixed premises or location served by an Alarm System or
Systems. Each unit, if served by a separate Alarm System, or alarm partition, or emergency
contact list in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate Alarm Site.
“Alarm System” means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to,
hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or
private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal
indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement response, including
Local Alarm Systems. Alarm System does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on
someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site.
“Alarm User” means any person who has contracted for Monitoring, repair, installation
or maintenance from an Alarm Company for an Alarm System; or who owns, uses, operates, or
is responsible for an Alarm System, whether or not it is monitored, maintained or repaired under
contract.
“Business Alarm” means an alarm system installed in a building or site such as a store,
factory or office. For the purposes of this article it would include apartment/multi unit living
buildings and any building or structure other than a single family dwelling.
“Central Monitoring Service” means any vendor provided service whereby activations of
alarm systems are received from alarm systems, and such activations are then reported to the
City’s Emergency Communications Center on behalf of the operator, owner, or lessee of the
alarm system.
“City” means the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
“Communicator Delay” means a period of time which elapses before the control panel
sends a transmission to the central station. See “Abort Window”.
“Conversion” means the transaction or process by which one Alarm Company begins the
servicing and/or Monitoring of a previously unmonitored Alarm System or an Alarm System
previously serviced and/or monitored by another Alarm Company.
“Cross Zoning” means a way of configuring logic within the control panel such that two
or more zones of the security system are interdependent to cause an alarm condition.
“Delayed Zone” means a zone or circuit configured to provide a time delay, when
tripped, before an alarm is generated.
“Duress Alarm” means a silent Alarm System signal generated to signal that the Alarm
User requires law enforcement response.
“Emergency Communications Center” means the City of Bethlehem’s Communications
Center located at 10 East Church Street, which handles all police, fire, EMS, and other
emergency communications.
ARTICLE 735 3
“Exit Time” means the period of time allowed, after arming a security system, to exit the
premise without tripping an alarm.
“Exit Time Restart” means an option provided where a violation, restoral, and then a
second violation of an entry/exit zone prior to the end of the Exit Time shall restart the Exit
Time.
“False Alarm” means an Alarm Dispatch Request to the Police Communications Center,
when the responding law enforcement officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense, attempted
criminal offense, or other emergency, after having completed a timely investigation of the Alarm
Site.
“Holdup Alarm” means a Duress Alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
“Local Alarm System” means any Alarm System, which is not monitored, that
annunciates an alarm only at the Alarm Site.
“Monitoring” means the process by which a monitoring Alarm Company receives
notification of an alarm activation, and/or relays an Alarm Dispatch Request to the Police
Communication Center for the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the Alarm Site.
“One Plus Duress Alarm” means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by
entering at an Arming Station a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm
code (e.g., normal code = 1234, One Plus Duress Code = 1235).
“Operator” or “Alarm User” means any person, firm, corporation, owner, or lessee who
operates an alarm system within the City.
“Option” means a functional or performance feature that may be implemented as a
selectable part of a product’s performance capability.
“Panic Alarm” means an audible Alarm System signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law
enforcement response.
“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or
similar entity.
“Residential Alarm” means an alarm system installed in a single family dwelling.
“Responder” means an individual capable of reaching the Alarm Site and has both
authorized access to the Alarm Site and the code to the Alarm System.
ARTICLE 735 4
“SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the ANSI” is an American National Standard
Institute approved Security Industry Association – SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be
updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control
panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms.
Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other
nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: “Design evaluated in
accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction”.
“Silent Alarm” means a protective system that does not emit an audible signal or tone,
when activated at a protected site.
“Swinger Shutdown” means an operating mode in which the control panel, when a sensor
or zone is repeatedly tripping, ignores the trips on that zone after a limited number of them.
“Takeover” means the transaction or process by which an Alarm User takes over control
of an existing Alarm System, which was previously controlled by another Alarm User.
“Verify” means an attempt by the Alarm Company, or its representative, to contact the
Alarm User through the enhanced verification standard below to determine whether an alarm
signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary
Alarm Dispatch Request.
Enhanced Alarm Verification of Burglar Alarm Signals
“Enhanced Verification” means the attempt by the monitoring facility personnel
to verify that no emergency appears to exist at the alarm site, by means of more
thorough procedures such as 2 (two) or more verification calls, live audio or
video, cross zoning, other means or a combination of the procedures or adherence
to current SIA standards for enhanced verification.
“Zones” means division of devices into which an Alarm System is divided to indicate the
general location from which an Alarm System signal is transmitted.
735.02 APPROVED ALARM COMPANIES
A. No Alarm Company shall own, operate, lease, install, or maintain an Alarm System
at an Alarm Site in the City of Bethlehem unless they are licensed as a Telecommunication
Installer as outlined in Article 1703 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and
possess a valid City of Bethlehem Business Privilege License as per City of Bethlehem Business
Privilege & Mercantile Tax Regulations and comply with this ordinance. This does not include
companies that are solely subcontracted as the “monitoring” company – which may be located in
another state.
B. The Alarm Administrator shall provide all licensed Alarm Companies with a copy
of this Article and shall maintain a list of approved Alarm Companies.
ARTICLE 735 5
735.03 ALARM REGISTRATION PERMIT REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY;
FALSE STATEMENTS; AND ALARM SYSTEM REGISTRATION FOR
APARTMENTS COMPLEXES
A. No Alarm Company or Alarm User shall own, operate, lease, install, or maintain
an Alarm System at an Alarm Site without an approved Alarm Registration issued by the City of
Bethlehem Alarm Administrator.
B. A Separate Alarm Registration is required for each Alarm Site. An Alarm
Registration may be granted subject to any special conditions stated thereon, if it is deemed
necessary by the Alarm Administrator or Police Department.
C. Upon receipt of a completed Alarm Registration application form and the Alarm
Registration fee, the Alarm Administrator shall register the applicant unless the applicant has:
(1) failed to pay an Alarm System fine or required fee; or (2) had an alarm registration for the
Alarm Site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not
been corrected; (3) other conditions exist that hinders the proper operation of the Alarm System
in compliance with this Article.
D. The Alarm Registration shall be made available or clearly posted at the Alarm
Site.
E. An Alarm Registration will automatically terminate: on the 31st of December
each year; or upon change in occupancy or sale or transfer of the property for which it was
originally issued. The Permit cannot be transferred to another Person or Alarm Site.
F. An Alarm User and the Alarm Company shall inform the Alarm Administrator of
any change or update that alters any of the information listed on the Alarm Registration
application within three (3) business days. Failure to renew the Alarm Registration or make
proper notification of changes shall result in a fine and/or the revocation of the Alarm
Registration.
G. An Alarm Registration granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express
condition that the Alarm User shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from and on account of
any and all damages arising out of the activities of the registrant, Alarm User, Alarm Company,
or use of the Alarm System.
H. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of
obtaining an Alarm Registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration.
I. Alarm systems installed or operated in apartment complexes:
(1) By the individual tenant - the tenant shall be considered the Alarm User
and in addition to the requirements of the Article, shall provide the name
of a representative of the apartment owner or manager who is capable of
granting access to the Alarm Site.
ARTICLE 735 6
(2) as a fixture of the apartment complex or an amenity for each residential
unit – the owner or property manager of the apartment complex shall be
considered the Alarm User and in addition to the requirements of the
Article, shall provide a master list of tenants to the Alarm Administrator
for all units, including any unoccupied units.
735.04 ALARM SYSTEM USE
In order to assure proper response to an Alarm Site and to minimize False Alarms, an
Alarm User shall:
(1) Notify the Alarm Administrator with any changes to the information
contained on the Alarm Registration form including emergency contact
information and Responder information within seven (7) business days of
the change.
(2) Assure a valid Alarm Registration renewal has been issued effective on
the 1st of January each year.
(3) Maintain the Alarm Site and the Alarm System in a manner that will
assure the proper operation of the Alarm System; and maintain a set of
written operating instructions at each alarm site.
(4) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of at least two (2)
persons who are authorized to respond to an emergency and gain access to
the address and deactivate the alarm system where the device is installed.
(5) Adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an
alarm signal audible on the exterior of an Alarm Site will sound for no
longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated, or meets the minimum
requirements under Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
(6) Not activate an Alarm System for any reason other than an occurrence of
an event that the Alarm System was intended to report.
(7) Not use Automatic Voice Dialers.
735.05 ALARM INSTALLATION AND MONITORING
A. The Alarm Company performing Installation shall also:
(1) Apply for and obtain a valid Alarm Registration from the Alarm
Administrator seven (7) business days prior to the installation.
ARTICLE 735 7
(2) Use alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01
capabilities or the have the following minimum features:
a) Abort window
b) Cross zoning
c) Communicator delay
d) Delayed zoning
e) Swinger shutdown
f) Exit time restart
(3) Provide written and oral instructions to each Alarm User for the proper use
and operation of their Alarm System. Such instructions will specifically
include all instructions necessary to turn the Alarm System on and off, and
how to avoid False Alarms.
(4) Provide notification of the availability of a 7 day no dispatch period for
intrusion alarms during which time the alarm company will have no
obligation to and will not respond to any alarm signal from an alarm site
and will not make an alarm dispatch request to law enforcement, even if
the signal is the result of an actual alarm event.
(5) Complete and review with the customer both the Installer & Customer
False Alarm Prevention Program Checklist. A copy of the completed
documents shall be provided to the Alarm Administrator.
(6) Not program Alarm Systems so that they are capable of sending One Plus
Duress Alarms. Alarm Companies may continue to report One Plus
Duress Alarms received from existing Alarm Systems programmed with
One Plus Duress Alarms. However, when a takeover, conversion, or
modification occurs, or for reasons deemed necessary by the Alarm
Administrator for appropriate response, the One Plus Duress Alarm
capability from such Alarm Systems must be removed.
(7) Not install a device to activate a Holdup Alarm which consists of a single
action, non-recessed button.
(8) Not install Automatic Voice Dialers.
B. The Alarm Company shall also:
(1) Notify the Alarm Administrator with any changes to the information
contained on the Alarm Registration form including emergency contact
information and Responder information within three (3) business days; If
the Alarm Company utilizes a separate monitoring company, then in
addition to notifying the Alarm Administrator, the Alarm Company shall
ARTICLE 735 8
also notify the alarm monitoring company of the changes to the
information on the Alarm Registration form.
(2) On or before the 1st of January each year, provide the Alarm
Administrator an updated, alphabetical list of all active Alarm Sites being
monitored within the City of Bethlehem, and upon request with Alarm
User information and information required for the Alarm Registration
form renewal. Alarm Registrations not receiving the renewal information
shall become subject to suspension and/or revocation on the 2nd of
January each year.
(3) Report alarm signals to the Police Communications Center by using
telephone numbers designated by the Police Department.
(4) Attempt enhanced verification of every alarm signal, except Duress or
Holdup Alarm activations before requesting a police response to an Alarm
System signal.
(5) All pre-existing systems will have 6 months from the passage of this
ordinance to come into compliance with enhanced verification.
(6) Communicate Alarm Dispatch Requests and Alarm Dispatch Verified
Cancellations to the Police Communications Center in a manner and form
determined by the Police Department.
735.06 ALARM SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEWS
The Alarm Administrator may require a conference with an Alarm User and the Alarm
Company responsible for the repair or monitoring of the Alarm System to review the
circumstances of each False Alarm.
735.07 SUSPENSION OF RESPONSE
Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress or an emergency
exists, the Commissioner of Police or his designee may suspend or alter the type of law
enforcement response to an Alarm Site for which the Alarm Registration is revoked or where
excessive false alarms have occurred.
735.08 REVOCATION OF ALARM REGISTRATION
The Alarm Administrator may revoke or suspend an Alarm Registration for an Alarm
Site, as deemed necessary for specific reasons including, but not limited to:
(1) Any violation of, or failure to comply with, this Article;
ARTICLE 735 9
(2) A false statement of a material fact made on Alarm Registration or
renewal;
(3) Failure to make payment of a fine or required fee by the Alarm Business
or Alarm User;
(4) Improper installation, operation, monitoring, or malfunction resulting in
excessive false alarms.
735.09 APPEAL FROM DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF AN ALARM
REGISTRATION
A. If the Alarm Administrator denies the issuance or renewal of an Alarm
Registration, or suspends or revokes it, the Alarm Administrator shall send written notice of the
action and a statement of the right to an appeal, by certified mail, to both the Alarm User and the
Alarm Business.
B. The Alarm User, or the Alarm Business on behalf of the Alarm User, may appeal
the decision of the Alarm Administrator to the Commissioner of Police by filing a written
request for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of
notice. If a request for appeal is not made within thirty (30) days, the action is final.
C. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the Alarm Administrator
suspending or revoking a registration until the Police Commissioner has completed the review.
The decision of the Police Commissioner is final.
735.10 REINSTATEMENT OF REGISTRATION
A Person whose Alarm Registration has been revoked may be issued a new permit if the
Person: submits an updated application; and pays all required fees and pays, or otherwise
resolves all citations and fines; and submits a certification from an Alarm Business that the
Alarm System has been inspected and repaired, as necessary, for compliance with this Article.
735.11 FEES
A. The fee for an Alarm Registration is Twenty-five ($25.00) Dollars for a
residential alarm and Fifty ($50.00) Dollars for a business alarm. No refund of a registration will
be made. The initial Alarm Registration fee must be submitted to the Alarm Administrator not
less than fifteen (15) days before the Alarm System installation or at the time of an Alarm
System Takeover. New Alarm registrations fees after March 31 will be prorated.
B. A registration update form must be submitted no later than December 31 so that
the registration may continue for the following year. Alarm Registrations not being renewed by
January 2nd shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation. Renewal Alarm Registrations will
be subject to a late fee of $25.00 if not renewed and paid before February 1 of each succeeding
year.
ARTICLE 735 10
C. In the event of a third or fourth False Alarm activation at an Alarm Site, within
any calendar period, beginning January 1st, the Alarm User shall be charged a fee for service
from the City. This fee shall be Seventy-five ($75.00) Dollars for each of those false alarm
activations during that calendar period. The fifth and subsequent False Alarm or inadvertent
activations, within this same calendar period will necessitate a Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollar
fee for service for each occurrence of a False Alarm activation during said period.
D. Extreme weather, testing or repair of telephone lines or any other extraordinary
circumstances not under control of the alarm user may be considered by the alarm administrator
and exempted from the False Alarm fees.
735.99 PENALTIES
A. Any Person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) First violation – A fine of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars;
(2) Second violation - A fine of Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars;
(3) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of Five Hundred ($500.00)
Dollars.
(Ord. 3137. Passed 8/18/87; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89; Ord. 2011-4. Passed 3/1/11)
ARTICLE 736Error! Bookmark not defined.
Rules and Regulations for B.Y.O.B. Clubs
Not Licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board within the City of Bethlehem
736.01 Purpose.
736.02 Definitions.
736.03 Unlawful activities.
736.04 Club requirements.
736.05 Club permit.
736.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Article 1302 of the Codified Zoning Ordinance, City of Bethlehem
Article 1313 of the Codified Zoning Ordinance, City of Bethlehem
736.01 PURPOSE
The Council of the City of Bethlehem hereby declares that the
purpose of the within Rules And Regulations is to regulate B.Y.O.B.
Clubs to preserve the character of neighborhoods and to protect the
rights of its citizens to the quiet enjoyment of the same.
736.02 DEFINITIONS
"B.Y.O.B. Club" a place of assembly or any other use defined
in this Ordinance, other than a dwelling unit, including but not
limited to, taverns, clubs, and social buildings, that is not
licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, in which no
alcoholic beverages are sold, but where patrons are permitted to
bring alcoholic beverages upon the premises for their own use and
consumption. A facility which is rented for a limited period of
time, but in no event to exceed six (6) hours in length, nor to
exceed one (1) rental in a twenty-four (24) hour period, nor to
occur between the hours of 12:00 p.m. midnight and 11:00 a.m. by
individuals or an organization for the purpose of a private party
in which alcoholic beverages are carried onto the premises, shall
not be considered a B.Y.O.B. Club under the terms hereof. B.Y.O.B.
Club shall not include a restaurant as defined at Section 1302.75,
as amended, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
"Alcoholic beverages" means any and all beverages, including
malt beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other
ARTICLE 736 2
intoxicating substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania
Liquor Code, 47 P.S. Section 1-101 et seq.
"Residence" means a building or structure wholly or partially
used for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation by human
occupants.
"Residence District" means those classes of residential
districts as specified in the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem.
736.03 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
In any district in which B.Y.O.B. Clubs are otherwise
permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own,
operate, lease, manage or control a B.Y.O.B. Club to:
(a) Remain open and/or to transact business between the
hours of midnight and 11:00 a.m., prevailing time. In all cases,
the premises must be vacated within fifteen (15) minutes after the
required closing time.
(b) Conduct activities to which this Ordinance applies
without possessing a valid Club permit as specified herein.
(c) The principal structure of a B.Y.O.B. Club shall not be
located within three hundred (300') feet from the nearest property
line of any residential district, church, school, other institution
of learning or education, hospital, library, park, and /or
playground.
736.04 CLUB REQUIREMENTS
Any and all B.Y.O.B. Clubs, as that term is defined, shall
comply with the following requirements:
(a) Obtain and carry general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of, $1,000,000 per occurrence, proof of which shall
be filed with the Commissioner of Police;
(b) Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and the City of
Bethlehem and prominently display said certificate as required;
(c) Obtain a valid business privilege and mercantile tax
license from the City of Bethlehem and prominently display said
license as required;
(d) Obtain a valid City of Bethlehem permit and prominently
display said permit as required;
ARTICLE 736 3
(e) Obtain a valid B.Y.O.B. Club permit pursuant to this
Article and prominently display said permit as required; and
(f) Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the
business premises such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of
same.
736.05 CLUB PERMIT
(a) Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to
operate a B.Y.O.B. Club shall file with the Commissioner of Police
of the City of Bethlehem an application for a B.Y.O.B. Club permit,
which application shall include the following information: the
name and address of the B.Y.O.B. Club, a statement whether the
business premises is leased or owned by the B.Y.O.B. Club, the name
and address of the lessor of the business premises, if applicable,
the nature of the ownership of the B.Y.O.B. Club, i.e. corporation,
partnership, joint venture, association, the names and addresses of
the officers and/or financial interest in the B.Y.O.B. Club.
(b) The Commissioner of Police shall determine whether the
B.Y.O.B. Club fully and completely complies with the provisions and
requirements of this Ordinance within twenty (20) days following
the date on which application is received. If the Commissioner of
Police determines that the applicant fully and completely complies
with the provisions hereof, the Commissioner of Police shall issue
a B.Y.O.B. Club permit; if the Commissioner of Police determines
that the applicant does not fully and completely comply with the
provisions hereof, the Commissioner of Police shall deny the
issuance of a B.Y.O.B. Club permit and shall furnish written
evidence of the same to the applicant together with the reason(s)
for denial.
(c) The Club shall pay an administrative fee of two hundred
and fifty dollars ($250.00) for a B.Y.O.B. Club permit and two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for each renewal thereof. Said
B.Y.O.B. Club permit shall be effective for a period of one year
following the date of issuance; provided, in the event the B.Y.O.B.
Club fails to fully and completely comply with the provisions
hereof or is convicted of any unlawful activities during the term
of the B.Y.O.B. Club permit so issued, the City of Bethlehem shall
have the authority to revoke the B.Y.O.B. Club permit due to
B.Y.O.B. Club's lack of compliance.
736.99 PENALTY
(a) Any person, persons, or entity violating the provisions
of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
penalty in amount of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for each day
of such violation, and any and all other remedies available in
accordance with the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
ARTICLE 736 4
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) The unlawful activities specified herein shall
constitute separate and distinct offenses for each and every day in
which said activities are conducted.
(c) In addition to any monetary penalties involved, the City
of Bethlehem shall revoke the Club Permit required upon conviction
of any unlawful activities.
(d) In the event of any of the unlawful activities specified
herein are conducted by or in the name of a corporation,
partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association, in addition
to entity liability, the officers, agents or principals of said
corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association
shall be deemed in violation, as well as the person or persons
engaged in the unlawful activity.
(Ord. 3948 - Passed 4/6/99.)
ARTICLE 738
Regulating Use of Interactive Wireless
Communications Devices by Persons Operating Vehicles
738.01 Purpose.
738.02 Definitions.
738.03 Prohibited Conduct.
738.04 Effective Date.
738.05 Signage.
738.99 Penalty.
NOTE: This Article was repealed by Ordinance 2012-11 on
March 20, 2012.
ARTICLE 742
ANTI-GRAFFITI
742.01 Purpose.
742.02 Definitions.
742.03 Prohibitions.
742.04 Proof of Violation.
742.05 Notice to Abate Graffiti; Owner’s Duty to Abate.
742.06 Standards for Abatement and Removal of Graffiti.
742.07 Owner Failure to Comply; Remediation by City; Lien for Expenses and Penalty.
742.99 Penalty - Fines and Imprisonment.
742.01 PURPOSE
City Council has determined that graffiti is a nuisance because it contributes to blight, creates
visual pollution and adversely affects the enjoyment and value of property. When graffiti is not
promptly removed and remains on display, it invites additional graffiti, it can encourage criminal and
gang activity and it can lead to other nuisance conditions. This Article is intended to deter graffiti by
prohibiting it and by establishing penalties for applying it and failing to promptly remove it.
742.02 DEFINITIONS
“Graffiti” means an inscription, word, figure, mark, design, symbol, painting, writing,
message, drawing, imprint or carving that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, brushed,
sprayed, glued, thrown, propelled or painted upon or otherwise applied to Property with a Graffiti
Implement intentionally and without permission from the owner or the owner’s authorized agent or
manager when the defacement was committed or graffiti applied.
“Graffiti Implement” means an aerosol spray-paint container, broad tipped indelible marker,
a marking device, a device used as a marking device, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, paintball
marker or gun, etching equipment or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a mark on any
natural or manmade surface.
“Graffiti Paraphernalia” means Graffiti Implement and also means files, folders, black
books, sketch books, pictures (digital or printed), or papers with a common graffiti tag on them,
computer files, computer images, rubber or latex type gloves and air filtration masks.
“Graffiti Removal” means the elimination of Graffiti by the owner of the affected property,
by another person with the consent of the owner, by the owner’s agent or by court order.
“Graffiti Tag” means a form of Graffiti represented by stylized signature of a writer’s chosen
name or the identifying mark of a group name or name of an association of individuals.
ARTICLE 742 2
“Gum Label” means any material such as, but not limited to, decals, stickers, posters or
labels which contain a substance commonly known as adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed
from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal effort.
“Indelible Marker” means a permanent marker or similar implement with a point, a brush,
an applicator or other writing implement which contains ink that is not water soluble.
“Intentional Defacement of Property” means to act willfully or maliciously, without
permission from the owner or the owner’s authorized agent or manager, by using a Graffiti Implement
to deface with Graffiti or to damage with Graffiti any publicly or privately owned Property.
“Paint Stick” or “Graffiti Stick” mean any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk,
wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and, upon
application, leaving a visible mark and that is not water soluble.
“Property” means publicly and privately-owned tangible property and real property including
any improvements, structures, walls, fences, roofs, fixtures, plants, trees and landscaping, roads,
sidewalks, pedestrian paths, playground equipment, and any other decorative or functional amenity or
facility placed or stored thereon or attached thereto.
742.03 PROHIBITIONS
A. Intentional Defacement of Property is prohibited.
(1) A person is guilty of Intentional Defacement of Property if the person acts
willfully or maliciously, without permission from the owner or the owner’s
authorized agent or manager, to deface with Graffiti or to damage with Graffiti
any publicly or privately-owned Property by using a Graffiti Implement.
B. Solicitation to Commit Intentional Defacement of Property is prohibited.
(1) A person is guilty of Solicitation to Commit Intentional Defacement
of Property if the person solicits or commands another person to commit
Intentional Defacement of Property.
C. Aiding or Abetting Intentional Defacement of Property is prohibited.
(1) A person is guilty of Aiding or Abetting Intentional Defacement of Property if
the person aids, abets or agrees to aid or abet another person in either planning
to commit or to commit Intentional Defacement of Property (such as others in
the group who knowingly make available the tools, writing materials, ladders,
lookouts, materials or assistance, or who knowingly supply funds to acquire
such materials for purposes prohibited under this Article).
D. Possession of Graffiti Implements is prohibited in the following situations:
(1) by minors, defined herein to mean persons under eighteen (18) years of age,
while on or within fifty feet (50’) of any school Property. Notwithstanding
ARTICLE 742 3
this provision, any person may possess broad-tipped indelible markers and
highlighters if traveling to or from a school where the person is a student, or if
such person is permitted by school officials to possess same on the premises;
(2) by any person remaining upon or immediately adjacent to Property
without the permission of the owner, the owner’s agent or manager after
warning by a Police Officer that the person’s presence on the Property with
Graffiti Implements is unauthorized; “Immediately adjacent” means near
enough to the Property to apply Graffiti;
742.04 PROOF OF VIOLATION
A. When a person suspected of violating section 742.03.A(1) of this Article is found in
possession of Graffiti Paraphernalia upon which a common or personal Graffiti Tag is
written, painted, designed, photographed, copied or stored, and where that particular
Graffiti Tag was found on the damaged or defaced Property, possession of such
Graffiti Paraphernalia shall be prima facie evidence that the person in possession is the
author of the Graffiti Tag which is the subject of the violation and was in possession of
the Graffiti Paraphernalia when the violation was committed.
742.05 NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI; OWNER’S DUTY TO ABATE
A. Whenever a City of Bethlehem Building Code Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer,
Police Officer or other agent designated by the Mayor (collectively hereafter referred
to as an “official”) determines that Graffiti exists on any Property the official may
cause a notice to abate or remove the Graffiti to be issued to the Property owner. The
Property owner shall have fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice to abate or
remove the Graffiti. If the owner fails to comply, the Graffiti will be subject to
remediation by the City.
B. The notice issued pursuant to this section may be served in any one of the following
manners:
(1) By personal service on the owner, the owner’s agent or property manager; or
(2) By registered mail or certified mail with a copy also sent by regular US mail
addressed to owners as their name(s) and address(es) appear on the current
property tax assessment rolls or to the last known valid address(es) of the
owners.
(3) If service is not successful under B.(1) above or if it is attempted under B.(2)
above and fails by no receipt confirming delivery from the US mail, notice
shall be posted on the Property. Such notice shall be posted in a place on the
Property where it is reasonably likely to be seen by either an owner or a visitor.
C. An official, at the official’s sole discretion, may enter a written agreement with the
owner to extend the compliance date in order to accommodate weather, hardship or
other circumstances. An official, at the official’s sole discretion, also may enter a
ARTICLE 742 4
written agreement with the owner to allow the City to perform the remediation at the
owner’s expense on payment terms, to reimburse the City, acceptable to the City.
Under such agreement, the City may engage all labor and acquire all materials from
third parties, and from City supplied labor and materials, deemed by the City
necessary to comply with the notice to abate or remove the Graffiti and to enter upon
the premises with said resources to accomplish said purpose. The owner shall be liable
for reimbursing the City’s expense for same pursuant to the agreement. An official, at
the official’s sole discretion, may unilaterally revoke any agreement entered under this
Article 742 if, in the official’s judgment, the owner evidences an intention not to
comply with an agreement.
742.06 STANDARDS FOR ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI
Graffiti shall be abated, removed or completely covered in a permanent manner that renders it
imperceptible against a proximate or surrounding surface which has not been defaced by Graffiti.
When Graffiti is painted out, the color used to paint it out shall match the original color of the surface,
or the surface shall be completely repainted with a new color that is aesthetically compatible with the
pre-Graffiti colors and architecture. The removal shall not leave shadows and shall not follow the
pattern of the Graffiti such that letters or similar shapes remain apparent on the surface after Graffiti
markings have been removed. If the area is heavily covered with Graffiti the entire surface shall be
repainted.
742.07 OWNER FAILURE TO COMPLY; REMEDIATION BY CITY; LIEN FOR
EXPENSES AND PENALTY
Should an owner refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any of the terms, provisions and
requirements of this Article after notice is given pursuant to the provisions hereof, then the City of
Bethlehem Building Code Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer or other agent designated by the
Mayor (collectively hereafter referred to as an “official”), acting in the name and on behalf of the City
of Bethlehem, is authorized to engage all labor and acquire all materials deemed by the City necessary
to comply with the notice to abate or remove the Graffiti and to enter upon the premises with said
resources to accomplish said purpose. The cost and expense thereof, whether procured from third
parties or from City supplied labor and materials, plus ten percent for the City’s administrative
expense, plus ten percent added as a penalty, shall be tallied. Said expenses and penalty shall be
certified to the City Solicitor, who is authorized to enter the same as a lien against the property in the
Court of Common Pleas of Northampton or Lehigh Counties and may proceed to collect same in like
manner as other municipal claims are by law collectible.
742.99 PENALTY – FINES AND IMPRISONMENT
A. Any person convicted of or pleading guilty to violating section 742.03 of this Article
shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more
than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and up to ninety (90) days imprisonment.
B. Any person convicted of or pleading guilty to violating section 742.03 of this Article
for having defaced a “Historic Structure” as defined in City Zoning Ordinance,
Section 1302.52, or a building within “Historic Bethlehem” as established by City
Ordinance, Article 1713, shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
ARTICLE 742 5
($500.00) and not more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and up to ninety (90)
days imprisonment.
C. In addition to the fines assessable in this section 742.99, any person convicted of or
pleading guilty to a violation of Sections 742.03 shall be subject to pay restitution for
all costs to the City and property owner to remediate the Graffiti which is the subject
of the violations established by a conviction or guilty plea.
D. A person convicted of or pleading guilty to violating sections 742.03D shall forfeit
ownership of any Graffiti Paraphernalia and Graffiti Implements said person
possessed during the commission of the prohibited act. Forfeited property will then be
disposed of as determined in the discretion of the Police Commissioner.
E. Any person violating Section 742.07 of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not
more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month for every calendar month and
partial calendar month the violation continues after the time allowed under section
742.05 or any extension granted by the City official expires. Every such month and
partial month that a violation continues is a separate violation and is subject to
imposition of fines pursuant to this subsection (E) upon conviction of or a guilty plea
to the violation.
(Article 742 established by Ord. 2016-22, Passed in City Council on August 2, 2016)
ARTICLE 744
Marijuana Possession
744.01 Definitions
744.02 Possession
744.03 Enforcement
744.99 Penalties
CROSS REFERENCES
"Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act," 1972, April 14 - See P.L. 233, No. 64,
§ 1 et seq., 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.
Prohibited acts; penalties - See 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 780-113(a)(31)
744.01 DEFINITIONS
“Marijuana” means all forms or varieties of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not,
as defined by Pennsylvania's "Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act" as set
forth at 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 780-101 et seq.
“Marijuana Paraphernalia” means any device, instrument, apparatus or object used,
intended to be used, or designed to be used for introducing marijuana into the human body or for
storing, containing, concealing, or transporting marijuana.
“Personal Possession” means actual physical custody of or the ability to exercise control
over or have access to, for the sole purpose of one's own personal use. This does not include
possession with intent to deliver, distribute, transfer, or sell.
“Personal Use” means introducing marijuana into one's own body, which includes
smoking, inhaling, exhaling, vaporizing, or burning any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
such device which contains marijuana or marijuana extracts.
“Small Amount” means thirty grams or less of marijuana or eight grams or less of hashish
as set forth in 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 780-113(a)(31).
ARTICLE 744 2
744.02 POSSESSION
a. Personal Possession or Personal Use of Small Amounts of Marijuana.
(1) So long as marijuana shall be listed as a controlled substance in the
"Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act," 1972, April 14,
P.L. 233, No. 64, § 1 et seq., 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq., no person shall be
in possession of a small amount of marijuana.
(2) The following shall be summary offense violations of this section:
a. Personal possession of a small amount of marijuana; or
b. Personal use of a small amount of marijuana.
b. Personal Possession of Marijuana Paraphernalia
(1) So long as drug paraphernalia includes objects used in connection with
marijuana possession or use in the "Controlled Substance, Drug, Device
and Cosmetic Act," 1972, April 14, P.L. 233, No. 64, § 1 et seq., 35 P.S.
§ 780-101 et seq., no person shall be in possession of marijuana
paraphernalia.
(2) It shall be a summary offense violation of this section to be in personal
possession of marijuana paraphernalia.
744.03 ENFORCEMENT
To the extent permitted by law, it is the intent that any revenue collected pursuant to this Article
be evenly allocated to Bethlehem’s Parks and Recreation Department for the various youth
sports programs and to The City of Bethlehem Police Department for any community
engagement projects or events.
744.99 PENALTIES
a. Personal Possession
(1) The penalty for a first violation in one (1) calendar year of personal
possession of a small amount of marijuana shall be a fine of $25.
(2) The penalty for a second violation in one (1) calendar year of personal
possession of a small amount of marijuana shall be a fine of $50.
ARTICLE 744 3
(3) The penalty for a third violation in one (1) calendar year of personal
possession of a small amount of marijuana shall be a fine of $100.
(4) The penalty for a fourth violation, or subsequent violations, in one (1)
calendar year of personal possession of a small amount of marijuana shall
be a fine of $150 OR the court may, in its discretion, suspend the fine
imposed under this section if the person found guilty agrees to and does in
fact perform such community service as the court deems appropriate, up to
eight (8) hours.
b. Personal Use
(1) The penalty for a first violation in one (1) calendar year for personal use of
marijuana shall be a fine of $25.
(2) The penalty for a second violation in one (1) calendar year for personal
marijuana shall be a fine of $50.
(3) The penalty for a third violation in one (1) calendar year for personal use
marijuana shall be a fine of $100.
(4) The penalty for a fourth violation, or subsequent violations, in one (1)
calendar year for personal use of marijuana shall be a fine of $150 OR the
court may, in its discretion, suspend the fine imposed under this section if
the person found guilty agrees to and does in fact perform such
community service as the court deems appropriate, up to eight (8) hours.
c. Personal Possession of Marijuana Paraphernalia
(1) The penalty for a first violation in one (1) calendar year of personal
possession of marijuana paraphernalia shall be a fine of $25.
(2) The penalty for a second violation in one (1) calendar year of personal
possession of marijuana paraphernalia shall be a fine of $50.
(3) The penalty for a third violation in one (1) calendar year of personal
possession of marijuana paraphernalia shall be a fine of $100.
(4) The penalty for a fourth violation, or subsequent violations, in one (1)
calendar year of personal possession of marijuana paraphernalia shall be a
fine of $150 OR the court may, in its discretion, suspend the fine imposed
under this section if the person found guilty agrees to and does in fact
perform such community service as the court deems appropriate, up to
eight (8) hours.
(Ord. 2018-15. Passed 6/19/2018.)
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF BETHLEHEM
PART NINE - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
TITLE ONE - Street and Sidewalk Areas
Article 901. Street Plan Map.
Article 903. Excavations.
Article 905. Street Improvements; Assessments.
Article 907. Poles and Wires.
Article 908. Antenna Systems.
Article 909. Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters and Driveways.
Article 910. Trees and Shrubs.
ARTICLE 901
Street Plan Map
901.01 General Plan Of Streets; Acceptance Of Map.
901.02 Duty of Engineer.
CROSS REFERENCES
General plan required - See 3rd Class §2901 (53 P.S. §37901)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
901.01 GENERAL PLAN OF STREETS; ACCEPTANCE OF MAP.
Council hereby ordains that the action of the City Engineer in marking
the lines of all the streets and highways of the City already opened or
intended to be opened for public use, on a map dated January 1, 1968, is
ratified, confirmed and approved, and such Map of the City Engineer is and
the same hereby is accepted and adopted as the General Plan of Streets of
the City. (Ord. 2102 §1. Passed 9/3/68.)
ARTICLE 901 2
901.02 DUTY OF ENGINEER.
The City Engineer shall make, or cause to be made, a draft or plan of
such streets, with every provision and explanation necessary for a full
understanding of the same, distinctly designating where new streets and
highways are hereafter to be opened. He shall return the same to Council for
filing in the office of the City Clerk where the same shall be open to
inspection by those interested. (Ord. 1682 §2. Passed 1/17/61.)
ARTICLE 903
Excavations
903.01 Definitions.
903.02 Permit Required.
903.03 Permit Application.
903.04 Insurance.
903.05 Permit/Degradation Fee.
903.06 Compliance With Specifications And Regulations.
903.07 Supervision And Inspection.
903.08 Safety Precautions.
903.09 City May Perform Work; Costs.
903.10 When Fee Not Required.
903.11 Refilling Excavations.
903.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to open streets, etc. - See 3rd Class §2915 (53. P.S. §37915)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Deep and shallow excavations - See BLDG. Art. 1701.02; BOCA 1807.2.1.
903.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) As used in this Article, "applicant" shall mean any person, firm,
association or corporation applying for and to whom a permit to make an
excavation may be issued.
(b) A degradation fee is a rate charged for officially authorized street
excavation to defray a percentage of the costs for resurfacing and
reconstruction of City streets resulting from the depreciation of streets
associated with street openings. (Ord. 4096. Passed 11/20/01.)
(c) "Excavation" or "excavations" shall mean the digging of any
trench or excavating through or under the limits of any ordained or dedicated
street in the City, or any public sidewalk, or the cutting into or opening and
ARTICLE 903 2
removal of any paved or unpaved surfaces in the public right-of-way within
the City. (Ord. 3024 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
903.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in the
public right-of-way within the City without first obtaining a permit therefor.
(Ord. 3024 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
903.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
(a) Application for an Excavation permit shall be made to the
Department of Public Works. Each application may be required to be
accompanied by plans indicating the location, purpose, size and time of the
Excavation and shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
(b) No permit shall be issued for the opening and digging up of any
street or public right-of-way in the City between December 1 of any year
and March 1 following, except to repair leaking and damaged water pipes,
gas pipe, sewer or drain, or such other work deemed necessary and essential
by the City Engineer, and then only with the issuance of a permit and written
consent of the City Engineer.
(c) Should a situation arise where it would become necessary to
open or dig up any street or public right-of-way between December 1 of any
year and March 1 following for any reason other than emergency repairs to
existing utilities, such request shall be made in writing to the Department
of Public Works. Such a request must provide sufficient cause for the
Excavation and the City Engineer may require accompanying plans
indicating location, purpose, size and time, etc. Such Excavation can only be
done upon the issuance of a permit and written approval of the City
Engineer. Special requirements may be imposed by the City Engineer. (Ord.
3117 §1. Passed 3/17/87).
903.04 INSURANCE.
The applicant shall deposit or show evidence of a public liability
insurance policy insuring the City, as well as the person doing the work,
against any loss or damage to persons or property resulting from the acts
or work being done, in such amounts as shall be deemed adequate by the
ARTICLE 903 3
Director of the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 1800 §4. Passed
3/5/63.)
903.05 PERMIT/DEGRADATION FEE.
Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall pay to the City
Treasurer, a permit fee in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) For excavations that involve any portion of the paved roadway
in any public area of the City, the following Roadway Excavation Permit
Fees shall apply per each excavation as finally restored:
(1) Roadway Pavement Age - More than Five Years $10.00/SF
(2) Sanitary Sewer Lateral Replacement/Repair $10.00/SF
Degradation Fee Does Not Apply
Degradation Fee (In addition to Excavation Fee in
Item (1) above):
(1) Roadway Pavement Age - Less than Five Years $10.00/SF
Includes Degradation Fee
(2) Roadway Pavement Age - Less than Four Years $20.00/SF
Includes Degradation Fee
(3) Roadway Pavement Age - Less than Three Years $35.00/SF
Includes Degradation Fee
(4) Roadway Pavement Age - Less than Two Years $50.00/SF
Includes Degradation Fee
(5) Roadway Pavement Age - Less than One Year $60.00/SF
Includes Degradation Fee
(b) For excavations in public areas which do not involve the paved
roadway, a fee of $3.00/SF shall be paid.
The permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the
date of issue and no work shall be done after any permit has expired. All
work shall be done in accordance with the specifications of the City
Engineer. (Ord. 3024 §1. Passed 10/15/85; Ord. 4096. Passed 11/20/01;
Ord. 2010-31. Passed 12/21/10.)
ARTICLE 903 4
903.06 COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS AND
REGULATIONS.
All work shall be performed in accordance with the specifications of
the City Engineer, the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 1800 §6. Passed
3/5/63.)
903.07 SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION.
All work shall be subject to supervision and inspection of the City
Engineer, and shall be done to his satisfaction and approval. (Ord. 1800 §7.
Passed 3/5/63. )
903.08 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
(a) The applicant shall provide such barriers and lighting devices as to
make the Excavation safe at all times.
(b) Before any Excavation is made and in accordance with 1974, Dec.
10, P.L. 852, No. 287; As Amended 1986, Dec. 12, No. 172, the Applicant
shall notify all utilities that he will be making an Excavation at least three
(3) working days prior to the day of beginning such work so that each utility
can mark or locate their lines for the Applicant; they shall then be located
and if required, supported during the Excavation operation.
(c) The walls and faces of all Excavations and trenches 5 feet or more
deep in which humans are exposed to danger from cave-in shall be guarded
by a shoring system, sloping of the ground, or some other equivalent means.
(d) In Excavations which humans may be required to enter, excavated
or other material shall be effectively stored and retained at least 2 feet or
more from the edge of the Excavation.
(e) Excavations 4 feet deep or more shall have an adequate means of
exit, such as, ladders or steps, located so as to require no more than 25 feet
of lateral travel. (Ord. 3117 §2. Passed 3/17/87).
ARTICLE 903 5
903.09 CITY MAY PERFORM WORK; COSTS.
The City shall have the right to correct any deficiencies in the work
performed by the applicant and to charge the costs to the applicant. (Ord.
3024 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
903.10 WHEN FEE NOT REQUIRED.
No charge shall be made for an excavation on the sidewalk where the
same is made in connection with a permit granted for an excavation in the
roadway, or for excavations made under permits issued for the construction
or repair of sidewalks, curbing or gutters, or where permits have been
granted for the erection of poles, or for contracts executed for the City or any
department thereof, or for any work done under the direction and authority
of any City department; but in all cases proper application shall be made and
a permit secured as herein provided. (Ord. 3024 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
903.11 REFILLING EXCAVATIONS.
All persons opening or digging any of the streets of the City for any
purpose whatever shall refill the same in the following manner:
Spaces excavated for but not occupied by structures shall be
backfilled with suitable material as approved by the City Engineer. Backfill
material shall be placed in uniform horizontal layers of not more than a loose
eight inch depth for full width of the cross section. Each layer is to be
thoroughly compacted by adequate tamping. This procedure shall be
followed from the bottom of the Excavation until the Excavation is solidly
filled to street level. Frozen material shall not be used for backfill at any
time. Surfacing material, other than earth, removed for trench Excavation
shall not be used for backfill and shall be removed from the site. All
Excavations shall be backfilled within a reasonable time allowed for the
work to be performed. Final restoration of the trench will be in accordance
with City specifications. (Ord. 3117 §3. Passed 3/17/87.)
903.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
ARTICLE 903 6
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242.
Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 905
Street Improvements; Assessments
905.01 Street Construction And Assessment.
905.02 New Development - Curb, Gutter And Sidewalk Requirements.
905.03 Water And Sewer Assessment.
905.04 Construction Costs.
905.05 Construction By Owner.
905.06 Assessment Of Costs Of Improvement Projects.
905.07 Manner Of Payment Of Assessments.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to improve - See 3rd Class §2930 (53 P.S. §37930)
Payment of cost - See 3rd Class §2931 (53 P.S. §37931)
Assessment by front-foot rule - See 3rd Class §2932 (53 P.S. §37932)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Streets and sidewalks - See GEN. OFF. Art. 721
Excavations - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 903
Construction of Sewers; Cost – 53 P.S. §38201
905.01 STREET CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT.
(a) Abutting property owners shall be charged with the cost of
construction and paving of new streets, including intersections.
(b) Assessable frontage shall include all lot frontage abutting the street
improvement, but excluding two-thirds of the long side in the case of corner
lots. (Ord. 3024 §2. Passed 10/15/85.)
905.02 NEW DEVELOPMENT - CURB, GUTTER AND
SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS. (Ord. 4154; Passed 11/6/02)
(a) Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be required as a condition of
each building permit or new subdivision, except in those areas deferred by
action of the City Planning Commission, upon recommendation by the
Director of Public Works. (Ord. 4159; Passed 12/3/02)
ARTICLE 905 2
(b) The cost of curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be borne fully by the
abutting property owners, except that, in the case of double frontage lots
which cannot be further subdivided in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance at the time of notification, and where the Director of Public
Works decides that sidewalk is necessary on the rear, the cost of the rear
sidewalk shall be borne by the City. (Ord. 3024 §2. Passed 10/15/85.)
905.03 WATER AND SEWER ASSESSMENT.
(a) Abutting property owners shall be charged with the cost, including
intersections and street paving replacement, on the basis of an eight inch
main for water lines and an eight inch main for sewer lines (provided,
however, that such charge for each line shall be limited to nine dollars and
forty cents ($9.40) per front foot and that the City shall pay for any amount
by which the cost exceeds nine dollars and forty cents ($9.40) per front
foot), plus the cost of necessary service pipes and laterals, except that in
order to keep the maximum front-foot assessment charge in line with current
construction costs, the figure of nine dollars and forty cents ($9.40) per front
foot for each year following 1966 shall be multiplied by the ratio of the
Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index at the beginning of that
year with the same index value as of the first week of January 1966. (Ord.
1948 §1. Passed 11/30/65.)
(b) Assessable frontage shall include all lot frontage abutting the
improvements, but excluding two-thirds of the long side in the case of corner
lots where the improvements abut both front and side. Where the
improvements abut only the long side, assessable frontage shall be the front
or two-thirds of the side, whichever is greater. Where mains are installed
along more than two sides of a property, only the front and one-third of the
longer side shall be assessable. Where an interior lot has mains along both
front and rear, one frontage, which shall be the shorter, if they are of
different lengths, shall be excluded. (Ord. 2040 §3. Passed 8/8/67.)
(c) The City shall assume any additional cost involved in the use of
larger mains and any portion of the cost not assessed against the abutting
property owners. (Ord. 1762 §3. Passed 11/8/62.)
(d) Where property is connected to an existing water or sewer line,
when the City installs an additional line which would otherwise be
assessable against such property, the property shall be exonerated from any
ARTICLE 905 3
assessment for the additional line, except that, where a line constructed after
the effective date of this subsection (Ordinance 2040, passed August 8,
1967) stops short of the far property line, the continuation of such water or
sewer line under later construction shall be assessable. In addition, should
the owner of such property at any time desire to connect with the line for
payment of which the property owner was exonerated he may do so only on
payment to the City of a connection charge equaling the assessment which
would otherwise have been made against the property for the installation of
such line, together with interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the
date of completion of the installation of such additional line. (Ord. 2040 §3.
Passed 8/8/67.)
(e) Where dual water or sewer mains are installed in the same street,
the City shall absorb half the cost thereof. (Ord. 2040 §4. Passed 8/8/67.)
905.04 CONSTRUCTION COSTS.
(a) In the case of construction work performed by City forces, the
assessment shall include all applicable municipal out-of-pocket expenses
such as labor, fringe benefits, overhead and materials as determined by the
City's cost allocation plan.
(b) Included in the assessable cost of any street, water or sanitary
sewer project shall be the engineering cost, including all applicable
municipal out-of-pocket expenses such as labor, fringe benefits, overhead
and materials as determined by the City's cost allocation plan. (Ord. 3024
§2. Passed 10/15/85.)
905.05 CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
Any property owner representing, by ownership or agreement, 100
percent of the frontage to be assessed under a given project, shall be
permitted to perform, or to have his contractor perform, the work of
constructing the street paving, curb, gutter and sidewalk, water or sewer
main, provided he meets specification standards of the Bureau of
Engineering, providing further that all work is performed under the City's
specifications and engineering supervision, and provided further that, where
any part of the cost of the improvements is to be borne by the City, the cost
thereof shall be based upon the lowest written quotation received by the
property owner or his contractor and approved by the Director of Public
Works. (Ord. 2040 §6. Passed 8/8/67.)
ARTICLE 905 4
905.06 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS.
(a) Upon final passage of an ordinance authorizing any assessable
improvement project, the City's Department of Public Works shall notify all
abutting property owners by certified mail of the starting date of such
project. Such notice shall include a copy of the ordinance and this Article
905. Notice shall be simultaneously given to the City Treasurer of the staring
date of the project and the names of affected property owners and property
location.
(b) At the completion of any assessable improvement project, the
City's Department of Public Works, within ninety days after the completion
date, shall notify all abutting property owners by certified mail that the
project has been completed and shall set forth in such notice the exact
completion date and the assessable cost of such improvement on a front foot
basis. Notice shall be simultaneously given to the City Treasurer of the
completion date of the project and the names of affected property owners
and property locations.
(c) On the completion of any assessable improvement project, the
City's Department of Public Works, after compliance with notice
requirements set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above, shall assess the costs
chargeable to abutting property owners on a front foot basis. (Ord. 1993 §1.
Passed 8/16/66.)
905.07 MANNER OF PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS.
Property owners may pay assessments charged against them on the
following basis:
(a) Payments on the assessment within one year from the date of
completion shall bear no interest.
(b) A property owner shall be permitted, up to one year from the date
of completion, to enter into an agreement with the City to pay his
assessment, or any balance due thereon, in quarterly installments over a
period of two years, together with simple interest at the rate of ten percent
(10%) beginning one year from date of completion.
ARTICLE 905 5
(c) A property owner who neither pays in full nor signs an installment
agreement with the City within one year from date of completion shall be
required to pay the balance of his assessment, together with simple interest
thereon, at the rate of ten percent (10%) from the date of completion of the
project. (Ord. 3010. Passed 9/3/85.)
(d) Where a property owner has been assessed for the cost of
construction of water or sewer mains, street paving or curb, gutter and
sidewalk within the period permitted to pay such assessment as hereinabove
set forth, receives one or more additional assessments for the cost of
construction of water or sewer mains, street paving or curb, gutter and
sidewalk, such property owner shall not be charged interest on the
subsequent assessments until after one year from the date of completion
thereof, and payments on principal and interest shall be deferred until after
payment is completed on the first assessment, when the property owner shall
enter into an agreement to pay the principal and interest thereon as set forth
in subsection (b) hereof. In the event that a property owner defaults in the
payment of principal or interest hereunder, all principal and accumulated
interest shall become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 3024 §2. Passed
10/15/85.)
ARTICLE 907
Poles and Wires
907.01 Rules and Regulations.
907.02 Replacing Sidewalk.
907.03 Cutting or Defacing Trees.
907.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to require underground electric wires - See 3rd Class §2403(50) [53 P.S. §37403 (50)]
Street lighting - See 3rd Class §3576 (53 P.S. §38576)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
907.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Director of Public Works is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations with respect to the setting, placing, resetting, replacing and removing of poles and
guy wires used for stretching wires and cables for telegraph, telephone, electric light, power and
railway purposes, in, along and upon the streets of the City; upon application therefor, to issue
permits for the setting, placing, resetting, replacing and removal of such poles upon the payment
by the applicant to the City of a fee per pole; and to prescribe in such permit the place where and
the manner in which such poles may be set, placed, reset or replaced, and in case of the removal
of poles, the manner in which the same may be effected. No such poles shall be hereafter set,
placed, reset, replaced or removed without a permit from the Director. (Ord. 3024 §3. Passed
10/15/85.)
(a) Pole Permit Fee - $50.00 per Pole
(Ord. 4097. Passed 11/20/2001; Ord. 2010-32. Passed 12/21/2010; Ord. 2017-53. Passed
12/19/2017.)
907.02 REPLACING SIDEWALK.
Whenever a permit shall be issued to reset, replace or remove any such poles or guy
wires, the person to whom such permit shall have been granted shall replace the sidewalk, curb
and gutter in a proper and safe condition. In no event shall such person be allowed to cut down
any poles without removing such portion of the same as may have been placed below the surface
of the ground. (Ord. 3024 §3. Passed 10/15/85.)
907.03 CUTTING OR DEFACING TREES.
No person shall cut, break or otherwise deface any tree in, along or upon any street in
connection with the setting, placing, resetting, replacing or removing of any poles as
hereinbefore provided, without having first obtained permission in writing from the Director of
ARTICLE 907 2
Public Works. (1946 Code C. 23 §3.)
907.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment,
or both.
(Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 908
Antenna Systems
908.01 Short Title
908.02 Definitions
908.03 Franchise Required
908.04 Grant Of Authority
908.05 Franchise Term
908.06 Acceptance Of Franchise
908.07 Franchise Payments
908.08 Installation And Extension Of System
908.09 Standards Of Service
908.10 Programming
908.11 Franchisee Rules And Regulations
908.12 Regulatory Action
908.13 Condition Of Street Occupancy
908.14 Compliance With Standards
908.15 Franchisee Liability - Indemnification
908.16 Severability
908.17 Penalty
908.18 Revocation Of Franchise
908.19 Effective Date
CROSS REFERENCE
Poles and wires - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 907
Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984
908.01 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Bethlehem Cable Television Franchise Ordinance."
908.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
ARTICLE 908 2
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the
singular number include the plural number, and words in the masculine
gender shall include the feminine gender. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
(a) "Basic Cable Television Service" shall mean that tier of cable
television service to which all users must subscribe in order to obtain cable
television service and for which a charge is made.
(b) "Cable Television System" or "System" shall mean any facility or
group of facilities which, in whole or in part, receives, modifies or originates
television, FM radio or other electrical signals for the purpose of
transmitting or distributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to
subscribing members of the public or to selected customers, as herein
contemplated. This definition shall include those systems which do not
occupy or cross over or under the public ways and places of the City.
(c) "Franchisee" shall mean any duly approved person, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind
operating under a franchise granted pursuant to Section 908.03 of this
Ordinance.
(d) "Optional Cable Television Service" shall mean the furnishing of
television programming for which a per channel charge is made in addition
to that for Basic Cable Television Service.
908.03 FRANCHISE REQUIRED
From and after the enactment of this Ordinance, no Cable Television
System shall be constructed, installed or operated in the City unless such
construction, installation or operation shall first have been authorized by
Ordinance of the City duly enacted. This Ordinance shall not restrict the
number of franchises granted pursuant to this Ordinance.
908.04 GRANT OF AUTHORITY
Any franchise granted under Section 908.03 of this Ordinance shall
include the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain a
Cable Television System in, under, over, along, across or upon the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, rights-of-way and places within the boundaries
ARTICLE 908 3
of the City, to the extent permitted by law. The franchise granted shall also
be construed as to permit the Franchisee to attach or otherwise affix or
install its cables and other equipment to and in the facilities of any public
utility even though the same may occupy or cross over or under the public
ways and places of City.
908.05 FRANCHISE TERM
Any franchise granted under Section 908.03 of this Ordinance shall be
for a period of ten (10) years from the effective date of the grant of the
franchise. Nothing contained therein shall be construed to limit the City's
ability to adjust the franchise fee on gross revenues as set forth in Section
908.07 herein in accordance with changes in applicable State and Federal
statutes.
908.06 ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE
Any franchise granted under Section 908.03 of this Ordinance shall be
upon the express condition that the Franchisee shall file with the City Clerk
a written acceptance of the same within thirty (30) days after written notice
is given to the Franchisee of the grant. The Ordinance granting the franchise,
acceptance of the same by the Franchisee, and the execution of a Franchise
Agreement between the City and the Franchisee, shall constitute a contract
between the City and the Franchisee for all the uses, services and purposes
set forth in this Ordinance. Except as may be otherwise provided by State or
Federal law, order or regulation, or the Franchise Agreement, the rights and
obligations of the City and the Franchisee shall be those specified herein and
they shall not be enlarged, diminished or altered by unilateral action of the
City during the term of the franchise or renewal thereof. The Franchisee, by
its acceptance of the provisions of the Ordinance granting the franchise and
its execution of the Franchise Agreement, binds itself to provide the
necessary Cable Television System and to establish, operate and maintain
the local Cable Television System contemplated in this Ordinance,
continuing without substantial interruption except for causes beyond its
control until the expiration of the term of the grant. In the event that the
Franchisee shall fail to file a written acceptance within the time hereinafter
specified, the grant shall be of no effect and void. (Ord. 2013-13. Passed
5/7/13.)
ARTICLE 908 4
908.07 FRANCHISE PAYMENTS
(a) As compensation for the rights conferred by the grant of a
franchise by this Ordinance, including the privilege of engaging in the
business of operating a Cable Television System in the City, the Franchisee
shall pay annually to the City a fee equal to five percent (5%) of gross
revenues derived from the operation of its cable system in the City. “Gross
Revenues” shall include all revenue received directly or indirectly by
Franchisee or its Affiliated Entities from any source whatsoever arising
from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the operation of
Franchisee’s Cable System in the City to provide Cable Services. “Gross
Revenues” shall not include bad debts; interest income; revenue of the
Franchisee or any Affiliated Entity from the facilities of a common carrier,
which is subject to Title 11 of the Communications Act, as amended; or any
taxes on services furnished by Franchisee and imposed directly upon any
Subscriber or user by the City, state, federal or other governmental unit.
Franchisee shall not deduct or otherwise credit against the franchise fee any
tax, fee or assessment of general applicability.
(b) Franchise fee payments to the City under this provision shall be
computed at the end of each calendar quarter or as otherwise set forth below
and shall be due and payable in accordance with the following schedule: on
or before May 15 for the first quarter, on or before August 15 for the second
quarter, on or before November 15 for the third quarter, and on or before
December 1 for the fourth quarter (based on estimated gross revenues). The
actual fourth quarter amount due shall be computed at the end of the
calendar quarter and reconciled with the fourth quarter payment made, with
any adjustments or credits applied to the next payment due. In the event that
any franchise fee payment is not made on or before the applicable date, then
interest shall be added at the annual rate of six percent (6%) of the amount of
franchise fee revenue due to the City. No acceptance of any percent shall be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor
shall acceptance of any payment be construed as a release of any claim the
City may have for additional sums payable under this Agreement.
(c) Each franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a written
report containing an accurate statement of Franchisee’s Gross Revenues
received for Cable Services for the quarter in connection with the operation
of Franchisee’s Cable System and a brief statement showing the basis for
computation of fees. The statement shall contain a line item for every source
ARTICLE 908 5
of revenue received and the amount of revenue received from each source.
The report shall be verified by an authorized representative of Franchisee.
(d) On an annual basis, upon a minimum of thirty (30) days prior
written notice, the City shall have the right to conduct an independent audit
of Franchisee’s records reasonably related to the sources, amounts and
computation of gross revenues in accordance with Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles. Such records shall be kept or made available to the
City at the notice location for Franchisee specified in Section 13.3 below.
Provided the documents requested are not unduly burdensome, any
reproduction of such records for purposes of inspection shall be performed at
Franchisee’s expense. If the audit shows that franchise fees have been
underpaid then Franchisee shall pay the underpaid amount and monetary
fines of five percent (5%) of the underpayment. If franchise fees have been
underpaid by five percent (5%) or more, then Franchisee shall also pay the
reasonable cost of the audit.
At the time of the annual audit, the Franchisee shall furnish the City
with such information as the City shall reasonably require with respect to the
Franchisee’s services within the City for such period.
(Ord. 2013-13. Passed 5/7/13.)
908.08 INSTALLATION AND EXTENSION OF SYSTEM
The Franchisee shall serve all residents of the City except to the extent
that low household density, adverse terrain or other factors render providing
service impracticable or technically or economically infeasible. The
Franchisee's Cable Television System shall not be required to be installed in,
or extend to, areas of the City where potential revenues from subscribers to
be served therein would produce a return insufficient to justify economically
such installation or extension. If otherwise practicable and technically
feasible:
(a) Service shall be provided at normal installation and monthly
service rates to an individual customer whose point of connection is located
within one hundred fifty foot (150 foot) aerial distance of an in-place
distribution cable of the Franchisee. For any installation in excess of a one
hundred fifty foot (150 ft) aerial distance or that requires an underground
installation, Franchisee shall extend Cable Service at a rate not to exceed
ARTICLE 908 6
Franchisee’s actual cost of installation from its main distribution system.
(b) The Franchisee, at its cost, shall make an extension of its cable
system where the number of existing households per linear mile of cable to
be passed by the extension equals or exceeds the average number of
households passed per linear mile of its existing cable system within the
City.
(c) In no event shall the Franchisee be required to make an extension
where the number of existing households to be passed per mile is less than
50. The Franchisee shall not be required to install or extend its cable system
in areas where it cannot obtain necessary rights-of-way over private property
at economically feasible cost, or obtain permission to attach its facilities to
public utility poles or conduits.
(d) All installations of wires and/or equipment by Franchisee shall be
underground where such facilities of other similarly situated entities are
underground.
(Ord. 2013-13. Passed 5/7/13.)
908.09 STANDARDS OF SERVICE
(a) The Franchisee shall render efficient service, make repairs
promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice
and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the System. Upon receipt
of a complaint regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters, the Franchisee shall promptly investigate such complaints.
(b) Where possible, the Franchisee shall commence an investigation
of such complaints within 48 hours of their receipt. Resolution of such
service complaints shall be made promptly. The Franchisee shall maintain a
toll-free business telephone for the receipt of complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustments.
908.10 PROGRAMMING
The Franchise shall have the right to add, alter, change or delete
particular programming and services provided on its Cable Television
ARTICLE 908 7
System in response to changes in public demand, program and service
availability, technical developments and costs.
908.11 FRANCHISEE RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Franchisee to exercise its rights
and perform its obligations under its franchise, and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however,
that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with
the provisions hereof or of Federal and State laws.
908.12 REGULATORY ACTION
The performance by the Franchisee hereunder is subject to limitations,
restrictions, or requirements now existing or which may henceforth be
imposed by law, rule, or order of the Federal Communications Commission
or other government board, commission or authority. The Franchisee shall
not be deemed in default of any of the requirements of this Ordinance to the
extent it acts in compliance with, or refrains from doing anything prohibited
by such law, rule or order.
908.13 CONDITION OF STREET OCCUPANCY
(a) All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment
erected by the Franchisee within the City shall be so located as to cause
minimum feasible interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and
other public ways, roads and places, and to cause minimum feasible
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways, roads and
places. The Franchisee shall obtain any required permits prior to
construction.
(b) In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or
other surfacing by the Franchisee, the Franchisee shall, at its expense and in
a manner approved by the City, replace and restore the same in as good
condition as before said work was commenced.
ARTICLE 908 8
908.14 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS
The Franchisee's construction and maintenance of its transmission and
distribution system shall be in accordance with applicable City, State and
Federal ordinances, laws or regulations now in effect, or later enacted
regulating or affecting the Franchisee's installation or operation. At such
time as a franchise is granted under this Ordinance, City shall advise the
Franchisee of any and all City ordinances, laws, or regulations in effect
which City determines affects the construction and maintenance of a
transmission and distribution system. City shall also notify a Franchisee of
any proposed ordinance, law or regulation which is intended to affect, alter,
amend or extend such ordinances, laws or regulations. Nothing herein shall
be deemed a waiver of Franchisee's right to challenge the reasonableness
and/or validity of the enactment and/or enforcement of any such City, State,
or Federal law or regulation.
908.15 FRANCHISEE LIABILITY - INDEMNIFICATION
The Franchisee shall save the City harmless from all loss sustained on
account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever,
resulting solely from the conduct of the Franchisee in the construction,
operation or maintenance of its System in the City. The City shall notify the
Franchisee within twenty-one (21) days after the presentation of any claim
or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the City on account of
any damages or losses as aforesaid resulting from such conduct of the
Franchisee. Within thirty (30) days from the enactment date of any
Ordinance granting a franchise, the Franchisee shall furnish satisfactory
evidence in writing that it has in force public liability insurance of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate limit for bodily
injury and property damage (including death) issued by an insurance
company or insurance companies authorized to do business in this
Commonwealth.
908.16 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance, is for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction or by any State or Federal Regulatory
Agency having jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
ARTICLE 908 9
the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
908.17 PENALTY
Any Franchisee that willfully fails to attempt to remedy a violation of
any provision of this Ordinance within ten (10) days of its receipt of written
notice thereof, or any other person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind who knowingly or
unknowingly violates any provision of this Article, shall be charged with a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3225-Passed 12/6/88)
908.18 REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE
Any franchise granted under this Ordinance may be revoked after
notice and a full public hearing and a subsequent resolution of City Council,
provided however, that City Council shall determine, by clear and
convincing evidence, that any Franchisee is in serious breach of the
Franchisee's obligations under this Ordinance. Franchisee shall have the
right to appeal any decision of City Council rendered pursuant to such
petition to the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, or to such higher appellate court as Franchisee deems proper.
908.19 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be effective for the calendar year beginning
January 1, 1989. (Ord. 3225. Passed 12/6/88.)
ARTICLE 909
Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters and Driveways
909.01 Existing Development with Existing Sidewalks - Curb, Gutter and Sidewalk
Requirements.
909.02 Existing Development without Existing Sidewalks - Curb, Gutter and Sidewalk
Requirements.
909.03 Warrant of Survey.
909.04 Warrant of Survey; Line and Grade; Fees.
909.05 City May Perform Work; Owner to Pay.
909.06 Driveway and Sidewalk Construction Permit and Fee.
909.07 Insurance Required.
909.08 Owner Responsible For Safety Devices.
909.09 Obstructions in Public Right-Of-Way.
909.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to require sidewalk construction - See 3rd Class §3001 (53 P.S. §38001)
Construction by City - See 3rd Class §3002 (53 P.S. §38002)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Streets and sidewalks - See GEN. OFF. Art. 721
Street Improvements - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 905
909.01 EXISTING DEVELOPMENT WITH EXISTING SIDEWALKS – CURB,
GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Every owner of property abutting any public street or public alley in the City shall
reconstruct, repair and/or replace sidewalk and/or curb and/or gutter upon service of a written
notice to do so by the Director of Public Works.
(b) Every owner of property abutting any public street or public alley in the City shall
reconstruct, repair and/or replace such sidewalk and/or curb and/or gutter within thirty (30) days
after service of the written notice from the Director of Public Works as herein provided, unless
said notice or a subsequent notice shall specifically provide for a longer period.
(c) All sidewalks and/or curbs and/or gutters shall be constructed, reconstructed,
repaired and/or replaced in conformity with city standards and specifications, and in conformity
with the line and grade established by the Department of Public Works Engineering Bureau.
ARTICLE 909 2
(d) All sidewalks and/or curbs and/or gutters, when formed, shall be inspected by the
Department of Public Works Engineering Bureau before the pouring of concrete. A minimum of
twenty-four (24) hours advance notice shall be given to the Department of Public Works
Engineering Bureau before the start of concrete placement. Upon completion of construction,
reconstruction, repair and/or replacement, the Department of Public Works Engineering Bureau
shall be notified in order to schedule a final inspection for approval. If approval is denied due to
non-compliance with the line and grade established by the Engineering Bureau or noncompliance
with city standards and specifications, the Engineering Bureau will serve written
notice to the owner of the land to reconstruct, repair and/or replace the sidewalks and/or curbs
and/or gutters.
(e) Every owner of land abutting any public street or alley in the city shall have the
responsibility to maintain existing sidewalks, curbs, and gutters on such land or abutting such
land in a good and safe condition.
909.02 EXISTING DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT EXISTING
SIDEWALKS – CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK
REQUIREMENTS.
(a) At locations where no sidewalks and/or curbs and/or gutters exist on the effective
date of this Article, the Director of Public Works may, from time to time, direct the construction
of sidewalks and/or curbs and/or gutters by property owners, but only if the Director of Public
Works has made a determination that a serious and well documented pedestrian safety issue
exists, which cannot be remedied by any other means other than to direct the construction of
sidewalks and/or curbs and/or gutters.
(b) The cost of sidewalks, curbs and gutters to be constructed, reconstructed, repaired
and/or replaced under this ordinance, shall be borne and paid for by the abutting property
owners, except that in the case of double frontage lots which cannot be further subdivided in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance at the time of notification, and where the Director of
Public Works decides that sidewalk is necessary on the rear, the cost of the rear sidewalk shall be
borne and paid for by the City.
(c) If a property owner desires to appeal from a decision of the Director of Public
Works pertaining to action taken by the Director of Public Works pursuant to Article 909.02(a)
of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, an appeal shall be filed under and pursuant
to the rules and procedures set forth at Article 150 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem, pertaining to the Board of Appeals, upon which is conferred the jurisdiction to hear
and decide such an appeal.
909.03 WARRANT OF SURVEY.
The property owner, after notification as provided in Section 909.01 or 909.02, shall
obtain the line and grade from the City Engineer and pay to the City Treasurer a fee for the
warrant of survey according to the schedule of fees established by Section 909.04. If construction
ARTICLE 909 3
has not been started within ninety days after issuance of a warrant of survey, a new warrant of
survey shall be procured.
909.04 WARRANT OF SURVEY; LINE AND GRADE; FEES.
Any person applying to the City Engineer for a warrant of survey establishing lines and
grades in connection with the construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks, shall pay to the City
Treasurer, for each warrant of survey issued by him, a fee based upon the front foot rule of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first fifty feet or fraction thereof; for each front foot in excess
of the first fifty feet, the applicant shall pay to the City Treasurer an additional fee of sixty cents
($.60) per front foot. (Ord. 2010-33. Passed 12/21/2010.)
909.05 CITY MAY PERFORM WORK; OWNER TO PAY.
Upon failure of the property owner to comply with the provisions of Section 909.01 or
909.02, the City may lay and construct such curb, gutter and/or sidewalk and charge the costs
thereof against the property owner, together with such penalties as may be authorized by law,
and file any municipal liens authorized by law in the event of failure of the property owner to
pay, subject however to the following limitation: during the first twenty-four (24) months
following the date of completion of such work, interest charged shall be limited to 3% simple
interest.
909.06 DRIVEWAY AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
PERMIT AND FEE.
(a) Driveway. Any person desiring to construct a private driveway within a public
right-of-way from the paved cartway to his property line (street line) shall obtain a permit from
the Department of Public Works and pay to the City Treasurer a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
residential driveways and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for commercial driveways. Plans and
specifications for such work shall be approved by the City Engineer, and all work shall be
subject to his inspection and approval. All work shall conform to City standards. This permit
shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of issue and no work shall be done
after the permit has expired. (Ord. 2017-54. Passed 12/19/2017.)
(b) Sidewalk. Any person desiring to construct sidewalks within any public area of
the City shall obtain a permit from the Department of Public Works and pay to the City
Treasurer a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). This permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90)
days from date of issue and no work shall be done after any period has expired unless a new
permit has been obtained. All work shall be done in accordance with line and grade established
by the City Engineer and in conformity with the plans and specifications of the City Engineer.
(c) Curb. Any person desiring to construct curb within any public area of the City
shall obtain a permit from the Department of Public Works and pay to the City Treasurer a fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00). This permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from date of
issue and no work shall be done after any period has expired unless a new permit has been
ARTICLE 909 4
obtained. All work shall be done in accordance with line and grade established by the City
Engineer and in conformity with the plans and specifications of the City Engineer.
(d) Any such driveway, sidewalk and/or curb permit shall only be issued to the owner
of the property on which the work is to be performed or to an applicant who shall have the
expressed approval of the property owner.
(Ord. 2010-33. Passed 12/21/2010.)
909.07 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
The property owner or applicant shall deposit or show evidence of a public liability
insurance policy insuring the City, as well as the person doing the work, against any loss or
damage to persons or property resulting from the acts or work being done, in such amounts as
shall be deemed adequate by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
909.08 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR SAFETY DEVICES.
The property owner or applicant shall provide such barriers and lighting devices to make
the excavation safe at all times.
909.09 OBSTRUCTIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
No person shall place, construct or build any obstructions such as pipes, ramps, metal
plates, etc. which will impede the flow of water or cause any inconvenience to the general public
in the public right-of-way. Should any person need to provide a temporary obstruction, it shall
require the approval of the Director of Public Works, or his designee.
909.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/1985; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/1989.)
(Ord. 4155. Passed 11/6/2002; Ord. 2010-33. Passed 12/21/2010; Ord. 2017-54. Passed 12/19/2017.)
ARTICLE 910
Trees
910.01 Definitions.
910.02 Enforcement.
910.03 Planting and control of trees and shrubs.
910.04 Permit required to plant, treat or remove in public
areas.
910.05 Permit contents; fee.
910.06 Fastening materials to trees.
910.07 Obstructing passage of air, water to roots.
910.08 Protection of trees.
910.09 Spraying trees.
910.10 Tree surgeon to do work; license, fee.
910.11 Property owner's privileges.
910.12 Public nuisances.
910.13 Permits to public utilities.
910.14 Cooperation with other City Departments.
910.15 Interference with Director.
910.16 Planting of trees by the City.
910.17 Assessments for Public Improvements.
910.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Cutting, defacing trees when setting poles - See S.U. & P.S.
Art. 907
910.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following meanings shall apply:
(a) "Person" includes all firms, associations, and
corporations, and persons connected with such firms,
associations, and corporations.
(b) "Public area” includes all parks, streets, and any
planting area between streets and property lines.
(c) "Trees” includes shrubs and all woody vegetation.
(d) "Director" means the Director of Public Works.
(e) “Caliper”- a measure of trunk diameter taken at six
inches above the root flare.
ARTICLE 910 2
(f) “Licensed arborist”-an individual who holds a current
license to perform arboricultural work on public property trees
within the City of Bethlehem.
(g) “Replacement tree(s)”-a tree or trees required to be
planted in place of a tree or parts thereof, removed from public
areas.
(h) “Public Right-of-Way” –Land between private property
lines dedicated and reserved for use by the general public as
roads, streets, highways and other roadway purposes.
(i) “Root flare”- the outward curve at the base of a tree
where the trunk transitions into roots.
(j) “Street Tree” - a tree the base of which lies wholly or
partially within a public right-of-way.
(k) “Public improvement” – for purposes of this Article, the
planting, maintaining, trimming, transplanting, removal and
protection of trees.
(l) "Owner." The owner of record of a property, based upon
the city's real estate registry or, if not in the registry, on
the tax assessment records of the city or of either Lehigh or
Northampton County. The term may include any person in whom is
vested all or any part of the legal or equitable title to the
property or who has charge, care or control of the property as
agent, executor, administrator, assignee, receiver, trustee,
guardian, lessee or mortgagee in possession.
(Ord. 2776. Passed 5/26/81; Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.02 ENFORCEMENT.
The Director shall enforce the regulations as set forth in
this Article. (Ord. 2776. Passed 5/26/81.)
910.03 PLANTING AND CONTROL OF TREES.
(a) The Director shall have charge and control of all trees
growing now or hereafter in any public area of the City, and
shall have the power to plant and maintain or order the
maintenance of such trees, in accordance with this Article.
(b) All decisions of a physiological, entomological and
pathological nature relating to the disposition of any tree or
group of trees that may be in question in any particular instance
shall originate from the City Forester.
(Ord. 2776. Passed 5/26/81; Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
ARTICLE 910 3
910.04 PERMIT REQUIRED TO PLANT, TREAT OR REMOVE IN PUBLIC
AREAS.
(a) No person shall hereafter plant, move, spray, cut,
remove, prune, fertilize, inject, climb with spikes or with the
assistance of rope, remove or damage any guard or device placed
to protect any tree, cut above or below ground, disturb or alter
any tree on any public area of the City of Bethlehem, nor cause
such acts to be done by others, without first obtaining
permission from the Director, who shall issue the permission if,
in his judgment, the work is necessary, and the proposed methods
of workmanship are of a satisfactory nature. A permit shall not
be required to cultivate and water. All tree work shall be
carried out in conformity with the current Arboricultural
Specifications and Standards or Practice prepared by the City
Forester.
(b) As a condition to any permit to remove any tree on a
public area, or any portion of a tree that is on a public area,
the Director may require that the permittee plant one or more
trees in place of the one removed. Whenever any such tree has
been removed or destroyed pursuant to any such conditional
permit, it shall be unlawful for the permittee to fail, refuse or
neglect to plant another tree or other trees of the type, size
and at the location specified in the permit, within the time
specified by the Director. In instances where aesthetics,
desirability of species, or general utility is concerned, all
decisions should reflect the professional opinion of the City
Forester. The City Forester will then issue the recommendation
of approval or disapproval to the Director for his issuance or
rejection of the proper permit.
(c) In those situations where the replacement tree can be
planted on a public area at a location adjacent to the tree
removed and adhere to the Arboricultural Specifications and
Standards of Practice, then the stump and exposed roots of the
tree removed must be leveled four inches below the ground surface
and filled in with acceptable type soil. In those situations
where the replacement tree cannot be planted on a public area at
a location adjacent to the tree removed, then the stump and
exposed roots must be leveled to a width and depth below the
ground surface to allow the planting of a replacement tree in the
same location as the tree removed, as long as the Arboricultural
Specifications and Standards of Practice are adhered to. The City
Forester will issue a recommendation for the location of the
replacement tree to the Director, or his designee, for approval
or disapproval.
(d) Permits shall be posted at the jobsite for the duration
of the project until final inspection is performed. The permit
shall be posted near the front entrance and visible from the
ARTICLE 910 4
public right-of-way.
(e) Replacement trees shall be planted within six months of
the issue date on the approved permit or as directed by the City
Forester. All replacement trees planted shall be single-stemmed
and a minimum of two inches (2”) in caliper, with the trunk free
of branches to a minimum of six feet (6’) above the ground. All
replacement trees and newly planted trees shall have a straight
trunk and well spaced branches so that subsequent pruning shall
achieve eight feet (8’) of clearance over sidewalks and fourteen
feet (14’) of clearance over roadways as the tree matures. Any
exceptions shall require authorization from the City Forester or
the Director.
(f) Required replacements which have not been planted by the
property owner within the six month period may be planted by the
City or the City’s authorized agent at the expense of the
property owner. An administration fee of three hundred dollars
($300.00) plus all other costs such as Auditor’s fees, the cost
of the replacement tree(s), overhead costs, planting costs,
County Recorder’s fees, maintenance fees, etc. shall be the
responsibility of the owner of record.
(g) Any replacements or newly planted trees that do not, in
the opinion of the City Forester, meet the requirements as found
in this article or that do not conform to the City’s current
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice, may,
without additional notice to the property owner, be removed and
be replaced by the City or the City’s agent and all costs
associated with such work shall be assessed to the property
owner.
(Ord. 2776. Passed 5/26/81; Ord. 3481. Passed 5/19/92; Ord.
2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.05 PERMIT CONTENTS; FEE; INSPECTION.
(a) Every written permit issued by the Director shall
describe the work to be done, specify the species or variety,
size, nursery grade, location, briefly specify the method of
planting, method of support and trimming of all trees concerned,
and contain a definite expiration date. Any permit may be
declared void if its terms are violated.
(b) A non-refundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00),
payable to the City of Bethlehem, shall be charged for each
permit application. A separate permit application shall be
required for each property.
(c) Upon completion of the work described in the permit, the
permittee shall notify the Bureau of Urban Forestry within 10
days so that an inspection may be scheduled.
ARTICLE 910 5
(Ord. 3010. Passed 9/3/85; Ord. 3927. Passed 1/5/99; Ord. 2010-
34. Passed 12/21/10; Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.06 FASTENING MATERIALS TO TREES.
No person shall fasten any sign, wire, rope or other
material to or around or drive any nail or spike through any tree
or shrub in a public area in the City, except by permission of
the Director and except in emergencies such as storms or
accidents. (Ord. 1853 §1. Passed 2/18/64.)
910.07 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF AIR, WATER TO ROOTS.
(a) No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon
any public area of the City any stone, earth fill, brick, sand,
concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of
water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing
therein.
(b) No person shall fail to provide and maintain sufficient
open, weed-free space, with appropriate soil and mulch, around
the base of a street tree, or to remove an amount of concrete,
brick, asphalt or other covering to allow for such open, mulched,
weed-free area after being given notice to do so. Failure to
comply may result in the City or the City’s agent performing the
work and the charges shall be assessed to the owner.
(Ord. 1853 §1. Passed 2/18/64; Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.08 PROTECTION OF TREES.
(a) No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy
any tree, or permit any fire to burn where such fire will injure
any portion of any tree in any public area of the City.
(b) No person shall knowingly permit any leak to exist in
any gas pipe within the root zone of any tree in a public area.
(c) No person shall permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain
or be emptied on or about any tree in a public area.
(d) No person shall knowingly permit electric wires to come
in contact with trees in any public areas unless protected by
approved methods.
(e) No person shall attach any electrical insulation to any
tree in a public area or shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or
trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any
tree in a public area without first obtaining permission from the
ARTICLE 910 6
Director.
(f) During building operations, the builder shall erect
suitable protective barriers around trees in public areas apt to
be injured.
(g) Whenever the Director determines it is necessary to
move, protect or cut off the electricity from service wires so he
can safely and properly do his work, he shall serve written
notice on the owners of such wires and such owners shall comply
with such orders within twenty-four hours after the service of
such notice.
(h) No person shall place salt, brine, oil or other
substances injurious to plant growth in any place in such a
manner as to injure any tree in a public area.
(i) No person shall build any fire or station any tar
kettle, road roller or other engine in such a manner that the
heat vapors or fumes therefrom may injure any tree growing in any
public area.
(j) No person is permitted to lay any sidewalk along or to
open, construct, curb or pave any street or do any like act so as
to interfere with or do injury to any tree in a public area
without the consent of the Director.
(k) Shovels and all other implements, machines and tools
shall be used or operated in such a manner as not to damage or
destroy any tree or plant in any public area.
(l) Where in authorized excavations it becomes necessary to
expose or cut roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be
the duty of the contractor to protect such roots under advice
from the Director.
(m) Any unauthorized removal or damage that necessitates
removal of a tree on public property shall be subject to a
minimum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per tree. Both
the abutting property owner and the person responsible for the
actions shall be held jointly and severally liable for the fine
and restitution to include replacement tree(s).
(Ord. 1853 §1. Passed 2/18/64. Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.09 SPRAYING TREES.
All spraying of trees shall be done with approved materials
as regulated under current Pennsylvania Pesticide Control Act.
(Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
ARTICLE 910 7
910.10 LICENSED ARBORIST TO DO WORK; LICENSE, FEE.
(a) All pruning, cutting, removal, spraying, fertilizing,
moving, and injecting shall be performed only by a person holding
an arborist’s license issued by the City of Bethlehem. A
separate license is required for each individual performing tree
work on public property trees.
(b) A City of Bethlehem Arborist License shall be issued to
those persons who have passed an examination prepared by and
administered by the City Forester, or to those persons who have
submitted documentation of current certification as an arborist
with the International Society of Arboriculture. Applications for
the arborist exam may be made upon payment of a non-refundable
fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee payable to the City of
Bethlehem. This fee shall cover the first year’s license fee if
the applicant receives a passing grade on the exam and is issued
a license. Applicants with ISA certification shall submit a copy
of their current ISA certification along with the application and
non-refundable fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee.
Thereafter, a yearly license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00),
payable to the City of Bethlehem, shall be levied for each
license issued to a commercial arborist and a fee of five dollars
($5.00) shall be levied for each license issued to a property
owner. The license issued to the property owner shall entitle
the licensee to perform work on trees only on property which the
licensee owns. Licenses issued to a commercial arborist shall be
renewed yearly without examination; however, the City Forester
may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license or require reexamination
of any licensee if, in the opinion of the City
Forester, the licensee has not performed in a satisfactory
manner. License renewals which have lapsed for a period of one
(1) year or longer shall require re-examination.
(c) Applicants for a City of Bethlehem Arborist License
shall meet the following minimum insurance requirements as set
forth below:
All commercial arborists are required to obtain General
Liability Insurance in the amount no less than of $1,000,000,
Products and Completed Operations Insurance in an amount not less
than $1,000,000, and Workers’ Compensation Insurance with
statutory limits of liability. Other than Workers’ Compensation,
the City of Bethlehem shall be named as an additional insured in
all such insurance policies. Those commercial arborists who do
not have employees, and property owners need not maintain
Workmen's Compensation Insurance. (Ord. 3927. Passed 1/5/99.)
Property owners must show evidence of their homeowner's or
liability policy which must be in effect at the time that they
apply for the City of Bethlehem's Arborist License.
ARTICLE 910 8
Each applicant shall submit to the City Solicitor proof that
the applicant maintains insurance coverage as required by this
section. No license may be issued without such proof.
(d) Safety Equipment - Licensed arborists are required to
use safety equipment including but not limited to protective
helmets, safety boots, goggles, safety harnesses and climbing
rope. Failure to use safety equipment will result in the
revocation of the arborist’s license.
(e) Concerning the spraying of pesticides and herbicides of
trees, growing on the public planting areas, a permit for this
work shall be issued only to those City of Bethlehem licensed
arborists who are certified under the Pennsylvania Pesticide
Control Act.
(f) All licensed arborists operating within the City of
Bethlehem shall display the company name and phone number on both
sides of all vehicles. Letters and numbers shall have a minimum
height of three inches (3”) and be easily read from a distance of
fifty feet (50’). Non-compliance with this requirement shall
result in license revocation.
(Ord. 2776. Passed 5/26/81; Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.11 PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES, DUTIES, and
PRIVILEGES
(a) Property owners shall be responsible to maintain trees
and other vegetation within and along the public right-of-way
abutting their property. Property owners minimum obligations
shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The maintenance, safety, health, and appearance of
trees within the public right-of-way, including:
(A) Maintaining mature trees to provide clearance
of eight feet (8’) over sidewalks and fourteen
feet (14’) over roadways.
(B) Pruning to allow illumination of the street by
a street light
(C) Pruning to ensure that street lights, traffic
signals, street signs, poles, standards, street
light wire, and all directional and regulatory
signs are not obstructed or impacted by trees or
other vegetation.
(D) Removing dead, diseased, damaged, or decayed
ARTICLE 910 9
limbs endangering the public right-of-way.
(E) Structural pruning to establish good form and
achieve required clearances as found in
910.11(a)(1)(A)
(2) Pruning or removal of trees and other vegetation
encroaching unto the public right-of-way.
(3) Removal of fallen limbs and other debris.
(4) Replacing any removed or missing tree as determined
by the City Forester.
(b) Minor tree work may be done by the individual homeowners
to trees planted in public areas on the homeowner’s property,
provided the homeowner had obtained prior approval from the
Director. The Director, or his designee, the City Forester,
shall advise the property owner whether or not the proposed work
is minor. All minor tree work shall be carried out in conformity
with the current Arboricultural Specifications and Standards or
Practice prepared by the City Forester. Additionally, property
owners must obtain the necessary licenses under Articles 910.04
and 910.10, and present proof of homeowners insurance each time
any license is applied for.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse, or
neglect to comply with an order of the Director or the City
Forester issued under this article within the time specified in
the order.
(Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.12 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(a) Any tree or shrub or parts thereof growing upon private
property or in the public right-of-way but overhanging or
interfering with the use of any street, park or public area of
the City, endangering the life, health, safety or property of the
public is a public nuisance. Such nuisance shall not be
permitted to exist and the property owner shall be responsible to
eliminate the nuisance by removing the tree or shrub in total or
by removing the interfering limbs and branches, all at his
expense. Should the property owner allow such public nuisance to
continue to exist, the Director shall notify the owner as noted
in (b) below.
(b) The owner shall be notified in writing of the existence
of the nuisance, and given thirty days for its correction or
removal. If not corrected or removed within the time allotted,
the Director shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed,
and the cost shall be assessed to the owner. The written notice
ARTICLE 910 10
of the Director in no way removes the property owner's
responsibility to correct the public nuisance.
(Ord. 3063. Passed 3/4/86.)
910.13 PERMITS TO PUBLIC UTILITIES.
(a) All permits issued for the installation and/or
maintenance of public utilities that affect trees in public areas
shall be approved by the Director.
(Ord. 2776. Passed 5/26/81.)
(b) When a permit is issued to a public utility to trim
public trees, or to do other operations affecting trees in public
areas, the work shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner
and in conformity with the rules, regulations and orders of the
Public Utility Commission, i.e the natural method, drop
crotch/lateral trimming, top trimming or side trimming.(Ord.
2776. Passed 5/26/81; Ord. 3210. Passed 9/6/88; Ord. 3947.
Passed 4/6/99.)
(c) The City Forester shall have the authority and it shall
be his/her duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a
permit issued in accordance with the terms of this article. (Ord.
1853 §1. Passed 2/18/64; Ord. 3947. Passed 4/6/99. Ord. 2014-34.
Passed 12/2/14.)
910.14 COOPERATION WITH OTHER CITY DEPARTMENTS.
(a) There shall be close cooperation with the Director and
other City departments when their common work affects trees and
shrubs in public areas. When, in the course of performing their
normal routine duties, it becomes necessary for City personnel to
perform minor arboricultural work, permit and licensing
requirements may be waived. The Director shall determine whether
the proposed work is minor.
(b) The Bureaus of Electricity, Fire and Police should work
closely with the Director in the interest of trees and shrubs in
public areas and public safety.
(c) EMERGENCY WORK- When emergency measures become necessary
to provide public safety, restore utility service, or otherwise
mitigate the potential for damage to persons or property from
trees or other vegetation within, encroaching, or endangering the
public right-of-way, such work may be done by permission of any
member of the Departments of Police, Fire, Public Works, or Parks
and Public Property. City personnel may take action to allow
immediate response to dangerous or hazardous situations and the
costs associated with such action shall be assessed to the
property owner. Such emergencies shall not require the City to
give notice to the property owner of such action, but if notice
is given, it may be verbal, or written when possible. The
ARTICLE 910 11
Director shall be notified within 24 hours of such action.
(Ord. 1853 §1. Passed 2/18/64. Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.15 INTERFERENCE WITH DIRECTOR.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the
Director or any of his assistants in the execution or enforcement
of this Article. (Ord. 1853 §1. Passed 2/18/64.)
910.16 PLANTING OF TREES BY THE CITY.
(a) The City may decide to plant trees in the planting area
of the public right-of-way. When such a decision is made in a
proposed development, the expense of purchasing and planting
trees shall be the developer's. The developer shall also be
responsible for the trees during the guarantee period. When the
decision to plant trees involves an existing established street
not part of a proposed development, the expense of purchasing and
planting the trees shall be the City's. The responsibility
during the guarantee period shall be the City's or the vendor's
when the trees are planted under a contract.
(b) The Director or his designee, the City Forester, shall
select the location and the tree type.
(c) Where applicable, tree wells and/or tree grates shall
be installed flush with the adjoining surface so as to not create
a safety hazard.
(d) When a tree is to be planted by the City in the
planting area of the public right-of-way, the property owner
shall be notified by certified mail. The property owner shall
have 30 days to comment or respond. The property owner shall
have the right of refusal for just cause, to have a tree planted
at the designated location.
(e) The property owner shall be responsible to maintain the
planted tree after the guarantee period and also the tree well
and/or grate, if installed, in accordance with the other
provisions of this ordinance. In addition, the tree grate must
be maintained flush with the adjoining surface.
(f) A property owner may plant a tree(s) in the planting
area of the public right-of-way subject to approval by the
Director or his designee, the City Forester, and in accordance
with all provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 3320 §1. Passed 2/20/90.)
910.17 ASSESSMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
(a) Public improvement costs, including administrative fees,
ARTICLE 910 12
may be assessed against the owner(s) of the lot(s) abutting the
street, sidewalk or right-of-way upon which tree is located. If
there are multiple lots, the assessment amount will be equally
split between the lots improved.
(b) The City shall give personal notice of the assessment to
the owner of each property being assessed, in accord with Section
4503-A of the Third Class City Code. The notice will indicate
that the owner has 30 days from receipt of the notice to appeal
the assessment, as set forth in Section 4504-A of the Third Class
City Code.
(c) In accord with Section 4507-A of the Third Class City
Code, the City may enter into installment agreements for
assessments that are greater than $1,000. Any such agreement
shall be in writing. Such agreements will have an interest rate
of 10% per year, unless a bond was issued for the improvement, in
which case the interest rate will be determined by section 9 of
the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law.
(d) The City Treasurer, Department Head, or the Mayor, may
use all available means, including those listed in Section 4508-A
of the Third Class City Code, to collect unpaid assessments.
(Ord. 2014-34. Passed 12/2/14.)
910.99 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89.)
ARTICLE 911
Water Regulations
911.01 Definitions.
911.02 Application for new service.
911.03 Service connections.
911.04 Customer's service line.
911.05 Discontinuance of service.
911.06 Restoration of service.
911.07 Water used for building purposes.
911.08 Meters.
911.09 Fire service.
911.10 Main extensions.
911.11 Damage to system and theft of water.
911.12 Water conservation contingency plan.
911.13 Water use standards for certain plumbing fixtures.
911.14 Cross connection control and backflow prevention.
911.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Water supply - See 3rd Class §3501-3572
(53 P.S. §38501-38572)
Water and sewer assessment - See S.U. and P.S. Art. 905
Rates and charges - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 913
911.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
Article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(a) Applicant. Any party applying for water service or a
water main extension.
(b) Bureau of Water. A Bureau of the Department of Water and
Sewer Resources, City of Bethlehem Pennsylvania.
(c) City. The City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
(d) City Service Line. The line through which water is
transmitted from the water main to the curb line.
(e) Corporation Stop. An outside shutoff valve on the water
main.
ARTICLE 911 2
(f) Cross Connection. A link or channel between pipes
carrying City water and pipes, carrying water from other
sources, e.g., wells, streams, etc.
(g) Curb Stop. An outside shutoff valve on the water service
(h) Customer. A party contracting with the City for service.
(i) Customer Service Line. The line through which water is
transmitted from curb line to user.
(j) Fire Flow Test. The flowing of water in a sprinkler
system, standpipe system or fire hydrant for testing
performance of it. (Ord. 3568. Passed 9/7/93.)
(k) Fire Line. A water line installed exclusively for fire
protection in a building or to a fire hydrant installed
on private property.
(1) Improved Property. Any property upon which a dwelling,
capable of human habitation, has been constructed.
(m) Landlord. A customer who owns a rental property.
(n) Meter. A device used for the purpose of measuring water
consumption including exterior remote reading device and
wiring.
(o) User. Anyone who creates a demand for water and engages
in the consumption thereof.
(p) Water Main. Line through which water is transmitted
throughout the distribution system.
(q) Water Service. The City service line, the meter, and
meter setting. (Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
911.02 APPLICATION FOR NEW SERVICE.
(a) Water will be furnished upon written application by a
person or persons desiring introduction of water service
to a property or properties upon approval of such
application by the City. Forms for all applications are
available at the Department of Water and Sewer Resources,
10 East Church Street, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE 911 3
(b) New water service will not be provided outside the City's
franchised water service area, as approved by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, unless the
following conditions are met:
(1) The official approval of the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission must be obtained prior to
granting approval to above-mentioned service
request, provided PUC approval is necessary.
(2) The water service application must have the
approval of Bethlehem City Council, upon the
recommendation of the Water and Sewer Resources
Department. The Department will only make such a
recommendation if it can be proven that the City
would benefit from the expansion of its
distribution system, and that such expansion, in
fact, would not be detrimental to the City's
ability to provide adequate service to its existing
customers.
911.03 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
(a) City's Service Line. Upon proper application, the City
will install and maintain a service line from the main to
the curb line.
(b)Size and Kind of Service Line. The City reserves the right
to determine the size and kind of the service line, from
the main to the curb line and also from the curb line to
the user to be served. Normally, 3/4" size lines will be
furnished to serve single dwellings unless a larger size
has been applied for and approved by the Bureau of Water.
The pipe from the curb line to the user shall be
furnished, installed and maintained by the owner of the
property.
(c) Separate Trench. No service pipe shall be laid in the
same trench with drain or sewer pipe, or any other
facility of another public service company, nor within
three feet of any open excavation or walk unless an
exception is granted by the Bureau of Water. When
installed in the same trench with sewer, the service line
must be shelved at least 18" above the invert of the
drain, sewer line or other facility. In addition, an 18-
inch horizontal separation must be maintained.
ARTICLE 911 4
(d) Independent Connection for Each Building. Each separate
building and single dwelling shall be provided with an
independent connection from the main. However, single
garages and apartments on the same lot may be supplied
from a single service connection, with the approval of the
Bureau of Water. Every meter shall have its own curb stop.
(Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
(e) Requirement to Connect to Water Supply System. Any
improved property on which water is used for human
consumption, which abuts the water supply system of the
City, shall connect to the water supply system of the
City within 90 days of a notice by the City to the owner
of the improved property to connect. Such notice to
connect may be given or served at any time after a water
service main is in place that can deliver water to the
improved property. Such notice shall be given or served
upon the owner by the Director of Water and Sewer
Resources by certified mail or in person as authorized by
the Director. (Ord. 3431 - Passed 9/3/91.)
911.04 CUSTOMER'S SERVICE LINE.
The customer's service line is the line through which water is
transmitted from the curb line to the user location and which
provides water service for the owner or tenant of any property being
served with City water.
In the case of any rental property, the landlord shall be
responsible for adhering to all City rules and regulations,
including payment of all water bills.
All connections, service lines and fixtures furnished by the
customer shall be maintained by him in good order; and all valves,
meters and appliances furnished and owned by the City and on the
property of the customer shall be protected properly by said
customer. All leaks in the customer service line or any other pipe
or fixture, in or upon the premises supplied, must be repaired
immediately by the customer. On failure to make such repairs with
reasonable dispatch, the City, upon five (5) days notice, will
discontinue service.
Service lines from the curb line to the user shall be laid at a
depth of not less than four (4') feet. Materials and installation
shall be in accordance with City specifications.
ARTICLE 911 5
The City shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any
portion of the customer service line, or for any damage done by
water escaping there from, or from lines or fixtures on customer's
property.
The City may require a deposit to cover the cost of City
service line in subdivisions or any property programmed for future
development. Deposit shall be returned at such time as connection to
improved property is made and billing for water service commences.
Where renewal of the City service line is found to be
necessary, the City will renew said City service line in the same
location and the same size. If the customer, for his own
convenience, desires the new City service line at some other
location or in a larger size, such relocation and increased size
will be made by the City, provided the customer pays for the excess
cost involved in complying with customer's request.
If the renewal of the City service line is predicated on a
customer request, renewal will be accomplished only if the customer
service line is renewed prior to the renewal of the City service
line and only if the City service line has not been renewed already.
(Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
911.05 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
(a) By Customer. All agreements covering service for water
shall continue in force unless and until reasonable
notice is given of a desire to terminate the service.
Water will be turned off from any premises upon the
request of the customer without in any way affecting the
existing agreements for service. Reasonable notice is
construed, as a minimum of one working day advance
notification of time the turn-off is desired.
In the case of a rental property, the City will not
terminate water service to said property simply to
accommodate the wishes of an owner who desires to use
said shut-off as a means to evict his tenants.
(b) By City. Service may be discontinued after the City has
served the user with the ten (10) day notice, for any of
the following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other property or
purpose other than that described in the
application;
ARTICLE 911 6
(2) For willful waste of water through improper or
imperfect pipes, fixtures or otherwise, such as
leaks in pipes and fixtures;
(3) For tampering with any service line, curb stop,
meter, or meter setting;
(4) In case of abandonment of the premises;
(5) For nonpayment of any charges accruing under the
service;
(6) For refusal of reasonable access to the property
for purposes of inspecting, reading, maintaining or
removing meters;
(7) For making or refusing to remove any cross
connections;
(8) For not complying with mandatory water conservation
rules and regulations imposed by the City during
times of limited water supply;
(9) For violation of any of the rules and regulations
governing the use of water.
(c) Discontinuing Service. Where service is discontinued by
the City as in 911.05(b) a discontinuance of service
charge of thirty-five ($35.00) dollars will be assessed.
(d) Turning On-Off Without Authority. The customer shall not
turn the water on or off at any corporation stop or curb
stop, or disconnect or remove the meter, or permit its
disconnection and removal.
(e) Emergency Turn-Off. As necessity may arise in case of
breakdown, emergency, or for any other unavoidable cause,
the City shall have the right to cut off the water supply
temporarily in order to make necessary repairs
connections, etc. The City will use all reasonable and
practical measures to notify the customer or user of such
discontinuance of service. In such case, the City shall
not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by
the customer or user or any claim against it at any time
for interruption of service, lessening of the supply,
inadequate pressure, poor quality of water, or for any
ARTICLE 911 7
causes beyond its control. When a supply of water is to be
temporarily cut off, notice will be given when
practicable, to all customers or users affected.
(f) Reserve Supply. The City shall have the right, at all
times, to issue restrictions on the unlimited use of
water. Such restrictions will be issued whenever the
public welfare may require it, for example, to reserve a
sufficient supply of water at all times in the City's
reservoirs to provide for fire and other emergencies, or
any cogent reason.
(g) Drought Contingency Plan. In order to prepare the
users in the service area for periods of limited water
supply in times of drought, the city shall have the right
to develop a Drought Contingency Plan. The goal of this
plan shall be to help the water supply system to match
the demand in the service area with the dwindling supply.
(Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
911.06 RESTORATION OF SERVICE.
(a) Change of Ownership. Upon change of ownership of the
property, continuation of the water service is contingent
upon submission of a new application by the succeeding
owner. The City shall have the right to discontinue
water service until such application has been made and
turn-on fee paid.
A new customer shall not be responsible for a previous
customer's back billing or delinquent accounts.
(b) Restoral of Service. Service will be restored when the
conditions under which such service was discontinued are
corrected, and all back billings for service including
the discontinuance of service charge and the restoral
charge of thirty-five ($35.00) dollars each are paid.
(Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.) No discontinuance of
service charge or restoral charge will be assessed when
service is discontinued by the City as in 911.05(e) -
Emergency Turn-Off.
911.07 WATER USED FOR BUILDING PURPOSES.
(a) Building Water Charge
1) Out-of-City. If water is required for building
purposes, a charge shall be made at the time
ARTICLE 911 8
application is made for water service. This charge
will be one quarterly minimum water billing based
on the size of the City service line servicing the
facility.
2) In City. For in-City construction the above charge
shall be levied at the time of building permit
application.
3) Restriction. Water for building purposes will be
used only for actual construction of the building
and shall not be used to facilitate landscaping or
other purposes. (Ord. 3025 §1. Passes 10/15/85.)
911.08 METERS.
(a) Installation and Meter Size. The City will furnish and
maintain all meters necessary to the furnishing of its
water service. If customer desires additional meters for
any reason for his convenience in recording use, such
meters shall be furnished by the customer at his expense.
City will install meters ranging in size from 5/8 inch to
and including one (1) inch meters. In the case of meters
larger than one (1) inch in size, the customer must
provide, at his expense, all the plumbing required for
the meter setup. The City will then provide the meter.
The meter also includes any exterior remote reading
device and wiring. Should the customer determine, due to
a change in use, that a larger meter size is needed, such
meter shall be provided by the City, provided customer
agrees to increased customer charge and customer agrees
to pay for the excess cost of the larger size meter.
(b) All Services to be Metered. All new services shall be
metered services. The City reserves the right to approve
the size and the location of the meter and any exterior
remote reading device.
Water may not be introduced into an occupied premises
without first installing a meter, following approval of
application for service (See Section 911.07 for Water
Used for Building Purposes).
(c) Location. The meter will be set after customer has had
the plumbing arranged to receive the meter at a
convenient point approved by the City so as to measure
all the water being supplied. Protection for the meter
shall be provided by the customer. Availability of
ARTICLE 911 9
access to the meter shall be maintained at all times.
Relocation of the meter for customer's convenience shall
be at the customer's expense.
The exterior remote reading device is to be installed a
minimum of four (4) feet and a maximum of five (5) feet
off the ground at a location to be determined by the City.
Protection of the exterior remote reading device shall be
provided by the customer. No vegetation may be planted or
allowed to remain in front of the remote reading device.
Availability of safe, unrestricted and unobstructed access
to the remote reading device shall be maintained by the
customer at all times. The customer may not tamper with or
alter the remote reading device in any way.
The meter and backflow prevention device shall be
installed within the customer's premises at a location
that provides for convenient access for future
maintenance. Customer shall reconfigure their internal
piping to accommodate installation of these devices, if
necessary. If adequate space is not available within the
customer premises, the customer shall enlarge or
reconfigure it. If this is not possible, customer shall
provide an approved above grade enclosure located outside
of the customer's premises to house these devices. Below
grade vaults shall not be permitted.
If the meter or backflow prevention device is upgraded or
replaced, the customer shall provide adequate space within
their premises for the new devices. Customer shall also be
responsible for reconfiguration of their internal piping
to accommodate installation of the new devices. If
adequate space is not available within the customer
premises, the customer shall enlarge or reconfigure it. If
this is not possible, customer shall provide an
approved above grade enclosure located
outside of the customer's premises to house these
devices. Below grade vaults shall not be permitted.
(d) Bypasses. Bypasses, valves, check valves, backflow
preventers, and pressure reducing valves, etc. as
specified in the City Standard must be
installed according to the meter size and location. No
bypasses shall be installed around meters unless approved
by the Bureau of Water. Such approval will be withheld
unless the bypass is metered.
ARTICLE 911 10
(e) Responsibility for Damage. Meters will be maintained by
the City so far as ordinary wear and tear are concerned,
but damage due to freezing, hot water or external causes
due to negligence of the customer, shall be paid for by
the customer.
The charge for the reinstallation and changing of a meter
when removed because damaged in any way due to the
negligence of customer, shall be actual cost of removing,
replacing, repairing and testing.
(f) Customer Charge. Every meter is installed subject to a
monthly or quarterly charge in accordance with the rates
thereof for which no quantity of water will be allowed
without additional charge. Such customer charge shall be
payable whether or not the customer uses any water. In
cases of fractional bills covering less than the monthly
or quarterly customer charge, the charge shall be
prorated, such as when ownership of a property changes.
(g) Notification of City of Non-Working Meter. The customer
shall notify the City of damage to or the non-working of
the meter as soon as it comes to his attention.
(h) Registration Conclusive. No adjustment of amount
registered is permitted for any reason except malfunction
of meter, or upon a positive showing by the customer in
instances of excessive usage that the usage resulted from
circumstances beyond his ability to control.
(i) Disputed Account. In case of a disputed account involving
accuracy of a meter, such meter will be tested upon the
request of the customer in conformity with the following
rules:
(1) Customer shall request in writing the testing of
the meter.
(2) Meter shall be sealed in the presence of the customer
before removal to the meter shop.
(3) Seal shall be broken and meter tested in the
presence of the customer or his authorized agent.
(j) Adjustment of Bills for Meter Error.
(1) Fast Meters - If, upon test of any meter, the meter
is found to have an error of more than four (4%)
ARTICLE 911 11
percent fast, the City shall refund to the customer
the overcharge, based upon the corrected meter
reading for a period equal to one-half the time
elapsed since the last previous test, but not to
exceed twelve (12) months. If the period of
registration error can be definitely fixed, the
overcharge shall be computed for such period, but
not to exceed three (3) years. This meter will not
be returned to service until certified as accurate.
(2) Slow Meters - If, upon test of any meter, the meter
is found to have an error of more than four (4%)
percent slow, the City may render a bill for the
water consumed, but not covered by bills previously
rendered, for a period equal to one-half of the
time elapsed since the last previous test, but not
to exceed twelve (12) months. If the period of
registration error can be definitely fixed, the
charge may be computed for such a period, but not
to exceed three (3) years. This meter will not be
returned to service until certified as accurate.
(3) Non-Registering of Meters - If a meter is found not
to have been registering for any period, the City
shall compute the water used by taking the average of
the water used for the nearest meter reading period
preceding and the meter reading period immediately
following the date when the meter was found to be not
registering, which amount shall be assumed to be the
amount of water used by the customer during the
billing period in which the meter was found not to
have registered. Exceptions will be made to this rule
only where the facts clearly show that the stated
method does not give the correct consumption for the
period. This meter will not be returned to service
until certified as accurate.
(4) If a meter is found to be accurate, the fee for
testing each water meter having an outlet not
exceeding one (1") inch shall be $38.00; for other
water meters having an outlet not exceeding two
(2") inches, the fee shall be $40.00.
(k) Readings. All metered accounts shall have a minimum of
one actual reading at intervals not exceeding twelve
months (Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.) Except for
accounts with meters having an electronic communications
register and remote reading device which shall have a
ARTICLE 911 12
minimum of one actual reading at intervals not exceeding
five (5) years, as well as every time the property is
sold. It shall be the owner's responsibility to make his
property accessible for at least one (1) meter reading
per year except for properties with meters having an
electronic communications register and remote reading
device which shall be made accessible for at least one
(1) meter reading every five (5) years, as well as every
time the property is sold.
911.09 FIRE SERVICE.
(a) Hydrant Installation: Public. Wherever main extensions are
made, the City will propose the installation of fire
hydrants in accordance with accepted standards. Upon
agreement of the political subdivision concerned to pay
the yearly rental of such hydrant, the City will provide
fire hydrant materials for installation by the
applicant's contractor. The City will not propose
installation of, or furnish materials for, fire hydrants
in any municipality where the size of the existing street
main and surrounding distribution system and the available
pressure on said street main fail to meet acceptable
standards. All fire hydrants will be maintained by the
City.
(b) Hydrant Installation: Private. When a request is made
for private fire protection, a fire hydrant will be
provided by the City for installation by the applicant's
contractor.
(c) Automatic Devices, Hydrants: Private. A fire line, to
be used for fire service, will be required for automatic
sprinklers or other fire service devices located inside
of a building or buildings. Fire hydrants located
outside of the buildings may be connected to said fire
line, without additional charge.
(d) Allowable Use. Except for fire, only persons authorized
by the City shall take water from any fire hydrant, and
no fire hydrants shall be used for any other purpose,
except with the written approval and consent of the City.
(e) Change of Location. Change in the location of public
fire hydrants may be made upon written request and
approval by the City. Such relocation will be paid for
by the requestor.
ARTICLE 911 13
(f) Approval. The City reserves the right to refuse an
application for fire protection where, in the judgment of
the City, such service is not reasonable or practical.
(Ord. 3025 §1. Passed 10/15/85.)
(g) Fire Flow Test. All customers or their authorized agent
must notify the City at 610-865-7077 at least three (3)
business days prior to conducting a fire flow test. A fee
of $250.00 is required to be paid to conduct the test
during 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays. A fee of $385.00 is required to be
paid to conduct the test after normal business hours.
(Ord. 3568. Passed 9/7/93; Ord. 2010-1. Passed 1/19/10;
Ord. 2012-30. Passed 11/20/12.)
(h) Fire Pump Test. All customers or their authorized agent
must notify the City at 610-865-7077 at least three (3)
business days prior to conducting a fire pump test. A fee
of $130.00 per City personnel is required to be paid to
conduct the test during 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays. A fee of $200.00 is
required to be paid to conduct the test after normal
business hours. (Ord. 2012-30. Passed 11/20/12.)
911.10 MAIN EXTENSIONS.
Whenever the developer/owner ("Applicant") of a property within
the service territory of the City requests the City to extend its
distribution system to serve such property, the City will, subject
to certain terms and conditions, extend its distribution mains or
allow Applicant to extend the City's distribution mains.
The City will utilize an agreement defining the extension,
applicable cost (including taxes, if applicable), method of payment,
and refunds and/or credits, if applicable. Such agreement will be in
accord with the Public Utility Code, Title 66 Pa. C.S. §1303.
The City shall have the exclusive right to determine the type,
size, length and location of mains to be installed and the other
facilities required to render adequate service, including fire
service. The minimum pipe size for main extensions shall be 6 inches
per 52 Pa. Code Chapter 65.17(b). Applicants are responsible for
100% of the costs associated with the extension, including
materials, rights of way, installation, inspection and overhead.
However, the City may agree to share a portion of the cost of the
extension where the City determines that the extension will be
beneficial to the quality of service provided to existing customers.
ARTICLE 911 14
In determining the length of and necessity for any extension
required, the terminal point of such extension shall, in all cases,
be at that point in the curb line which extends entirely across the
frontage of the property for which water service is requested. A
street service connection will be provided only for customer service
lines that extend from the curb to the premises to be served which
are laid in a straight line at right angles to the curb line.
For purposes of this rule:
1. "Bona Fide Prospective Customer" shall mean any owner of an
existing developed premises having a curb line abutting on that part
of a street or public highway in which there is, or is to be,
located a distribution main of the City, who shall file a signed
application for a new street service connection to such premises and
for water service to begin immediately following installation of the
street service connection.
2. "Street Service Connection" shall mean a pipe with
appurtenances used to conduct water from a distribution main of the
City to the curb line of the premises.
When the City determines that an extension requested by an
Applicant qualifies for a credit/refund, said extension and
refund/credit shall be determined as follows:
The Applicant will deposit with the City upon execution of an
agreement an amount equal to:
(1) The Estimated Cost - The Estimated Cost of the Applicant's
Deposit shall include estimates of the cost of said main(s) and of
any other facilities which the City shall have decided are required
to render adequate service, less
(2) The Applicable Credit - The Applicable Credit shall be a
credit equal to the amount produced by multiplying (a) the average
Estimated Cost per foot of the extension by (b) thirty-five (35)
feet, and by multiplying the product thereof by (c) the number of
Bona Fide Prospective Customers who will be directly served by said
extension.
When an agreement calls for the refunding of deposits, the city
will refund to the Applicant, during the period of ten (10) years
from actual date of deposit, a Per-Customer Refund Amount for each
additional Bona Fide Prospective customer for whom a street service
connection shall be directly attached to such main extension, as
ARTICLE 911 15
distinguished from extensions or branches thereof; provided however,
that the total amount refunded shall not exceed the original
deposit, without interest, and that all or any part of the deposit
not refunded within said 10-year period shall become the property of
the City. The Per-Customer Refund Amount shall be an amount equal to
the average actual completed cost of thirty-five (35) feet of the
said extension.
At the conclusion of the project, there shall be a
reconciliation of the actual costs incurred to the amount of deposit
that has been paid. If the actual cost exceeds the deposit, the
Applicant shall be responsible for payment of the difference to the
City. If the deposit exceeds the actual cost, the City shall refund
the difference.
911.11 DAMAGE TO SYSTEM AND THEFT OF WATER.
Any owner or occupant of property which is serviced by the
water system of the City of Bethlehem who removes the seal installed
by the City, or who in any other way willfully causes damage to any
equipment in the system or who uses water for which the City is not
properly compensated, shall be considered in violation of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section
911.99. (Ord. 2949. Passed 7/3/84.) Nothing in this section shall be
construed as limiting the City's remedies at law or equity.
911.12 WATER CONSERVATION CONTINGENCY PLAN
(a) General.
If the City is experiencing a short-term supply shortage,
the City may request general conservation of inside water
uses and may impose mandatory conservation measures to
reduce or eliminate nonessential use of water.
(b) Voluntary Conservation
The City shall first request voluntary curtailment
of all non-essential uses of water.
(c) Mandatory Conservation
If voluntary cooperation does not achieve satisfactory
results, mandatory compliance will be imposed. If any
customer refuses to comply with such mandatory measures,
the City may either adjust the outside water valve
connection in a manner, which will restrict water flow by
up to 1/2, or otherwise restrict flow such as by the
ARTICLE 911 16
insertion of a plug device.
(d) Nonessential Uses of Water Include:
(1) The use of hoses, sprinklers, or other means for
sprinkling or watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns,
grass, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers,
or other vegetation.
(2) The use of water for washing automobiles, trucks,
trailers, trailer houses, or any other type of mobile
equipment.
(3) The washing of streets, driveways, parking lots,
service station aprons, office building, exteriors of
homes, sidewalks, apartments or other outdoor
surfaces.
(4) The operation of any ornamental fountain or other
structures making a similar use of water.
(5) The use of water for filling swimming or wading pools.
(6) The operation of any water-cooled comfort airconditioning,
which does not have water-conserving
equipment.
(7) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction
purposes or fire drills.
(8) The use of water to flush a sewer line or sewer
manhole.
(9) The use of water for commercial farms and nurseries
other than a bare minimum to preserve plants, crops,
and livestock.
(e) In addition to the provisions as set forth above, the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Council is authorized to
promulgate, adopt, and enforce a Water Rationing Plan by
virtue of the Emergency Management Services Code, 35 Pa.
C.S. £1701 et seq. as implemented by the Drought Emergency
Proclamation dated November 6, 1980.
(f) In the event of a drought emergency, as declared by a
Basin Commission and by a proclamation or executive order
issued by the Governor, the City of Bethlehem is
authorized to collect fines set forth in its Local Water
ARTICLE 911 17
Rationing Plan as filed with and approved by the
Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency.
911.13 WATER USE STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PLUMBING FIXTURES
(a) General.
This Rule establishes the maximum water use for certain
plumbing fixtures installed in all new construction or renovation.
Such standards have been implemented to achieve the maximum
efficiency of water use, which the City of Bethlehem determined is
technologically feasible and economically justified.
PLUMBING MAXIMUM WATER EFFECTIVE
FIXTURE USE DATE
Showerheads 3.0 gallons/minute in effect
Lavatory Faucets 3.0 gallons/minute in effect
Kitchen Faucets 3.0 gallons/minute in effect
Water Closets 1.6 gallons/flush Jan. 1, 1991
Urinals 1.5 gallons/minute in effect
(b) Reevaluation of Water Use Standards.
The City of Bethlehem may, at any appropriate time, amend any
of the water use standards listed above relevant to technological
developments relating to the water use or water efficiency of any of
the specified plumbing fixtures. Amendments will also apply only to
new construction and renovation.
(c) Exemptions.
The City of Bethlehem may exempt a particular type of customer
when it is determined that the water use standard for plumbing
fixtures listed above are inappropriate or cannot be accommodated by
existing technology.
911.14 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION
Cross connection control and backflow prevention shall provide
containment of sources of contaminants that may exist on the
customer’s premises. All procedures for this shall be in accordance
with the City of Bethlehem’s Cross Connection Control and Backflow
Prevention Regulations. Included in the Regulations are procedures
for: the installation and testing of backflow prevention devices,
the certification of Backflow Prevention Assembly Technicians, the
ARTICLE 911 18
implementation time schedule and a list of City-approved backflow
prevention devices.
(a) Cross Connection Control.
No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to
any premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the
public water supply system or customer's water system may exist,
unless such cross-connections are abated or controlled to the
satisfaction of the public water supplier.
No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby water
from an auxiliary water supply may enter a public or customer's
water system unless such auxiliary water supply, as well as the
method of connection and use of such supply, has been approved.
(b) Backflow Prevention.
City will require installation of backflow prevention devices
for all new facilities. Existing single family residential
facilities and multi-family residential facilities three stories and
lower in height will not be required to install backflow prevention
devices unless a cross connection is discovered on the customer's
premises. All other existing facilities will be required to install
backflow prevention devices. The type, size and location of the
backflow prevention device shall be in accordance with the City's
Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Regulations. The
backflow prevention device shall be installed, owned and maintained
by the customer at the customer's expense. The city shall approve
the location of the backflow prevention device.
(c) Installation.
Backflow prevention devices required by this ordinance shall be
installed at a location, and in a manner, approved by the city. A
person properly qualified shall install the device(s). Backflow
prevention devices installed on the service line to a customer's
water system shall be located on the customer's side of the water
meter, as close to the meter as is reasonable practical, and prior
to any other connection.
Backflow prevention devices and water meters shall be installed
within the customer's premises at a location that provides for
convenient access for future maintenance. Customer shall reconfigure
their internal piping to accommodate installation of these devices,
if necessary. If adequate space is not available within the customer
premises, the customer shall enlarge or reconfigure it. If this is
not possible, customer shall provide an approved above grade
ARTICLE 911 19
enclosure located outside of the customer's premises to house these
devices. Below grade vaults shall not be permitted.
If the water meter of backflow prevention device is upgraded or
replaced, the customer shall provide adequate space within their
premises for the new devices. Customer shall also be responsible for
reconfiguration of their internal piping to accommodate installation
of the new devices. If adequate is not available within the customer
premises, the customer shall enlarge or reconfigure it. If this is
not possible, customer shall provide an approved above grade
enclosure located outside of the customer's premises to house these
devices. Below grade vaults shall not be permitted.
(d) Violations.
The City may deny or discontinue, after issuing reasonable
notice, water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by this ordinance is not installed,
tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable to the City, or if it
is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off device required by this
ordinance is not installed and maintained in working order.
Water service shall not be restored until the customer has
corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this ordinance and to the satisfaction of the City.
911.99 PENALTY.
Applicants and customers are required to comply with all the rules
and regulations applicable to water service furnished by the
City of Bethlehem. For violation of this ordinance, the City
reserves the right to shut off the water after due notice and cancel
the contract. For turning on the water again, a charge will be made
as specified in Section 911.06. Nothing in this Section shall be
construed as limiting the City's remedies at law or equity.
(a) First Violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second Violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and Each Subsequent Violation - A fine of $1,000.00,
ARTICLE 911 20
or ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3025. Passed
10/15/85; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89.)
(Ord. 4018 Passed 7/5/00)
ARTICLE 913
Water Rates and Charges
913.01 Water service rates.
913.02 Scheduling of bills for all water service customers.
913.03 Penalties for late payments of bills.
913.04 Collection of delinquent bills.
913.05 Charges For Discontinuing And Restoring Of Water
Service For In-City and Out-of-City Users.
913.06 Additional Charge For Discontinuing And Restoring Of
Water Service For Out-Of-City Users.
913.07 Returned check charge.
913.08 Meter test rates.
913.09 Construction rates.
913.10 Rider DIS – Demand-Based Industrial Service.
913.11 Rider DRS – Demand-Based Resale Service.
CROSS REFERENCES
Water supply - See 3rd Class Sections 3501-3572 (53 P.S. Sections
38501-38572)
Water regulations - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 911
Use in air conditioning systems - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 915
Sewer rental based on water consumed - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 927
913.01 WATER SERVICE RATES.
The Council of the City of Bethlehem hereby fixes and
establishes the following rates governing the furnishing of water
with respect to real estate situate both inside and outside the
City of Bethlehem.
(a) Meter Rates. The following schedules apply to all
service other than fire protection.
Schedule A
Meter Rates – General Residential Customer Service
APPLICATION
This schedule applies to all residential customer
service.
CUSTOMER CHARGES
All metered residential customers shall pay the
following customer charge based on the required size of
meter to render adequate service.
ARTICLE 913 2
Size of Meter Customer Charge
Inches Per Month Per Quarter
5/8 $ 8.25 $ 24.75
3/4 $ 13.98 $ 41.94
1 $ 27.14 $ 81.42
1-1/2 $ 53.04 $ 159.12
2 $ 85.28 $ 255.84
3 $ 174.80 $ 524.40
4 $ 273.56 $ 820.68
6 $ 547.11 $ 1641.33
8 or larger $ 1098.37 $ 3295.11
CONSUMPTION CHARGES
In addition to the customer charge all water
consumption will be billed at the following rate:
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons
For all usage monthly or quarterly $4.266
Schedule B
Meter Rates – General Commercial Customer Service
APPLICATION
This schedule applies to all commercial customer
service.
CUSTOMER CHARGES
All metered commercial customers shall pay the
following customer charge based on the required size of
meter to render adequate service.
Size of Customer Charge Size of Customer Charge
Meter Per Month Per Quarter Meter Per Month Per Quarter
5/8” $ 8.25 $ 24.75 3” $ 174.80 $ 524.40
3/4" $ 13.98 $ 41.94 4” $ 273.56 $ 820.68
1” $ 27.14 $ 81.42 6” $ 547.11 $ 1641.33
1-1/2” $ 53.04 $ 159.12 8” $ 1098.37 $ 3295.11
2” $ 85.28 $ 255.84 or larger
CONSUMPTION CHARGES
In addition to the customer charge all water
consumption will be billed at the following rates:
ARTICLE 913 3
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons
For all usage monthly or quarterly $3.333
Schedule C
Meter Rates – General Industrial Customer Service
APPLICATION
This schedule applies to all industrial customer
service.
CUSTOMER CHARGES
All metered industrial customers shall pay the
following customer charge based on the required size of
meter to render adequate service.
Size of Customer Charge Size of Customer Charge
Meter Per Month Per Quarter Meter Per Month Per Quarter
5/8” $ 8.25 $ 24.75 3” $ 174.80 $ 524.40
3/4" $ 13.98 $ 41.94 4” $ 273.56 $ 820.68
1” $ 27.14 $ 81.42 6” $ 547.11 $ 1641.33
1-1/2” $ 53.04 $ 159.12 8” $ 1098.37 $ 3295.11
2” $ 85.28 $ 255.84 or larger
CONSUMPTION CHARGES
In addition to the customer charge all water
consumption will be billed at the following rates:
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons
For all usage monthly or quarterly $3.333
Schedule D
Meter Rates – General Public Customer Service
APPLICATION
This schedule applies to all public customer service.
CUSTOMER CHARGES
All metered public customers shall pay the following
customer charge based on the required size of meter to
render adequate service.
ARTICLE 913 4
Size of Customer Charge Size of Customer Charge
Meter Per Month Per Quarter Meter Per Month Per Quarter
5/8” $ 8.25 $ 24.75 3” $ 174.80 $ 524.40
3/4" $ 13.98 $ 41.94 4” $ 273.56 $ 820.68
1” $ 27.14 $ 81.42 6” $ 547.11 $ 1641.33
1-1/2” $ 53.04 $ 159.12 8” $ 1098.37 $ 3295.11
2” $ 85.28 $ 255.84 or larger
CONSUMPTION CHARGES
In addition to the customer charge all water
consumption will be billed at the following rates:
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons
For all usage monthly or quarterly $3.333
Schedule E
Meter Rates – Sales for Resale
APPLICATION
This schedule applies to all sale of water to other
water utilities or public authorities for resale.
CUSTOMER CHARGES
All metered sales for resale customers shall pay the
following customer charge based on the required size of
meter to render adequate service.
Size of Customer Charge Size of Customer Charge
Meter Per Month Per Quarter Meter Per Month Per Quarter
5/8” $ 8.25 $ 24.75 3” $ 174.80 $ 524.40
3/4" $ 13.98 $ 41.94 4” $ 273.56 $ 820.68
1” $ 27.14 $ 81.42 6” $ 547.11 $ 1641.33
1-1/2” $ 53.04 $ 159.12 8” $ 1098.37 $ 3295.11
2” $ 85.28 $ 255.84 or larger
Lower Saucon Honor System $1098.37 $3295.11
CONSUMPTION CHARGES
In addition to the customer charge all water
consumption will be billed at the following rates:
ARTICLE 913 5
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons
For all usage monthly or quarterly $3.969
Schedule F
Meter Rates – Untreated Water Service
APPLICATION
This schedule applies to all sale of untreated water
for non-potable use only.
CUSTOMER CHARGES
All metered untreated water service customers shall pay
the following customer charge based on the required
size of meter to render adequate service.
Size of Customer Charge Size of Customer Charge
Meter Per Month Per Quarter Meter Per Month Per Quarter
5/8” $ 8.25 $ 24.75 3” $ 174.80 $ 524.40
3/4" $ 13.98 $ 41.94 4” $ 273.56 $ 820.68
1” $ 27.14 $ 81.42 6” $ 547.11 $ 1641.33
1-1/2” $ 53.04 $ 159.12 8” $ 1098.37 $ 3295.11
2” $ 85.28 $ 255.84 or larger
CONSUMPTION CHARGES
In addition to the customer charge all water
consumption will be billed at the following rates:
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons
For all usage monthly or quarterly $2.035
(b) Private Fire Service Standby System Rates
For each private fire line that supplies water service
to a standby system for fire protection, the following
quarterly/monthly charge is made according to the size of the
area protected and the size of the fire line servicing the
facility.
ARTICLE 913 6
Fire Line Per Quarter Per Month
Less than 6” (including Siamese $112.50 $37.50
connections and 2”, 3”, and
4” residential connections)
6” $140.55 $46.85
8” $168.27 $56.09
10” $195.99 $65.33
12” $252.06 $84.02
In addition to the above fire line charge, a
quarterly/monthly charge is made at $2.79 ($0.93 per month) per
thousand square feet of protected area.
(c) Private Fire Hydrant
For each private fire hydrant, the following
quarterly/monthly charge is made:
Per Quarter Per Month
Each Private Fire Hydrant $78.27 $26.09
(d) Public Fire Hydrants – Out-of-City
For each public fire hydrant, the following
quarterly/monthly charge is made:
Per Quarter Per Month
Each Public Fire Hydrant $66.00 $22.00
(e) The out-of-city rates contained herein shall be
effective subject to the established date by and the approval of
the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission which date is
July 10, 2014; and, in-city rates shall take effect on the
effective date above.
(Ord. 2008-20. Passed 7/1/08; Ord. 2012-3. Passed 2/21/12; Ord.
2014-25. Passed 8/19/14.)
913.02 SCHEDULING OF BILLS FOR ALL WATER SERVICE
CUSTOMERS
Billing for all properties serviced by a five-eighth (5/8”)
inch, three-quarter (3/4”) inch or one (1”) inch meter shall be
on a quarterly basis, and all other bills for water service
through a meter shall be on a monthly basis.
All customers will be given the option of being billed
monthly.
ARTICLE 913 7
913.03 PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT OF BILLS
(a) Residential and Non-Residential Accounts
All customer water meter bills for residential and nonresidential
accounts shall be subject to a penalty of one and
one-half (1.50%) percent interest per month on the full unpaid
and overdue balance of the bill if not paid within twenty (20)
calendar days from the date the bill is mailed. The interest
charges are to be calculated on the overdue portions of the bill
only and shall not be charged against any sum that falls due
during a current billing period.
(b) Private Fire Protection Service
Residential and Non-Residential:
All customer bills for residential and non-residential
accounts shall be subject to a penalty of one and one-half
(1.50%) percent interest per month on the full unpaid and overdue
balance of the bill if not paid within twenty (20) calendar days
from the date the bill is mailed. The interest charges are to be
calculated on the overdue portions of the bill only and shall not
be charged against any sum that falls due during a current
billing period.
(c) Private Fire Hydrants
Residential and Non-Residential:
All customer bills for residential and non-residential
accounts shall be subject to a penalty of one and one-half
(1.50%) percent interest per month on the full unpaid and overdue
balance of the bill if not paid within twenty (20) calendar days
from the date the bill is mailed. The interest charges are to be
calculated on the overdue portions of the bill only and shall not
be charged against any sum that falls due during a current
billing period.
(d) Public Fire Hydrants – Out-of-City
All public fire hydrant bills will be subject to a penalty
of one and one-half (1.50%) percent interest per month on the
full unpaid and overdue balance of the bill if not paid within
twenty (20) calendar days from the date the bill is mailed.
913.04 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT BILLS
(a) In-City Customer – Delinquent accounts placed for
collection shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section
913.03 together with costs of collection and reasonable
attorney’s fees.
ARTICLE 913 8
(b) Out-of-City Customers – It shall be the duty of the
Bureau of Law, when requested by the Department of Water and
Sewer Resources, to take such action as may be authorized by law
or ordinance for the collection of delinquent bills, including
any court costs deemed appropriate by a court of jurisdiction.
913.05 CHARGES FOR DISCONTINUING AND RESTORING OF WATER
SERVICE FOR IN-CITY AND OUT-OF-CITY USERS
(a) The fee for shut-off and turn-on of service at the curb
stop shall be $35.00.
(b) See Article 911.
913.06 ADDITIONAL CHARGE FOR DISCONTINUING AND RESTORING
OF WATER SERVICE FOR OUT-OF-CITY USERS
(a) A charge of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per premises
shall be made whenever a municipality which is serviced by the
City water system requests the City to shut off water service
from any premises within the municipality for nonpayment of sewer
charges.
(b) See Article 911.
913.07 RETURNED CHECK CHARGE
A charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) will be assessed anytime
where a check which has been presented to the City for payment on
account has been returned by the payor bank for any reason.
913.08 METER TEST RATES
(a) The fee schedule for testing of meters shall be as
follows:
One (1”) inch or less $38.00
One and one quarter (1-1/4”) inch – two (2”) inch $40.00
Fees for testing meters over two (2”) inches or for testing
meters so located that testing costs are disproportionate to the
stated fees shall be established by the City based upon the
actual cost of the test.
(b) See Article 911.
(Ord. 3026. Passed 10/15/85; Ord. 4073. Passed 5/16/01; Ord.
4363. Passed 12/20/05.)
ARTICLE 913 9
913.09 CONSTRUCTION RATES
(a) Building Water Charge
(1) Out-of-City. If water is required for building
purposes, a charge shall be made at the time
application is made for water service. This charge
will be one quarterly customer charge based on the
size of the City service line servicing the
facility.
(2) In City. For in-City construction the above
charge shall be levied at the time of building
permit application.
(3) Restriction. Water for building purposes will be
used only for actual construction of the building
and shall not be used to facilitate landscaping or
other purposes.
913.10 RIDER DIS - DEMAND-BASED INDUSTRIAL SERVICE
(a) APPLICABILITY.
Throughout the water service territory served.
(b) AVAILABILITY.
This rider is available to a customer that:
(1) purchases water from the City for industrial
purposes;
(2) enters into a Service Agreement for a term of not
less than 10 years;
(3) during the original and any renewal terms of the
Service Agreement, agrees to purchase an average
of 10 million gallons of water per month at a
daily load factor of not less than 0.67; and
(4) has a viable competitive alternative to service
from the City and intends to select that
alternative to the detriment of the City and its
other customers.
The City shall require documentation to establish, to
the City’s satisfaction, the existence of a competitive
alternative. Such documentation may include, but is not limited
to, an affidavit of the customer or, if the customer is a
ARTICLE 913 10
corporation, an affidavit of one or more of its officers.
(c) RATE.
The rate(s) to be charged qualifying customers under
this rider will be as set forth in the Service Agreement,
provided, however, that such rate(s): (1) shall not exceed the
Maximum Rate; (2) shall not be less than the Minimum Rate; and
(3) shall be subject to an Escalation Clause, as hereafter
defined.
(d) MAXIMUM RATE.
The Maximum Rate shall be the charges specified in the
City’s Rate Schedule that would otherwise apply to the qualifying
customer absent this rider.
(e) MINIMUM RATE.
The Minimum Rate shall be sufficient to recover: (1)
the Production Cost of Water; (2) the fixed costs (depreciation
and pre-tax return) associated with all new facilities added to
serve the customer; and (3) some portion of the fixed costs of
the City’s other facilities. For purposes of this rider, the
Production Cost of Water shall be the variable cost the City
incurs to produce additional treated water, which consists of
expenses for electric power, chemicals and purchased water.
(f) ESCALATION CLAUSE.
The rate set forth in the Service Agreement shall be
subject to an Escalation Clause, during the original and any
renewal terms of the Service Agreement, based upon changes in
published price indices and/or changes in the City’s cost of
service, as the City and the qualifying customer shall agree.
(g) FILING WITH THE PENNSYLVANIA PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION/
CONFIDENTIALITY FOR OUTSIDE-CITY CUSTOMERS.
Service Agreements entered into between the City and
qualifying customers under this rider shall be filed with the
Commission on a confidential basis within five (5) days of their
execution and shall not be subject to disclosure except by
Petition made to and granted by the Commission pursuant to 52 Pa.
Code §1.74. The City shall provide copies of such Service
Agreements to the Pennsylvania Office of Consumer Advocate
(“OCA”) contemporaneously with their filing with the Commission,
subject to the OCA’s execution of a Confidentiality Agreement.
ARTICLE 913 11
913.11 RIDER DRS - DEMAND-BASED RESALE SERVICE
(a) APPLICABILITY.
Throughout the water service territory served.
(b) AVAILABILITY.
This rider is available to a customer that:
(1) purchases water from the City for resale;
(2) enters into a Service Agreement for a term of not
less than 15 years;
(3) during the original and any renewal terms of the
Service Agreement, agrees to purchase an average
of 21 million gallons of water per month and
maintain a daily load factor of not less than
0.67; and
(4) has a viable competitive alternative to service
from the City and intends to select that
alternative to the detriment of the City and its
other customers.
The City shall require documentation to establish, to
the City’s satisfaction, the existence of a competitive
alternative. Such documentation may include, but is not limited
to, an affidavit of the customer or, if the customer is a
corporation, an affidavit of one or more of its officers.
(c) RATE.
The rate(s) to be charged qualifying customers under
this rider will be as set forth in the Service Agreement,
provided, however, that such rate(s): (1) shall not exceed the
Maximum Rate; (2) shall not be less than the Minimum Rate; and
(3) shall be subject to an Escalation Clause, as hereafter
defined.
(d) MAXIMUM RATE.
The Maximum Rate shall be the charges specified in the
City’s Rate Schedule that would otherwise apply to the qualifying
customer absent this rider.
(e) MINIMUM RATE.
The Minimum Rate shall be sufficient to recover: (1)
the Production Cost of Water; (2) the fixed costs (depreciation
ARTICLE 913 12
and pre-tax return) associated with all new facilities added to
serve the customer; and (3) some portion of the fixed costs of
the City’s other facilities. For purposes of this rider, the
Production Cost of Water shall be the variable cost the City
incurs to produce additional treated water, which consists of
expenses for electric power, chemicals and purchased water.
(f) ESCALATION CLAUSE.
The rate set forth in the Service Agreement shall be
subject to an Escalation Clause, during the original and any
renewal terms of the Service Agreement, based upon changes in
published price indices and/or changes in the City’s cost of
service, as the City and the qualifying customer shall agree.
(g) FILING WITH THE PENNSYLVANIA PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION/
CONFIDENTIALITY FOR OUTSIDE-CITY CUSTOMERS.
Service Agreements entered into between the City and
qualifying customers under this rider shall be filed with the
Commission on a confidential basis within five (5) days of their
execution and shall not be subject to disclosure except by
Petition made to and granted by the Commission pursuant to 52 Pa.
Code §1.74. The City shall provide copies of such Service
Agreements to the Pennsylvania Office of Consumer Advocate
(“OCA”) contemporaneously with their filing with the Commission,
subject to the OCA’s execution of a Confidentiality Agreement.
(Ord. 3026. Passed 10/15/85; Ord. 4073. Passed 5/16/01; Ord.
4363. Passed 12/20/05; Ord. 2008-20. Passed 7/1/08.)
ARTICLE 915
Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
915.01 Definitions
915.02 Permits
915.03 Direct Water Cooling
915.04 Water Use And Conservation
915.05 Sanitary Sewer Connection Forbidden
915.06 Protection Against Contamination
915.07 High Temperature Protection
915.08 Existing Installation To Be Reported
915.09 Electric Wiring And Equipment
915.10 Provisions For Prior Installations
915.11 Exception For Manufactured Products Containing Water
915.12 Purpose
915.13 Violation By Plumbers
915.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
915.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
following meanings:
(a) "Air conditioning system" and "refrigeration system" shall include
any combination of air-cooling equipment, whether of compressor or of
other type, by which the accumulated or effluent heat is wholly or partially
removed by the use of water.
(b) "Air conditioning system" shall mean an installation for
maintaining temperature, by heat removal, at not less than sixty degrees
Fahrenheit.
(c) "Refrigeration system" shall mean an installation for maintaining
temperature, by heat removal, at less than sixty degrees Fahrenheit.
ARTICLE 915 2
(d) "Water-cooled system," as used in reference to subsections (b) and
(c) hereof, shall mean any individual unit, group or combination or
collection of units of apparatus supplied with City water and/or discharging
into the sewerage system of the City.
(e) "Direct water cooling" shall mean the use of water as a refrigerant.
(f) "Indirect water cooling" shall mean the use of water to extract heat
from a refrigerant in a water-cooled condensing unit.
(g) "Air-cooled system" shall mean any unit or apparatus in which air
is used as a refrigerant or as an indirect coolant.
(h) "Installation" shall mean an installation of new equipment or the
modification, alteration or change of existing equipment involving the use of
water or the discharge thereof into the City sewer system.
(i) "Person" shall mean and include an individual, partnership,
corporation or association. (Ord. 1416 §1. Passed 6/26/56.)
915.02 PERMITS.
No person in the City shall hereafter, in any structure or building,
install, operate, use or maintain any air conditioning equipment or
refrigeration system or equipment, or modify, change, operate, use and
maintain any air conditioning equipment or refrigeration system or
equipment heretofore installed in any building or structure from which any
waste water results, without having first filed a written application for a
permit therefor and obtaining approval to install, operate, use and maintain,
or modify or change, any air conditioning equipment or refrigeration system
or equipment from the Department of Public Works.
The written application shall set forth correctly the following
information:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Location of proposed installation.
(c) Name and address of owner of premises.
ARTICLE 915 3
(d) Manufacturer's name and other relative information pertaining
to system to be installed.
(e) Quantity of water required under maximum operating conditions.
(f) Proposed source of water and disposal of waste water.
(g) A drawing showing general arrangement of apparatus and
showing in detail all points of connection to water supply system and drain
piping.
(h) The name of any legally qualified person, firm or corporation
employed by the applicant to perform installation.
(i) Any additional information required.
Approval to install, operate, use or maintain any air conditioning
equipment or refrigeration system or equipment, or modify or change any
such air conditioning equipment or refrigeration system or equipment shall
be granted in the form of a permit. No installation of such air conditioning
equipment or refrigeration system or equipment or operation, use,
maintenance, modification or change of either of such air conditioning
equipment or refrigeration system shall be commenced until the proper
permit has been obtained from the Department of Public Works. (Ord. 1416
§2. Passed 6/26/56.)
915.03 DIRECT WATER COOLING.
No direct water-cooled system shall discharge any water used as a
cooling medium into the City's sanitary or storm sewer system without the
approval of the Director of Public Works, or his designee. (Ord. 3024 §5.
Passed 10/15/85.)
915.04 WATER USE AND CONSERVATION.
(a) A water-cooled system of total capacity of one and one-half tons
or less shall not use City water directly (or indirectly, except when used with
approved conservation equipment and provided with approved water meter).
(b) A water-cooled system with a total capacity of more than one and
one-half tons but not exceeding three tons may use water directly from the
City water supply at a rate not exceeding two gallons per minute per ton,
ARTICLE 915 4
provided it is equipped with a water meter installed by the Department of
Public Works, and an automatic regulating valve which will stop the flow of
water when the refrigerating machine is shut down, and will throttle the flow
of water down to the momentary requirements of the system.
(c) A water-cooled system having a total capacity exceeding three
tons per twenty-four hours shall be equipped with evaporative condenser,
cooling tower, spray pond or other water-cooling equipment satisfactory to
the City Engineer. Such equipment shall be of sufficient capacity to ensure
that the use of water for make-up purposes shall not exceed one-tenth gallon
per minute per ton when operating under full loading at maximum summer
temperature. (Ord 1416 §6. Passed 6/26/56.)
915.05 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FORBIDDEN.
Except for seasonal flushing and draining of the system, no watercooled
air conditioning, refrigeration or other water-cooled system shall be
connected to the City's sanitary sewer system. Such a connection must be
approved by the Director of Public Works, or his designee. (Ord. 3024 §5.
Passed 10/15/85.)
915.06 PROTECTION AGAINST CONTAMINATION.
(a) On installations which operate with use of water directly from the
City water supply, every direct connection shall be equipped with an
approved brass body, spring loaded brass-fitted check valve, placed in a
position satisfactory to the City Engineer, in the branch supply line to each
unit.
(b) Discharge connections for disposal of waste waters shall be in
strict accordance with applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations
of State and local health and regulatory bodies.
(c) Cooling water which is to be re-used for other purposes shall be
provided with free, above-the-rim discharge before entering other
equipment, unless otherwise permitted in writing by the City Engineer.
(d) On installations other than those described above, there shall be a
physical break between the City water piping and the piping of the
installation, so arranged as to make back-siphonage to the City water supply
impossible. (Ord. 1416 §8. Passed 6/26/56.)
ARTICLE 915 5
915.07 HIGH TEMPERATURE PROTECTION.
All systems shall be provided with devices which shall afford positive
protection against development of excessive pressures and/or temperatures
in either the refrigerant system or the water system. Such devices shall meet
the general standards of the refrigeration industry. (Ord. 1416 §9. Passed
6/26/56.)
915.08 EXISTING INSTALLATION TO BE REPORTED.
The owner of premises in which an individual or collective air
conditioning or refrigeration system has been installed prior to the passage
of this article is required to inform the Department of Public Works within
one month after the effective date of this article of the existence of every
such system. He shall furnish all such information, in writing, as is required
from an applicant for a permit to install a new air conditioning or
refrigeration system, on forms furnished by the City. (Ord. 1416 §10.
Passed 6/26/56.)
915.09 ELECTRIC WIRING AND EQUIPMENT.
All electrical equipment and service installation necessary to properly
and adequately install any air conditioning or refrigeration system must be
made in compliance with the National Electrical Code. All work shall be
subject to inspection and approval by City officials or their duly authorized
employees. So far as may be necessary, the City officials or their duly
authorized employees shall have the right, upon exhibiting their credentials,
to enter any structure or premises in the City to inspect any air conditioning,
refrigeration or other water-cooled equipment. (Ord. 1416 §11. Passed
6/26/56.)
915.10 PROVISIONS FOR PRIOR INSTALLATIONS.
The provisions of this article are deemed to be urgent for the
preservation of the public peace, health and comfort of the citizens, and shall
become effective immediately after their enactment by Council. However,
all persons who have heretofore installed, used, maintained and operated air
conditioning equipment and refrigeration systems and have not complied
with the provisions of this article, shall have sixty days from the date of the
enactment in which to comply with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 1416 §13.
Passed 6/26/56.)
ARTICLE 915 6
915.11 EXCEPTION FOR MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS
CONTAINING WATER.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit or be deemed to prohibit any
person from using water in any manufacturing process wherein water so
used becomes a part of the manufactured product. (Ord. 1416 §14. Passed
6/26/56.)
915.12 PURPOSE.
This article is enacted for the sole purpose of preventing the needless
wasting of the City water supply and to protect its sewage system under
existing conditions. The City shall have the right to amend or supplement
this article by additional ordinances or completely repeal the same whenever
scientific improvements to air conditioning systems and refrigeration
systems warrant the same. (Ord. 1416 §15. Passed 6/26/56.)
915.13 VIOLATION BY PLUMBERS.
Any master or journeyman plumber who violates any provision of this
article shall, in addition to the penalty herein provided, lose his license for
one year from the date of his conviction. (Ord. 1416 §12. Passed 6/26/56.)
915.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $50.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $150.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $300.00, or ninety
days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85.)
ARTICLE 921
Sanitary Sewer Regulations
921.01 Definitions.
921.02 General sanitary regulations.
921.03 Use of sanitary sewers and admission of industrial waste.
921.04 Permits.
921.05 Drainage of swimming pools.
921.06 Drainage of air conditioning or refrigeration equipment.
921.07 Hearing board.
921.08 City tapping fee.
921.09 Construction and severability.
921.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Tapping fee - See 3rd Class §3202 (53 P.S. §38202)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Sewer rental - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 927
On-Site Sewerage Systems - See HLTH. Art. 1163
Garbage disposals emptying into sewer system - See BLDG. Art. 1717
Industrial pretreatment - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 923
921.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Article shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
These definitions are applicable to all Articles contained within Part Nine, Title Five of the
Codified Ordinances.
(a) "Air Conditioning" means the cooling or dehumidification, or both, of space for human
occupancy or for any environmentally controlled equipment.
(b) "Approving Authority" means the Director of the Department of Public Works.
(c) "Authorized Industrial Waste" means industrial waste proposed for discharge into a
sanitary sewer or storm sewer which complies with all provisions of this Article regarding
quantity and quality and which:
(1) In the case of proposed discharge into a sanitary sewer, is
approved by the approving authority; or
(2) In the case of proposed discharge into a storm sewer, is
approved by the Department of Environmental Resources,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and approved by the
approving authority in writing.
ARTICLE 921
2
(d) "Building Drain" means the sewer or sewers within a building used to convey sewage
and/or industrial waste to building sewers or laterals, and in this Article shall relate to the point of
connection to the building sewers or laterals.
(e) "Building Sewer or Lateral" means the extension of the building drain from the
building to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
(f) "City" means the City of Bethlehem, Counties of Lehigh and Northampton,
Pennsylvania.
(g) "Color" of an industrial waste means the color of the light transmitted by the waste
solution after removing the suspended material, including the pseudocolloidal particles.
(h) "Water as a Direct Cooling Medium" means the use of water as a refrigerant.
(i) "Garbage" means all putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(j) "Ground Garbage" means solid waste that has been shredded to such a degree that all its
particles will be carried freely under normal sewer flow conditions, with no particle greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
(k) "Hearing Board" means the board appointed according to provisions of Section 923.05.
(1) "Improved Property" means any property located within the corporate limits of the City
upon which there is erected a structure or structures intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure or structures sewage
and/or industrial waste shall be, or may be, discharged, or any property outside the corporate
limits of the City upon which there is erected a structure or structures intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use of human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage and/or industrial waste shall be, or may be, discharged and which wastes are accepted by
the City into the City's sewerage system as it exists now or with any extensions or enlargements
that may be made in the future at any time.
(m) "Water As An Indirect Cooling Medium" means the use of water to extract heat from a
refrigerant in a water-cooled condensing unit.
(n) "Mg/l" means milligrams per liter.
(o) "Municipality" means any county, county authority, municipal authority, city, borough,
town, township or school district.
(p) "Owner" means any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of
any improved property.
ARTICLE 921
3
(q) "Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the
singular shall include the plural, where indicated by the context.
(r) "Premises Accessible to the Sewerage System" means any improved property when the
public sewer abuts, bounds or is adjacent to such improved property.
(s) "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority. It shall also include sewer within or without the City
limits, which serve one or more persons and discharge into the City sewerage system.
(t) "Refrigeration" means the preservation of food products, process work and the
maintenance of storage temperature.
(u) "Sanitary Sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and/or authorized industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(v) "Sewage" means any substance that contains any of the waste products or excretions or
other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals.
(w) "Sewerage System or Sewerage Facility" means all facilities owned and/or operated by
the City, which are used for collecting, pumping, transporting, treating, and disposing of sewage
and industrial waste.
(x) "Sewer" means a pipe conduit for carrying sewage, industrial waste or storm or surface
water.
(y) The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(z) "Slug" means any discharges of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than fifteen minutes more than five times the average twenty-four hour concentration or
flow, during normal operation.
(aa) "Suspended Solids" means solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension of water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
(bb) "Twenty-four Hour Composite Wastewater Sample" means a sample which consists
of twenty-four hourly wastewater samples collected over a twenty-four hour period with the
sample volume proportioned according to the flow rate at the time of the sample. The cumulative
sample shall be refrigerated.
(cc) "Toxic Substance" means any noxious and/or deleterious substance in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, which injures or interferes with any
sewage treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or
creates a hazard in any sewerage system or in the receiving waters of a sewage treatment plant.
ARTICLE 921
4
(dd) "Waste Water Treatment Plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage or authorized industrial waste.
(ee) "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Ord. 2323 §1. Passed 10/3/1972; Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
921.02 GENERAL SANITARY REGULATIONS.
(a) No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(b) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(c) The owner of any premises in the City accessible to the sewerage system is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Article, within ninety
days after date of official notice to do so.
(d) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to
a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article and the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes.
(e) No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any sanitary public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the approving authority.
(f) A separate and independent sanitary sewer shall be provided for every building, except
that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, the sanitary sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one sanitary sewer for purposes of this Article, provided appropriate written
agreement therefore shall be made between the affected property owners. In the case where there
are multiple dwellings on a single property owned by one owner or condominium association,
sanitary sewer lines may be joined for one connection to the City sewer system if approved by the
approving authority.
(g) Existing building sewers and laterals shall connect with new building sewers and
drainage systems only when it is determined by the City Plumbing Inspector, through examination
and testing, that the same conforms with this Article. No connection to the existing sewers and
laterals shall be made without the prior approval of the City Plumbing Inspector. The equipment,
materials, power, and labor necessary for the inspection, examination, and testing of the system,
shall be furnished by the permit holder. (Ord. 4101. Passed 12/4/2001)
ARTICLE 921
5
(h) The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing testing and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code and other
applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and
W.P.C.F. Manuals of Practice shall apply.
(i) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought from the building at a depth
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sanitary sewer, sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Exceptions to this requirement shall be
requested in writing and approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
(j) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a sanitary sewer, building
drain, or building sewer which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(k) The connection of the building drain to the building sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code with other applicable rules and regulations
of the City or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F.
Manuals of Practice. The connection of the building sewer to the public sanitary sewer shall
conform to the applicable rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manuals of Practice. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved in writing by the approving authority before installation.
(1) When a public sanitary sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected
to the sewer within ninety days, but if the private sewage disposal system is declared a health
hazard by the City's Health Officer, the building sewer shall be immediately connected to the
public sanitary sewer. At the time of connection, the private sewage disposal system shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with approved material.
(m) The owner of any improved property shall maintain and repair the building drain and
sanitary sewer lateral at his own expense, and shall remove all trees, tree roots and other
obstructions to the building drain and sanitary sewer lateral. (Ord. 2323 §1. Passed 10/3/1972.;
Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
921.03 USE OF SANITARY SEWERS AND ADMISSION OF
INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
(a) All sewage and authorized waste may be discharged into the sanitary sewage system
except that which is deemed harmful to the system or is specifically prohibited by this Article.
(b) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process water into any sanitary sewer. Where existing surface water or roof drains are
connected to the sanitary sewerage system, they shall be removed within 60 days of receipt of a
ARTICLE 921
6
notice from the City to remove such connection. In the event that the connection is not removed at
the end of the 60 day notice, the City shall have the right to remove the connection and bill the
property owner accordingly.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in this Article and Article 923 (Disposal and Discharge of
Industrial Waste), no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary sewerage
system any matter or substance:
(1) Heat in amounts producing interference, but in no
case heat in such quantities that the temperature
at the POTW Treatment Plant exceeds 40oC (104oF)
unless the Approval Authority, upon request of the
POTW, approves alternate treatment limits. At no
time shall a discharge to the POTW have a
temperature higher than 150oF or less than 32oF.
(Ord. 3304. Passed 12/5/1989.)
(2) Containing more than 100 mg/1 or mineral/petroleum
oil and grease and 300 mg/1 of animal/vegetable
oil and grease; (Ord. 3868. Passed 2/17/1998.)
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzine, naptha, fuel
oil, paint products, acid or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solids or gases;
(4) Containing unground garbage;
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shaving, metals, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure,
bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber, hair,
bones, leather, porcelain, china, ceramic wastes
or other solid or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction or other interference with the
operation of the sewage system;
(6) No pollutant may be discharged into the sanitary
sewer collection system to be treated at the POTW
which will cause any damage to the collection
system and the POTW, but in no case may the
pollutants being discharged have a pH lower than
5.0 nor greater than 11.5. (Ord. 3304. Passed 12/5/1989;
Ord. 3868. Passed 2/17/1998.)
(7) Containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to
ARTICLE 921
7
create any hazard in the receiving waters of a sewage
treatment plant of the sewerage system;
(8) Containing noxious or malodorous gas or a substance which
creates a public nuisance;
(9) Containing dye from any source that will not have an
effluent the equivalent of that produced by alum coagulation
and chlorination to remove suspended or colloidal matter and
bleach the dissolved dyes;
(10) Containing radioactive substances and/or isotopes;
(11) Containing wastes which are not amenable to biological
treatment or reduction in existing treatment facilities,
specifically nonbiodegradeable complex carbon compounds;
(12) Containing concentrations of anions, cations and other
various objectionable substances that would make the City
responsible for discharging such substances in excess of
that amount permitted in the allocated portion of the critical
flow of the receiving stream as determined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
[Note: Former (8) Deleted by Ord. 3304. Passed 12/5/1989.]
(d) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged into the
sewerage system, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
this section, and which in the judgment of the approving authority may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the approving authority may:
(1) Reject the waste;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers (refer to Article 923,
Disposal and Discharge of Industrial Waste);
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or;
(4) Require additional payment to the City for the added cost
of handling and treating the wastes, under the provisions
of subsection (e) hereof;
(5) Require immediate discontinuance of the waste discharge
until such time as it meets the requirements of this section.
ARTICLE 921
8
If the approving authority permits the pretreatment (Article 923) or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
acceptance of the approving authority and also subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, laws and regulations.
(e) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any person whereby industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be admitted into the sewerage system by the City, subject to payment
therefore by such person, or by proper continuous pretreatment (Article 923) prior to discharge
into the sewerage system.
(f) Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided where, in the opinion of the
approving authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and/or other harmful ingredients. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity acceptable to the approving authority and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(g) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense and shall be accessible to the City for inspection and testing. (Ord. 2323 §3.
Passed 10/3/1972; Ord. 2363 §l. Passed 3/6/1973; Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
921.04 PERMITS.
(a) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service; and
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the property owner or his agent shall make application to the Department of
Public Works, on a special form supplied for that specific purpose. A permit and inspection fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each residential building sewer permit and one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed. The permit application may be required to be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the approving authority. Permit fees for
excavating in the street or sidewalk area remain in force and shall be paid in addition to the
building sewer permit. Other plumbing permits applicable to the residence or building shall be
obtained from the Building and Plumbing Inspector's Office. A Sewer Connection Charge of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid in those cases where a sewer assessment has not been paid
or exonerated. (Ord. 3297. Passed 11/21/1989; Ord. 4098. Passed 11/20/2001; Ord. 2017-55.
Passed 12/19/2017.)
(b) A permit must be obtained prior to the installation of a private sewage disposal system,
or prior to making or changing a residential or commercial connection to the sewerage system, or
prior to making an industrial connection, or continuing an industrial discharge into an existing
ARTICLE 921
9
connection to the sewerage system. Industrial waste permit applications shall contain all pertinent
data including but not limited to estimated quantity of flow, character of waste, maximum rate of
discharge and proposed pretreatment facilities. Industrial pretreatment requirements are covered
by Article 923.
(c) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the sanitary sewer.
(d) The applicant for the sanitary sewer permit shall notify the City Plumbing Inspector
when the building sewer is ready for inspection to the lateral at the curb line. When the connection
is made to the public sewer, within the street right-of-way or easement, the Department of Public
Works shall be notified twenty-four hours before starting work. (Ord. 2323 §5. Passed 10/3/1972;
Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
921.05 DRAINAGE OF SWIMMING POOLS.
Drain lines from all swimming pools shall be connected or discharged to the storm sewer
system where available. Where no storm sewer waterways are available, the pool drain may be
connected to the sanitary sewerage system subject to approval by the Department of Public Works.
Filter backwash lines shall be connected directly to the sanitary sewerage system as
follows:
(a) Sand filter backwash shall be connected directly to the sanitary sewer.
(b) Diatomaceous earth filter backwash shall be connected to the sanitary sewer through
settling tanks with four months storage capacity, which tanks shall be readily accessible for
removing solid waste for disposal. (Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985; Ord. 3027 §1. Passed
10/15/1985.)
921.06 DRAINAGE OF AIR CONDITIONING OR REFRIGERATION
EQUIPMENT.
Drainage of air conditioning or refrigeration equipment shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Article 915 of these Codified Ordinances. (Ord. 2323 §9. Passed 10/3/1972; Ord.
3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
921.07 HEARING BOARD.
The Hearing Board, as established by 923.05 (e), shall arbitrate the differences between the
approving authority and owners of any improved property on matters concerning interpretation
and execution of the provisions of this Article by the approving authority. Cost of arbitration shall
be borne by the person requesting arbitration. (Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
ARTICLE 921
10
921.08 CITY TAPPING FEE
(a) The duly adopted fee schedule for tapping fees as that term is defined by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Authority’s Act to be charged by the City to owners of improved property
who desire to or are required to connect to the City’s sewer system is as follows:
(1) A tapping fee of $2,527.00 per equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)
(2) For purposes of this ordinance, an equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) shall be
equivalent to the amount of waste water discharged from a single, one
family residence consistent with Chapter 73 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code.
(3) The above tapping fee includes and is comprised of a capacity part of
$1,418.00 and a collection part of $1,109.00.
a. For residential properties the fee is calculated as follows:
1 EDU = 225 gpd or (90 gpcd x 2.5/c).
b. Tapping fees for bulk users such as industrial, commercial or any
other zoning designation shall be calculated by dividing the
requested allocation by 225 gpd and multiplying the result by
$2,527.00.
(4) The Tapping Fee described in subsection (1) shall be paid at or before the
earlier of the date that the Owner obtains an allocation of additional
capacity in the Sewer System, or –
a. the time the Owner or his agents obtains a building permit, if a
building permit is required in connection with the circumstances
under which the Tapping Fee is imposed;
b. the time the Owner or his agents obtains a zoning permit, if a
building permit is not required but a zoning permit is required in
connection with the circumstances under which the Tapping Fee is
imposed;
c. at or before the time the Owner or his agents completes his
improvements, alterations, extensions, or modifications, or
establishes his new use, or intensifies his existing use, if neither a
building permit nor a zoning permit is required in connection with
the circumstances under which the Tapping Fee is imposed;
d. immediately upon demand by the City, if a building permit or
zoning permit is required but not obtained, and activity which would
ARTICLE 921
11
have to be authorized by a valid building permit or zoning permit is
undertaken.
(b) The Owner of each Improved Property which is connected to the Sewer System shall
pay a Tapping Fee to the City, in the amount specified under Section (a)(3) whenever the use of
the Improved Property is to be changed, intensified, or improvements, alterations, extensions, or
modifications are to be constructed or made on the Improved Property, unless the EDU for the
Improved Property as of the date the new use intended for the Improved Property is established,
the date the existing use of the Improved Property is intensified, or the date the improvements,
alterations, extensions, or modifications contemplated for the Improved Property are completed, is
less than or equal to the EDU assigned to the Improved Property at the time the most recent
Tapping Fee was paid.
(c) The Owner of each Improved Property which is connected to the Sewer System shall
pay a Tapping Fee to the City, in the amount specified under Section (a)(3) whenever the City
shall reasonably determine, based on actual data that the EDU for the Improved Property is more
than one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the total EDU for which a Tapping Fee has
been paid with respect to the Improved Property.
(1) The Tapping Fee described in subsection (c) shall be paid within thirty (30)
days after demand by the City.
(2) For purposes of this Section, all Improved Properties connected to the
Sewer System on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed to
have paid a Tapping fee on the date of this Ordinance (although no such fee
is due) based on the EDU for each given Improved Property as of the date
of this Ordinance.
(d) Any person connecting any improved property with any part of the Sewer System must
first make application for and secure a permit, in writing, from the City, as provided for by
ordinance of the City. Such application shall be made on a form to be provided by the City.
(e) The Tapping fees paid under this Ordinance shall not be refundable in whole or in part
in the event that the quantity of wastewater used by an Improved Property should be reduced
and/or should be lower than estimated. The Tapping fees are paid for the right, under ordinary
conditions to use wastewater capacity in mains and at the treatment facility. No refund is justified
under any circumstances.
(f) The Director of Public Works shall waive these fees for any residential units that utilize
any federal, state, or local public funds, tax credits, or other similar financial programs in which
the owner agrees to keep the housing units affordable for low and moderate income residents
based on the affordability guidelines in the specific program or programs used in financing the
housing units. Financing programs would include but not be limited to the use of Federal
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME Investment Partnership funds,
Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency tax credit or other financing programs, programs using
public housing funding, local or county affordable housing trust fund projects, or programs using
funding provided for low and moderate income housing by foundations or not-for-profit
ARTICLE 921
12
organizations. The specific term of affordability would be established under the terms of the
individual program or programs used in the financing of the units.
(g) All provisions of any City Ordinance which are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency.
(h) This Ordinance shall be effective for all persons who obtain a permit to connect to the
System, or who require or use additional System capacity, after the date of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 4342. Passed 10/4/2005.)
921.09 CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Article shall be held to
be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such invalidity, illegality or unconstitutionality shall not
affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Article, it being
the intent of the City that such remainder shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2323 §13.
Passed 10/3/1972; Ord. 3027 §1. Passed 10/15/1985.)
921.99 PENALTY.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(1) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(3) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3027. Passed 10/15/1985; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/1989)
(b) This Article and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the right
of the City or any person to such equitable or other remedies as may otherwise be available with or
without process of law, including payment of damages to the City by any person causing damage
or injury to the sewerage system. (Ord. 2323 §11. Passed 10/3/1972.)
ARTICLE 923
Disposal and Discharge of Industrial Waste Regulations
923.01 Definitions. 923.05 Enforcement.
923.02 General Discharge 923.06 Repealer.
Regulations. 923.07 Severability.
923.03 Fees. 923.08 Holding Tank Wastes.
923.04 Permits. 923.09 Regulation of Wastewater
from Other Jurisdictions.
923.10 Contributing Municipality
Approval and Consent.
923.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act - 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Sanitary Sewer Regulations - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 921
Storm Sewer Regulations - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 925
923.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following abbreviations, acronyms, words, terms and phrases when used in this
Article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. Additional definitions that apply to this Article are set forth in
Section 921.01 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
Abbreviations - The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD5 - Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5-day)
CBOD5 - Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5-day)
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency
IWDP - Industrial Waste Discharge Permit
mg/l - milligrams per liter
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NH3-N - Ammonia-Nitrogen
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et. seq.
USC - United States Code
TSS - Total Suspended Solids
Art icle 923 2
Act or "the Act" - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
Administrator or “the Administrator” - The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
Approval Authority - The Regional Administrator of EPA Region III as defined in 40
CFR 403.3(c).
Authorized Representative of a User - An authorized representative of a User may be:
(1) A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation;
(2) A general partner or proprietor, if the User is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
(3) A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
operations and performance, if the User is a Federal, State or Local
Governmental facility.
(4) A duly authorized representative of the individual identified in (1) through
(3) above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of
the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates and a written
request for designation of an alternate representative is approved by the
City.
Best Management Practice (BMP) – Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMP’s also include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
and practices to contract plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5) - The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures, five (5) days at
20 degrees Celsius expressed as a concentration (mg/l - milligrams per liter), and determined in
accordance with EPA test methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
Building Sewer - A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a User to the
POTW.
Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD5) - The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of carbonaceous organic matter expressed as a concentration (mg/l -
Art icle 923 3
milligrams per liter), and determined in accordance with EPA test methods referenced in 40 CFR
136.
Categorical Standard or Categorical Pretreatment Standard - See National Categorical
Standard.
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) - The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical
oxidation of organic matter which is susceptible to conversion to carbon dioxide and water and
expressed as a concentration (mg/l - milligrams per liter), and determined in accordance with
EPA test methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
City - The City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania or the City Council of Bethlehem.
Cooling Water - The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or
refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
Control Authority - The City of Bethlehem.
Direct Discharge - The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters
of the State of Pennsylvania.
Director of Water and Sewer Resources - The person designated by the City to
implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this Article, or the Director's duly
authorized representative.
Domestic Sewage - Liquid or water-carried waste generated from sanitary conveniences
of campers, trailers, dwellings, office buildings, factories or institutions and from household
laundry operations, washing and cooking foods and dishwashing, but does not contain industrial
waste.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA - The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing Source - Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which
commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed Categorical Standards, which will be
applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section
307 of the Act.
Grab Sample - A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no
regard to the flow in the waste stream and taken over a period of time which does not exceed 15
minutes.
Hearing Board - The Board appointed according to provisions of Section 923.05 of this
Article.
Art icle 923 4
Holding Tank Waste - Any waste from holding tanks such as, but not limited to,
treatment units, vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
Indirect Discharge - The discharge or the introduction of pollutants from any nondomestic
source regulated under Section 307 (b) or (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), into
the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system).
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator - The person designated by the City to supervise the
operation of its Industrial Pretreatment Program, who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this Article, or a duly authorized representative as delegated by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator.
Industrial User - A source of Indirect Discharge.
Industrial Waste - Solid, liquid or gaseous wastes from any industrial, manufacturing, or
commercial process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, but
not domestic sewage.
Industrial Waste Discharge Permit (IWDP) - A Permit as set forth in Section 923.04 of
this Article.
Interference - A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its
sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES Permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State Regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Monthly Average - The arithmetic mean of the values for Users’ samples collected over a
calendar month.
National Categorical Standard or Categorical Standard - Standard specifying quantities or
Art icle 923 5
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to the POTW by
existing or new Industrial Users in specific industrial subcategories as established as separate
regulations under 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit - A Permit issued to
the City pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C 1342).
National Pretreatment Standard or National Standard - Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the
Act, which applies to Industrial Users. This term includes categorical standards and the
prohibitive discharge standards or local limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
New Source - Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may
be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of
proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to
such source if such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section
provided that:
(1) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at
which no other source is located; or
(2) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaced the process
or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
(3) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source should be considered. (Ord. 3305. Passed 12/5/89.)
Pass Through - A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES Permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
(Ord. 2940. Passed 4/17/84; Ord. 3028. Passed 10/15/85; Ord 3305. Passed 12/5/89.)
Person - Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or
their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine,
the singular shall include the plural, where indicated by the context.
pH - A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units, and
Art icle 923 6
determined in accordance with EPA test methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
Pollutant - Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into the environment.
Pollution - The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical,
biological, and radiological integrity of the environment.
Pretreatment or Treatment - The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful
state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6 (d).
Pretreatment Requirements - Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an Industrial User.
Pretreatment Standard - See National Pretreatment Standard.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) - A treatment works as defined by Section
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned in this instance by the City. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any manholes, sewers, pumping
stations, force mains, siphons or other facilities or appurtenances which are part of the system
utilized to convey wastewater to a POTW Treatment Plant. The POTW shall also include any
collection and conveyance systems which convey wastewaters to the City’s POTW from persons
outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, Users of the City's POTW.
POTW Treatment Plant - That portion of the POTW designated to provide treatment to
wastewater.
Septage - A type of holding tank waste originating from the discharge of strictly domestic
sewage to holding tanks, chemical toilets, camper waste tanks, trailer waste tanks, cesspools and
septic tanks.
Sewage - See Wastewater.
Shall - is mandatory; may - is permissive.
Significant Industrial User - Any Industrial User of the City's POTW who:
(1) is subject to Categorical Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N; or
Art icle 923 7
(2) discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater); or contributes a process wastestream which
makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by
the City on the basis that the Industrial User has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
Slug Load or Slug - Any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which will cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5 (b) and/or
any discharge of non-routine nature, episodic nature, including but not limited to accidental
spills or non-customary batch discharges, or which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards of Section 923.02 of this Article.
Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations or Local Limits - Numeric quantities or
concentrations of pollutants which may be discharged to the POTW by existing or new Industrial
Users developed by the City in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c) and defined in Section
923.02(d) of this Article.
State - State of Pennsylvania.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) - A classification pursuant to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of
Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
Storm Water - Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation
and resulting therefrom.
Superintendent - The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this Article, or the Superintendent's duly authorized representative.
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) or Suspended Solids - The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering and determined in accordance with EPA test methods
referenced in 40 CFR 136.
User - Any person who utilizes the services of the City's POTW.
Wastewater - The liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and/or domestic sewage from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, or institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
Art icle 923 8
Water Quality Manager – The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of
the Water Quality Bureau. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
Waters of the State - All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells,
springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any portion thereof.
Weekly Average - The arithmetic mean of the values for the Users’ samples collected
over a seven day calendar week.
923.02 GENERAL DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
(a) No User shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any
pollutant or wastewater which will cause pass through or interference with the operation or
performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such Users of a POTW
whether or not the User is subject to National Categorical Standards or any other National, State,
or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. A User may not contribute the following
substances to the POTW:
(1) Quantities of liquids, solids or gases (including, but not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naptha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides) which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or
may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any way to the POTW or to the
operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, any discharge with a
closed-cup flashpoint of less than 1400F (600C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time, shall any wastewater cause two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), to be more than
five percent (5%) nor any single reading to be over ten percent (10%) of
the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter.
(2) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the
flow in the POTW resulting in interference, including, but not limited to,
grease, garbage, solids greater than three (3) inches in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or
glass grinding or polishing wastes.
Art icle 923 9
(3) Pollutants which will cause any damage to the POTW, but in no case may
pollutants being discharged have a pH lower than 5.0 nor greater than
11.5. (Ord. 3305. Passed 12/5/89; Ord. 3869. Passed 2/17/98.)
(4) Pollutants in sufficient quantity which, either alone or by interaction with
other pollutants, would result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes, cause worker injury or disruption of any wastewater treatment
process, including the disposal of sludge, or would be in non-compliance
with any Categorical or Pretreatment Standards established in accord with
40 CFR Section 403.6.
(5) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either alone or by
interaction with other wastes, cause a public nuisance or hazard to life or
prevent entry into the POTW for maintenance and repair.
(6) Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge
at a flow rate and/or concentration which will cause interference with the
POTW.
(7) Substances which will cause pass through and cause the POTW to violate
its NPDES and/or State Solid Waste Disposal System Permit(s) or the air
quality and/or receiving water quality standards. (Ord. 3305. Passed
12/5/89.)
(8) Wastewater with excessive discoloration not removed in the POTW
treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which causes or contributes to interference, pass
through, or any violations at the POTW Treatment Plant.
(9) Heat in amounts producing interference, but in no case heat in such
quantities that the temperature at the POTW Treatment Plant exceeds
400C (1040F). At no time shall a discharge to the POTW have a
temperature higher than 1500F or less than 320F. (Ord. 3305. Passed
12/5/89.)
(10) Slug loads as defined in Section 923.01 of this Article.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive material or isotopes of such halflife
or concentration as may cause pass through or interference in the
POTW or exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable Delaware River Basin Commission, State or Federal
regulations.
(12) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
Art icle 923 10
(13) Discharge of mineral/petroleum oil and grease in concentrations greater
than 100 mg/l and animal/vegetable oil and grease in concentrations
greater than 300 mg/l. (Ord. 3751. Passed 5/21/96; Ord. 3869. Passed
2/17/98.)
(14) Discharge of holding tank waste or septage, except as provided for in
Section 923.08 of this Article.
(15) Discharge which, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered a
hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR Part 261, without prior notification
by the User in writing to the POTW, the State and EPA in accordance with
40 CFR 403.12(p)(l) and written approval by the Superintendent.
(16) New or increased discharges or changes in the nature of discharges
without prior notification to the POTW and written approval by the
Superintendent.
(17) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial process water, unpolluted
cooling water (also refer to Article 915), or swimming pool drainage (also
refer to Article 921), unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(18) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial
wastes, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(19) Wastes generated in the diagnosis, treatment, immunization, or autopsy of
human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the
preparation of human or animal remains for burial or cremation, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(20) Wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources, causing the
POTW Treatment Plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(21) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the POTW.
When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator determines that a User is contributing to
the POTW any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to cause pass through or
interference with the operation of the POTW and/or POTW Treatment Plant, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator shall: (1) Notify the User of the impact of the contribution on the
POTW and/or POTW Treatment Plant; (2) Develop effluent limitation(s), as needed, for the User
to correct the pass through or interference with the POTW and/or POTW Treatment Plant; and
(3) Proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Section 923.05 of this Article.
Art icle 923 11
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they have a reasonable potential to be discharged to the POTW.
(b) National Pretreatment Standards and National Categorical Standards - All
Industrial Users are subject to the National Pretreatment Standards. The National Categorical
Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated into
this Article by reference as though set forth in full. Industrial Users must comply with all
applicable Categorical Standards and other requirements promulgated by EPA. Any Categorical
Standard, if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this Article, shall immediately
supersede the limitations imposed under this Article.
(1) Where a Categorical Standard is expressed only in terms of either the
mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a Categorical Standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the Combined Waste
Stream Formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) An Industrial User may obtain a variance from a Categorical Standard
from EPA if the Industrial User can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA
when developing the Categorical Standard. If a variance is obtained, the
City reserves the right to modify the Industrial User's Permit to
incorporate the revised standards and requirements.
(4) An Industrial User may obtain a net gross adjustment to a Categorical
Standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
(c) Modification of National Categorical Standards - Where the City's POTW
Treatment Plant achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by National Categorical
Standards, the City may apply to the Approval Authority for modification of specific limits in
the National Categorical Standards. "Consistent Removal" is defined by EPA in 40 CFR
403.7(b). The City may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the National Categorical
Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and
prior approval from the Approval Authority is obtained.
(d) Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations - Local Limits - In accordance with 40
CFR 403.5(c), the City imposes the following Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations for all
Industrial Users:
Pollutant (Total) Local Limit (mg/l)
Art icle 923 12
Arsenic 0.11
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium 0.91
Copper 1.35
Lead 0.39
Mercury 0.007
Molybdenum 0.22
Nickel 1.36
Selenium 0.23
Silver 0.21
Zinc 2.58
Cyanide 0.38
(Ord. 3751. Passed 5/21/96; Ord. 3880. Passed 4/21/98. Ord. 2009-1.
Passed 1/6/09.)
The Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations listed above are the highest allowable
concentration in any type of sample, either a grab or composite, collected over any time interval,
unless otherwise specified in an IWDP.
The Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations listed above apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW or at the point designated by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator.
In addition to Industrial Users, the City reserves the right to apply the Specific Pollutant
Discharge Limitations listed above to any User’s wastewater discharge which is not composed of
strictly domestic sewage.
The City reserves the right to establish alternate Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations
in individual Industrial Waste Discharge Permits, but only in accordance with regulatory
requirements. In no event shall any alternate limit allow the total loading allocated to all
industrial users for any pollutant to exceed the maximum allowable industrial headworks loading
as determined in the City’s most recent local limits evaluation approved by the Approval
Authority. The Specific Pollutant Discharge Limitations, if more stringent than the National
Categorical Standards, shall immediately supersede the National Categorical Standards.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(e) State Requirements - State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply
in any case where they are more stringent than Federal requirements and limitations or those in
this Article.
(f) City's Right of Revision - The City reserves the right to establish by ordinance
more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary.
Art icle 923 13
(g) Excessive Discharge - No User shall increase the use of process water solely for
the purpose of complying with this Article or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the National Categorical Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation
developed by the City or State. The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may impose mass
limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet applicable National Categorical Standards, or
in any other pollutant-specific limitations or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition
of mass limitations is appropriate.
(h) Accidental Discharges/Slug Loads - Each Industrial User shall provide protection
from accidental discharges/slug loads of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this Article. Where facilities are provided to prevent accidental discharges/slug loads of
prohibited materials, these facilities shall be provided and maintained at the Industrial User's
own cost and expense. In the case of an accidental discharge/slug loads, it shall be the
responsibility of the Industrial User, upon discovery, and after assessing the situation and taking
initial corrective action, to immediately telephone and notify the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste,
estimated concentration and volume if known, and initial corrective actions taken by the
Industrial User.
(1) Written Notice: Within five (5) days following a accidental
discharge/slug loads; the Industrial User shall submit to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator a detailed written report including the date,
time, duration of the discharge as well as describing the cause of the
discharge, all corrective measures implemented or attempted, and
measures to be taken by the Industrial User to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the Industrial User of any
expenses, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the Industrial User of any
fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this
Article or other applicable articles or laws.
(2) Notice to Employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the
Industrial User's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge/ slug load.
Employers shall insure that all employees are advised of the emergency
notification procedures.
(i) Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans - An Accidental Discharge or Slug
Control Plan, as prescribed under 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (2) (v), shall be required:
(1) For new source Industrial Users. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide protection from accidental discharges or
slugs shall be submitted to the City for review as part of the IWDP
Art icle 923 14
application, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the
facility.
(2) For existing Industrial Users. The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
shall evaluate whether each Industrial User needs a new or updated
accidental discharge/slug control plan. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(j) Should the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator require the Industrial User to
develop, submit for approval, and implement a new or updated accidental discharge/slug control
plan, the accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section
923.02(h) of this Article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents,
and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
When an existing Industrial User is required by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
to provide and/or modify an accidental discharge/slug control plan, the Industrial User shall
provide the plan within sixty (60) days of notification. Should the plan require construction or
implementation of measures to meet compliance, the plan shall provide a schedule for those
actions. After initial review, should additional information be required to provide a complete
plan, it shall be furnished to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator within thirty (30) days of
the date of notification. Failure to submit a revised plan and/or failure to provide a complete
plan after the 30 day submission period may render the Industrial Waste Discharge Permit void.
The City's review and approval of accidental discharge/slug control plans shall not
relieve the Industrial User from the responsibility to modify the Industrial User's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this Article.
If not specifically required by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, the information,
requirements, etc., called for in a plan are not waived by the City and the Industrial User shall
provide all necessary items, procedures, etc., to prevent any accidental discharge and/or slug
discharge to the POTW.
Art icle 923 15
An approved State pollution prevention plan may substitute for all or a portion of the
contents of an accidental discharge/slug control plan to the extent that it satisfies the
requirements described herein.
All Users are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at its facility
affecting potential for a Slug Discharge. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
923.03 FEES
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from Users of the
City's POTW for the implementation of the Industrial Pretreatment Program established herein.
The applicable charges or fees are set forth below:
(a) Service Charges and Fees - The charges and fees include:
(1) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures completed
by the City or the City’s contract laboratory to be billed at 1.15 times the
actual cost. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(2) Fees for IWD Permit applications - $250.00. (Ord. 3751. Passed 5/21/96.)
(3) Fees for filing appeals - $200.00.
(b) Program Fee - The City reserves the right to develop and institute a Program Fee
to recover operating costs associated with implementation of the Industrial Pretreatment Program
which are separate from or in lieu of those costs identified in Sections 923.03 (a) or 923.03 (c) of
this Article. The Program Fee will be chargeable to all Users included in the Industrial
Pretreatment Program and will be billed and updated at a frequency determined by the City.
The above fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Article and are separate from
all other fees chargeable by the City.
(c) Industrial Waste Surcharge
When approval is granted by the City to a User to discharge industrial waste into the
POTW, the User’s sewer rental will be based on the prevailing rate for normal domestic sewage
plus a quarterly Surcharge based on the relative strength of said industrial waste contribution and
calculated as follows:
Surcharge = 0.00834 x Flow x {((BOD5 - 300) x BOD5 Cost) + ((TSS - 350) x TSS Cost) +
((NH3-N - 50) x NH3-N Cost)}
Where:
Art icle 923 16
Surcharge = Surcharge calculated quarterly;
0.00834 = constant to convert industrial waste strength from mg/l to thousand pounds;
Flow = total quarterly discharge flow of the industrial waste in million gallons;
BOD5 = biochemical oxygen demand (5-day) of the industrial waste in mg/l;
300 = value expressing the BOD5 of normal domestic sewage in mg/l;
BOD5 Cost = annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of BOD5;
TSS = total suspended solids of the industrial waste in mg/l;
350 = value expressing the TSS of normal domestic sewage in mg/l;
TSS Cost = annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of TSS;
NH3-N = ammonia-nitrogen of the industrial waste in mg/l;
50 = value expressing the NH3-N of normal domestic sewage in mg/l;
NH3-N Cost = annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of NH3-N;
The City reserves the right to substitute the following formula for the Surcharge in the
event that BOD5 is not the normal measure of the strength of the industrial waste:
Surcharge = 0.00834 x Flow x {((COD - 600) x COD Cost) + ((TSS - 350) x TSS Cost) +
((NH3-N - 50) x NH3-N Cost)}
Where:
Surcharge = Surcharge calculated quarterly;
0.00834 = constant to convert industrial waste strength from mg/l to thousand pounds;
Flow = total quarterly discharge flow of the industrial waste in million gallons;
COD = chemical oxygen demand of the industrial waste in mg/l;
600 = value expressing the COD of normal domestic sewage in mg/l;
COD Cost = annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of COD;
TSS = total suspended solids of the industrial waste in mg/l;
350 = value expressing the TSS of normal domestic sewage in mg/l;
TSS Cost = annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of TSS;
NH3-N = ammonia-nitrogen of the industrial waste in mg/l;
50 = value expressing the NH3-N of normal domestic sewage in mg/l;
NH3-N Cost = annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of NH3-N;
When actual industrial waste values of BOD5 and/or COD and/or TSS and/or NH3-N are
less than the normal domestic sewage values, then the normal domestic sewage values of
300, 600, 350 and/or 50 mg/l, respectively, shall be used in the calculation of the
Surcharge in place of the actual industrial waste values.
The annual City treatment costs per thousand pounds of BOD5, COD, TSS and NH3-N
shall be determined at the beginning of each calendar year, based upon the City Sewer
Fund’s actual operating costs from the previous year.
In no instance shall the sewer rental for industrial waste be less than the prevailing rate
for normal domestic sewage.
Art icle 923 17
In order to ascertain the strength of an industrial waste requiring a Surcharge, the City
shall cause appropriate analysis (BOD5, COD, TSS and NH3-N) to be made quarterly, the
average of which shall be used to establish the Surcharge for the ensuing quarter. A more
extensive analysis may be required under Section 923.04 of this Article. All sampling and
analysis shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of this Article. All expenses for
these analyses shall be borne by the User. (Ord. 2940, Passed 4/17/84; Ord. 3028, Passed
10/15/85; Ord. 3751, Passed 5/21/96.)
The City reserves the right to recalculate and adjust the Surcharge of any User at any
time during the year due to the introduction of new wastewater constituents or any substantial
increase in the strength of the wastewater. A substantial increase shall mean 15% or greater.
923.04 PERMITS.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any Significant and/or Categorical Industrial User to
discharge to the POTW tributary to the City's POTW Treatment Plant without having first
obtained a City Industrial Waste Discharge Permit (IWDP), except as authorized by the Director
of Water & Sewer Resources in accordance with the provisions of this Article, subject to State
and Federal laws and regulations.
In addition to the IWDP, the Industrial User shall obtain such additional permits as
required by applicable sections of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
(b) When requested by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, any User must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of the
request unless additional time is approved, in writing, by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator. The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require Users to update this information.
(c) Industrial Waste Discharge Permits - All Significant and/or Categorical Industrial
Users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain an IWDP before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require other Users to obtain an IWDP as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IWDP shall be deemed a violation of this
Article and shall subject the User to the enforcement under Section 923.05. Obtaining an IWDP
does not relieve a User of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law.
(d) Permit Application - Users required to obtain an IWDP shall complete and file
with the City an application in the form prescribed by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator,
and accompanied by a fee as listed in Section 923.03(a) of this Article. Existing Users shall file
Art icle 923 18
a completed application in accordance with Section 923.04(l). Proposed new Users shall file a
completed application at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW or
within 60 days of receipt of the application from the City, whichever is sooner. In support of the
application, the User shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to,
those referenced in Section 923.02 of this Article or any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by City, State, or National Pretreatment
Standards as determined by a City approved analytical laboratory.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
(4) Time and duration of contribution.
(5) Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including variations, if
any.
(6) Plans to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises
relating to all materials which are or could be discharged.
(8) A certification statement regarding whether or not the National Standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the User to meet applicable National Standards.
(9) Copies of all Material Safety Data Sheets.
(10) Products produced.
(11) Raw material processed.
(12) Normal hours of scheduled operation and operation of pretreatment
system.
(13) List of all environmental permits held.
Art icle 923 19
(14) For all Industrial Users subject to Categorical Standards, any other
information required in a Baseline Monitoring Report as stated in 40 CFR
403.12(b).
(15) Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plan
(16) Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be pertinent to
evaluate the permit application.
All IWDP applications and User reports must be signed by an authorized representative
of the User.
Incomplete or inaccurate IWDP applications will not be processed and will be returned to
the User for revision. All site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, all other types
of construction plans, and process diagrams, which are subject to the requirements of this
Article, shall be signed by an authorized representative of the User that is familiar with the
information and its accuracy. It is recommended that the above information be signed and sealed
by a Professional Engineer, who is licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to ensure
compliance with sound engineering and all applicable Federal, State, and local codes and
statutes.
(e) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the
User and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete
IWDP application, the City will determine whether or not to issue an IWDP. The City may deny
any application for an IWDP, if the application or discharge does not comply with the
requirements of this Article or applicable Federal and State laws and regulations. In the event
that a timely and complete IWDP renewal application has been submitted and the IWDP can not
be reissued, through no fault of the User, before the expiration date, the terms and conditions of
the existing IWDP will be automatically continued and will remain fully effective and
enforceable pending the granting or denial of the application for IWDP renewal.
(f) The City may modify an IWDP for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the User's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of IWDP
issuance;
(3) To reflect a change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
Art icle 923 20
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the
City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the IWDP;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
IWDP application or in any required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Standards pursuant to
40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the IWDP; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner
or operator.
The User shall be informed of any proposed changes in the IWDP at least 30 days prior
to the effective date to change. Any changes or new conditions in the IWDP shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(g) Permit Conditions - IWDPs shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this
Article and all other applicable regulations, User charges and fees established by the City.
IWDP's may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the wastewater to
be discharged to the POTW.
(2) Limits on the wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations
and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. All
Baseline Monitoring Reports, 90-Day Compliance Reports, and periodic
compliance reports must be certified by a qualified professional and must
be signed by an authorized representative of the User and must contain the
Art icle 923 21
certification statement in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). The periodic
compliance reports will be required a minimum of twice a year, indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge as well as a
record of flows.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the City, and affording City access
thereto. As required by 40 CFR 403.12(o), Users must keep records for a
minimum of three (3) years or longer in case of unresolved litigation or
when requested by the Approval Authority. The User shall make such
records available for inspection and copying.
(9) Requirements for prior notification of the City of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system, including the listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes for which the User has submitted initial notification
under 40 CFR 403.12(p). Substantial shall mean 15% plus or minus.
(10) Requirements for notification of accidental discharges/slug loads as per
Section 923.02(h).
(11) Requirements that if sampling by a User indicates a violation, the User
must notify the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The User must also resample and submit results of this resampling to the
City within 30 days.
(12) Statements regarding permit duration or transfer as per Sections 923.04(h)
and (i) of this Article.
(13) Statements associated with enforcement in accordance with Section
923.05 or this Article.
(14) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution
control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
POTW;
(15) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(16) Requirements to develop and implement slug control measures and to
provide notification of facility changes that affect the potential for a slug
discharge. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
Art icle 923 22
(17) Requirements associated with BMP’s at the sole discretion of the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(18) Other pertinent conditions required by the City to ensure compliance with
this Article.
(h) Permits Duration - IWDP's shall be issued for a specified time period, not to
exceed five (5) years. An IWDP may be issued for a minimum period of a year, and shall be
stated to expire on a specific date.
(i) Permit Transfer - IWDPs are issued to a specific User for a specific operation.
An IWDP shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new User, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City. Any succeeding
owner or User shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing IWDP.
(j) Permit Comments - The User may petition the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator to reconsider the terms of an IWDP within thirty (30) days of receipt of the IWDP.
This petition must be made in writing and shall indicate the IWDP provisions objected to, the
reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the IWDP.
The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator will review the comments and make the final decision
on the matter. If the User objects to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator's final decision, the
User may appeal the matter in accordance with Section 923.05(m) of this Article. Failure to
submit written comments within thirty (30) days shall indicate acceptance of the IWDP.
(k) Permit Revocation - The City may, in accordance with this Article, revoke an
IWDP for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
IWDP application;
(3) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(4) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(5) Refusing to allow the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator timely access to
the facility premises and records;
(6) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(7) Failure to pay fines;
(8) Failure to pay sewer charges;
Art icle 923 23
(9) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(10) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the IWDP application;
(11) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of
a permitted facility; or
(12) Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms of
the IWDP or this Article.
IWDPs shall be voidable upon cessation of operations for a period exceeding six (6)
months or transfer of business ownership, unless approved by the City. All IWDPs issued to a
particular User are void upon the issuance of a new or modified IWDP to that User.
(l) Permit Reissuance - A User with an expiring IWDP shall apply for IWDP
reissuance by submitting a complete IWDP application, in accordance with Section 923.04 (d) of
this Article, a minimum of 120 days prior to the expiration of the User's existing IWDP or within
60 days of receipt of the application from the City, whichever is sooner. It is the responsibility
of the User to request an IWDP Application Form no less the 150 days prior to the expiration of
the existing IWDP.
(m) Reporting Requirements
(1) Baseline Monitoring Reports
(A) Within one hundred eighty (180) days after either the effective
date of a Categorical Standard, or the final administrative decision
on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever
is later, existing Industrial Users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW, subject to the new or revised
Categorical Standard, shall submit to the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator a report which contains the information listed in
paragraph (C), below.
(B) At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become Industrial Users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable Categorical
Standard, shall submit to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator a
report which contains the information listed in paragraph (C),
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it
intends to use to meet applicable standards. A new source also
shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
Art icle 923 24
(C) Industrial Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below.
Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and Standard Industrial Classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such Industrial User. This
description shall include a schematic process diagram which
indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
Flow Measurement. Accurate information from properly designed,
installed and maintained flow metering devices showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per
day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
Measurement of Pollutants. The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where
required by the standard or by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR, Part 136 as
amended.
Best Management Practices. Information identified by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator or the applicable pretreatment
standard regarding compliance with any applicable BMP’s.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
Certification. A statement, reviewed by the Industrial User's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether Pretreatment Standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to
meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
Art icle 923 25
Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest
schedule by which the Industrial User will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable Pretreatment Standard. A Compliance Schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
Section 923.04(m)(2) of this Article.
Signature. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed by the
Industrial User’s Authorized Representative.
(2) Compliance Schedule Progress Reports - The following conditions shall
apply to the Compliance Schedule required by Section 923.04(m)(1)(c) of
this Article:
(A) The Compliance Schedule shall contain progress increments
(milestones) in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the Industrial
User to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards (such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
(B) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(C) The Industrial User shall submit a progress report to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator no later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the Compliance Schedule and the final date
of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of process, including the overall completion
date, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being
taken by the Industrial User to return to the established schedule;
and
(D) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator.
(3) Reports on Compliance with Pretreatment Standard Deadline - Within
ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
Categorical Standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
Industrial User subject to such Pretreatment Standards and Requirements
Art icle 923 26
shall submit to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator a report on the
status of compliance. This report must contain all the information
described in Section 923.04(m)(1)(c) of this Article. For Industrial Users
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in
accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall
contain a reasonable measure of the Industrial User's long-term production
rate. For all other Industrial Users subject to Pretreatment Standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), this report shall include the Industrial
User's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed by the Industrial User’s Authorized
Representative. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09)
(4) Periodic Compliance Reports For All Permitted Users
(A) All permitted Users shall, at a frequency determined by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator but in no case less than semiannually,
submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by Pretreatment
Standards and/or contained in a valid IWDP and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily wastewater flows for the
reporting period. Information identified by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator or the applicable pretreatment standard
regarding compliance with any applicable BMP shall also be
included with the report. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed by the User’s Authorized Representative.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09)
(B) As part of these reports, the User may be required to provide
manifests, certifications or any other information deemed
necessary by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator to ensure
compliance with this Article.
(C) All wastewater samples must be representative of the User's
discharge.
(D) If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, using EPA approved
procedures, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(E) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may waive some or all of
the reporting requirements described in (A) and (B) if it is
determined that the City will complete discharge monitoring on the
Art icle 923 27
User’s behalf.
(5) Reports of Changed Conditions - Each User must notify the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator of any significant changes to the User's
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the change occurs.
(A) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require the User to
submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate
the changed condition, including the submission of an IWDP
application.
(B) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may issue a new or
modified IWDP in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
(C) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to average flow increases of 15% or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants at levels that
may cause pass-through or interference or otherwise violate the
provisions of this Article.
(6) Reports of Potential Problems - In the case of any discharge, including,
but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges that violate the
prohibitions of Section 923.02 of this Article, or any discharge that could
cause potential problems for the POTW, the User upon discovery shall
follow the reporting procedures identified in Section 923.02(h) of this
Article.
(7) Reports from Unpermitted Users - All Users not required to obtain an
IWDP may be required to provide appropriate reports, certifications,
laboratory analyses, manifests or any other information to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator as the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator shall
require to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Article.
(8) Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting
(A) If sampling performed by the User indicates a violation, the User
must notify the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator within twentyfour
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The User shall
repeat the sampling within ninety-six (96) hours and shall submit
the analytical results to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation.
(B) Where the User believes the first reported result(s) indicating a
Art icle 923 28
violation(s) maybe in error, the User may submit additional data to
support its position with the repeat sampling results.
(C) Where the User believes its facility continues in violation of its
IWDP after repeat sampling, the User shall again repeat the
sampling within ninety-six (96) hours and shall submit the
analytical results to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator within
thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation. The User
shall also notify the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator to
determine if a schedule for additional monitoring is required.
(D) The User may not be required to resample if the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator notifies the User that the City will
initiate monitoring at the User's facility.
(9) All reports described in (1) through (8) must include the certification
statement listed in 40 CFR 403.6 (a)(2)(ii).
(n) Sample Collection - Wastewater samples collected to comply with any provision
of this Article shall meet the following requirements.
(1) Samples should be collected using 24-hour flow proportional composite
collection techniques. In the event that flow proportional sampling is
infeasible or not warranted in the opinion of the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator, the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may authorize the
use of time proportional sampling, a minimum of four (4) grab samples
where the User demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample
of the effluent being discharged or a frequency of grab samples acceptable
to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator. The Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator may allow grab samples to be composited prior to analysis.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides,
and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using standard grab
collection techniques.
(3) Sampling techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended, shall be
followed.
(4) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator shall be notified a minimum of 48
hours prior to the collection of a sample(s) by a User and may observe the
collection of any sample.
(5) If a User does not follow proper sample collection protocols and/or
techniques, all samples collected inappropriately shall be discarded and reArt
icle 923 29
collected at the sole expense of the User.
(6) Sampling facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained
in good working order at all times. The failure of a User to keep its
sampling location or facility in good working order shall not be grounds
for the User to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(7) All sampling locations utilized to meet the discharge monitoring
provisions of this Article shall be approved by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator.
(o) Analytical Requirements - Wastewater pollutant analyses completed to comply
with any provision of this Article shall meet the following requirements.
(1) All pollutant analyses shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable Categorical Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the Administrator.
(2) The User shall provide the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator with the
name, address and telephone number of any contract laboratory intended
to be utilized for pollutant analyses at least 48 hours prior to the collection
of any samples. The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may recommend
the use of an alternate contract laboratory.
(3) Copies of laboratory analysis results shall be forwarded to the User and
the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator simultaneously.
(4) Laboratory analysis results obtained by a User following improper
protocols or deemed technically deficient by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator shall be discarded and samples shall be re-analyzed at the
sole expense of the User.
(p) Flow Measurement - All wastewater flow monitoring data obtained to comply
with any provision of this Article shall meet the following requirements.
(1) All new, required flow measuring devices shall be approved by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator prior to installation. The flow
measuring device(s) shall be properly designed, compatible with the
process involved and accurate. The flow measuring device(s) shall be
calibrated at least semi-annually.
(2) If a discrepancy in reported flow data is identified, the Industrial
Art icle 923 30
Pretreatment Coordinator may require that existing flow measuring
devices be serviced by a certified technician or replaced at the sole
expense of the User.
(3) Flow monitoring facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and
maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a User to
keep its flow monitoring facility in good working order shall not be
grounds for the User to claim that the measurements are unrepresentative
of its volume of flow to the POTW.
(4) If a User does not properly calibrate or maintain its flow monitoring
equipment or if flow measurements are deemed inaccurate by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator shall utilize the User’s metered water usage records to
determine the volume of wastewater flow to the POTW. In this case, all
claims of product uptake, evaporation or other water losses shall be
precluded.
(5) If a User does not have a flow measurement device, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator may:
(A) Require installation of flow monitoring facilities in accordance
with the provisions of this Article or;
(B) Rely on the User’s metered water usage records to determine the
volume of wastewater flow to the POTW. In this case, metered
water losses may be considered by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator. Unmetered claims of product uptake, evaporation or
other losses shall be precluded unless appropriated documentation
can be provided by the User.
(q) Monitoring Facilities - The City shall require to be provided and operated at the
User's own expense, sampling manholes or any other device or facility suitable and appropriate
to enable inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal
drainage systems. Such manhole device or facility should normally be situated on the User's
premises in the User's possession; but, the City may, when a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the User, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of sample for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the User.
(r) Inspection and Sampling - The City shall inspect, at a minimum annually, the
Art icle 923 31
facilities of any User to ascertain whether the purpose of this Article is being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises connected to the sewage
collection system shall allow the City or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all
parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, or in the performance of any duties.
The User's records of monitoring activities and results shall be available for inspection and copying.
The City shall have the right to set up on the User's property such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations without
notification to the User. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
Where a User has security measures in force which would require proper identification
and clearance before entry into their premises, the User shall make necessary arrangements with
their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City
will be permitted to enter and to perform their specific responsibilities within 10 minutes of their
initial time of arrival. Delaying City personnel for more than 10 minutes for any reason or to
complete process changes or to alter wastewater constituency prior to sample collection shall be
a violation of this Article and shall subject the User to the sanctions set forth in this Article.
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User at the written request of the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator and shall not be replaced without approval of the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the User.
(s) If the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator has been refused any records or access
to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, or if the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator believes that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine or specific
inspection and sampling program of the City, designed to verify compliance with this Article or
any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the Director of Water and Sewer Resources may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the appropriate judicial authority.
(t) Pretreatment - Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply
with this Article and shall achieve compliance with all applicable Pretreatment Standards, local
limits, and the prohibitions set out in Sections 923.02 of this Article within the time limitations
specified by the agency issuing the standards. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the User's expense. Detailed plans describing such
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
for review, and shall be acceptable to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator before such
facilities are constructed. The City's review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no
way relieve the User from the responsibility of additional or future modifications of such
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this
Article.
Whenever deemed necessary, the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require Users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only at specific points of the POTW, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge,
Art icle 923 32
separate domestic sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and/or such other
conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the User's compliance with
the requirements of this Article.
The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and
flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A IWDP may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the
proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for residential sources. All interception units shall be
of type and capacity approved by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator and shall be so located
to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned,
and repaired regularly, as needed, by the User at their expense.
(u) Publication of Users in Significant Non-compliance – The City shall annually
publish, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful Public Notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, all Users which at any time during the previous twelve
months were in significant non-compliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements. For the purpose of this provision, a User is in significant non-compliance if its
violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in
which sixty-six percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a
six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40
CFR 403.3 (1);
(2) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3 (1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD5, CBOD5, TSS, fats, oil, and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
longer-term average) that the City determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f) (1)
(vi) (B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
Art icle 923 33
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the schedule date, required reports
such as Baseline Monitoring Reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which may include violations of
BMP’s that the City determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the City’s pretreatment program.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
(v) Confidential Information - Information and data on a User obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permit and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the User
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets or other confidential business information of the User.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public
but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
Article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, State Disposal
System Permit and/or the Pretreatment Programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the EPA or the State in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Effluent data as defined in 40 CFR
2.302(a)(2) will not be recognized as confidential information.
(w) Record Retention - Users shall maintain records of all information resulting from
any discharge monitoring activities completed by the User. At a minimum, such records must
include:
(1) The date, exact place, method, time of sampling and the
names of the person(s) collecting the samples;
(2) Dates analyses were performed;
(3) Who performed the analyses;
(4) Analytical techniques/methods used; and
(5) The results of such analyses.
Art icle 923 34
Users shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records, reports,
chemical analyses, etc. made by or on behalf of the User in connection with its discharge,
records associated with implementation of BMP’s and any other records required by the City
related to the MIPP. In addition, any records that pertain to matters that are the subject of
special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City shall be
retained and preserved by the User until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. The User shall, upon
request and within the time frame specified by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, furnish to
the City copies of any records required to be kept by this Article. (Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
923.05 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Suspension - The City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or an
IWDP without prior notice when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent and substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or
causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit. In the event of a failure of the
person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall take steps as deemed
necessary including immediate termination of water service and/or immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The service and/or IWDP shall be restored within five working days after, in the
opinion of the City, the actual or threatened cause for the suspension has been removed. The
above actions shall be taken only as ordered by the Director of Water & Sewer Resources.
(b) Notice of Suspension - In the event that the City decides it is necessary to suspend
its wastewater treatment service for reasons other than as described above, the User shall be
given a 15 day notice of such suspension. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or IWDP shall stop or eliminate the contribution as required in the
suspension notice. Between the time of the notice of suspension of services and the date services
are terminated, the User shall have the right to have a Show Cause Hearing with the Hearing
Board regarding the cause of the suspension.
The City shall reinstate the IWDP and/or wastewater treatment service within five
working days upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge or in compliance
with instruction of the Hearing Board. A detailed written statement submitted by the User
describing the cause of the harmful contributions and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the City within five days of the date of occurrence. In the event
of a failure of the User to comply with the suspension notice, the City may take such steps as
deemed necessary to terminate the service.
(c) Revocation of Permit - Any User who violates the conditions of this Article, or
applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having the User's permit revoked as
described in Section 923.04(k) of the Article.
Art icle 923 35
(d) Notification of Violation - Whenever the City finds that any User has violated or
is violating this Article, Industrial Waste Discharge Permit, or any prohibition, limitation of
requirements contained herein the City may serve upon such person a written Notice of Violation
stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the Notice, a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by the User.
(e) Hearing Board
(1) A Hearing Board, shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Bethlehem as needed, for the purpose of hearing and deciding appeals
between the City and Users on matters concerning interpretation and
execution of the provisions of this Article. Cost of appeals shall be borne
by the User requesting an appeal.
(2) The chairperson of the board shall be a member of City Council's Public
Works Committee, one member shall be a professional engineer skilled in
practice of sanitary engineering; one member shall be a representative of
industry or manufacturing enterprise; one member shall be a
representative of a local environmental organization; and one member
shall be selected at large for that member's interest in accomplishing the
objectives of this Article.
(3) Terms on the Board shall be for a period of five years. The Mayor shall
appoint representatives to fill vacancies on the board to complete
unexpired terms. Interim appointments may be permitted to serve an
additional full term on the board. Hearing Boards may be appointed as
standing panels, or on a case-by-case basis, as determined from time to
time, in the sole discretion of the Mayor.
(f) Show Cause Hearing
(1) The City may order any User who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Hearing Board why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be
served on the User specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the Hearing Board regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to
be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the User to show
cause before the Hearing Board why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
(2) The Hearing Board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence,
or may designate any one or more of its members, or any officer or
Art icle 923 36
employee of the assigned department to:
(A) Issue in the name of the Hearing Board notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(B) Receive evidence.
(C) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Hearing
Board for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing pursuant to this Article, testimony taken must be under
oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(4) After the Hearing Board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order
to the User responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further and/or other orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(g) Consent Orders - The City may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any User
responsible for non-compliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the
User to correct the non-compliance within a time period specified by the document.
(h) Compliance Orders - When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a
User has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Article, an IWDP or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the City may issue an order to
the User responsible for the discharge directing that the User come into compliance within a
specified time. If the User does not come into compliance within the time provided, wastewater
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance Orders also may contain other
requirements to address the non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
A Compliance Schedule contained in any Compliance Order shall not be construed as an
extension of the deadline for compliance established for any Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, nor does a Compliance Order relieve the User of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation.
Art icle 923 37
(i) Cease and Desist Orders - When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator finds
that a User has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Article, an IWDP or order
issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or that the User's past
violations are likely to recur, the City may issue an order to the User directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the User to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations, terminating the discharge or hauling non-compliant discharges
off-site for proper disposal.
(j) Administrative Fines
(1) When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a User has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Article, an IWDP or
order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement, the City may fine such User in an amount not to exceed the
amount set forth in the Section 923.99 of this Article for each violation
regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. Such fines shall be assessed in
accordance with the terms set forth in this Article and/or the City’s
Enforcement Response Plan. In the case of weekly, monthly or other
long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation.
(2) A lien against the User's property will be sought and other enforcement
collection action may be taken for unpaid fines.
(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines shall file a written request for the City
to reconsider the fine along with the full payment of the fine amount
within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. The Hearing Board
may convene to deliberate on the matter. In the event the appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall
be returned to the User. The City may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders to the fine
when the fine and or a portion of same, is substantiated.
(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.
(k) Legal Action - The City shall be able to seek injunctive relief for non-compliance
by Users with Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. Injunctive relief is available for
violations of any requirement stated in this Article or Industrial Waste Discharge Permits,
including, but not limited to, wastewater discharge violations, failure to allow access by the City
Art icle 923 38
to a User's facility, failure to submit reports by a specified deadline or any violation of any order
of the City. The City Solicitor may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable
relief in the local Court of Common Pleas.
(l) Remedies Nonexclusive - The remedies provided for in this Article are not
exclusive. The City may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
User. Enforcement of industrial pretreatment program violations will be in
accordance with this Article and/or the City’s Enforcement Response Plan. However, the City
may take other action against any User when the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any non-compliant User. Where
the Enforcement Response Plan does not provide guidelines on enforcement action for a specific
instance of non-compliance, the City may impose other appropriate enforcement action to
address the non-compliance.
(m) Appeals - A User, may appeal the terms of an IWDP, Administrative Fine or any
Administrative Action within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance. The written appeal
request shall provide the name, address and telephone number of the appellant as well the date
that the City took the action which is the subject matter of the appeal. In its petition, the
appealing party shall also indicate the provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any.
(1) Failure to submit a timely appeal for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) The conditions of the current IWDP shall remain in effect pending the
appeal of the new IWDP.
(3) The City shall respond with its position within sixty (60) days of filing of
an appeal.
(4) The User must file its appeal with the Hearing Board, described in Section
923.05(e), to conduct a hearing and decide an appeal on the matter.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
decision must do so by filing a complaint with the local Court of Common
Pleas, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Hearing Board.
(n) Conference Option - At the time an appeal is requested, the User may also request
a conference with the City prior to the scheduling of a Hearing Board hearing. Said conference
will include appropriate members of the City staff and its agents. Violations and penalties will
be explained and discussed. Electing this option does not foreclose and/or affect the User's right
to a hearing provided that the written request for the hearing was filed within thirty (30) days of
service as noted above. The purpose of this option is to provide the User with an informal forum
within which to discuss the alleged violations and expedite conclusion and/or resolution of
outstanding enforcement actions. If resolution is not reached within ninety (90) days of the
Art icle 923 39
scheduled conference, the City shall schedule the matter for Hearing Board hearing. In any
event either party may request a Hearing Board hearing at any point during the conference
proceedings.
923.06 REPEALER.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be, and the same are hereby
repealed.
923.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision to be unconstitutional or
invalid, that decision shall only affect the provision so declared. The declaration shall not affect
any other portion of this Article as a whole.
923.08 HOLDING TANK WASTE.
(a) Holding Tank Waste - The City may accept discharged, trucked or hauled waste
exclusively from holding tanks for treatment. The decision for approval shall be based on, but
not limited to, the source, characteristics and volume of waste to be discharged. In no instance
shall holding tank waste be discharged to the POTW without prior approval by the
Superintendent. All holding tank waste discharges shall be regulated through the City’s
Industrial Pretreatment Program.
(b) Septage - The City may accept for treatment, trucked and hauled septage which
originated from chemical toilets, campers, trailers or residential, commercial, or industrial septic
tanks/cesspools containing domestic sewage only. The decision for approval shall be based on,
but not limited to, the characteristics of the septage in conjunction with the volume of septage to
be discharged. In no instance shall septage be discharged to the POTW without prior approval
by the Superintendent. All septage discharges shall be regulated in accordance with the City’s
Industrial Pretreatment Program and/or Septage Management Plan.
(c) Discharge Points - The City shall designate the authorized discharge point(s) for
holding tank waste and septage. All such discharges must be made at the designated point(s).
(d) Application for Discharge - The City may require that some or all of the
information listed in Section 923.04(d) of this Article be submitted to the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator for review as part of the decision making process for approval to discharge holding
tank waste or septage.
(e) Approval to Discharge - The City may issue a letter approval for limited
frequency discharges or may require that a permit be obtained for the proposed discharge.
Permits will be obtained in accordance with Section 923.04 of this Article and/or the City’s
Art icle 923 40
Septage Management Plan.
(f) Enforcement - Users will adhere to and obey all terms and conditions stated in
their individual approval letters or permits and the requirements of this Article. Any violation of
the terms and conditions of individual approval letters or permits or the requirements of this
Article shall subject the User to the sanctions set out in this Article. Obtaining an approval to
discharge holding tank waste or septage from the City does not relieve a User of their obligation
to comply with any other requirements of Federal, State, and local law.
(g) Fees - A fee based on the City’s current fee schedule will be levied on all holding
tank waste or septage discharged to the City’s POTW. Holding tank waste and septage may also
be subject to surcharge fees as described in Section 923.03 of this Article.
(Ord. 2009-1. Passed 1/6/09.)
923.09 REGULATION OF WASTEWATER FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
(a) If another municipality, or User located within another municipality outside of the
jurisdiction of the City, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City may enter into a binding
agreement with the contributing municipality.
(b) Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a) above, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the
POTW by the contributing municipality;
(2) An inventory of all Users located within the contributing municipality that
are discharging to the POTW; and
(3) Such other information as the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may
deem necessary.
(c) A binding agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the
following conditions at a minimum:
(1) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a Sewer Use
Ordinance which is at least as stringent as this Article, an Enforcement
Response Plan Resolution, a Surcharge Resolution and local limits which
are at least as stringent as those set out in Section 923.02(d) of this Article.
The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's Article(s) or
local limits;
Art icle 923 41
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised User
inventory on at least an annual basis;
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will
be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities
will be conducted by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator; and which
of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator;
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
(5) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge;
(7) A provision ensuring the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator access to the
facilities of Users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator;
and
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the
binding agreement, and authorizing the City to take legal action to enforce
the terms of the contributing municipality's Ordinance or impose and
enforce Pretreatment Standards or Requirements.
923.10 CONTRIBUTING MUNICIPALITY APPROVAL AND CONSENT.
Following initial approval of this revised Article by the contributing municipalities, who
by contract or agreement with the City are users of the City's POTW, the City may amend and
supplement this Article as it deems appropriate and the initial contributing municipalities’
approval shall be deemed to be an advance consent to and approval of such further amendments
and supplements.
923.99 PENALTY.
(a) Criminal Penalties
A User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Article, an
Art icle 923 42
IWDP, or order issued hereunder, or who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury, property damage, pass through, interference or any
User who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed, or required to be maintained pursuant
to this Article, an IWDP or order issued under this Article or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Article, may
be subject to criminal prosecution in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18 P.C.S. Section 101 et seq.
(b) Civil Penalties
(1) In accordance with PA Act 9, any User who has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this Article, an IWDP, or order issued hereunder,
or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement shall be liable to the
City for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation, per day.
(2) In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the User's violation,
corrective actions by the User, the compliance history of the User, and any
other factor as justice requires. All penalties shall be assessed in
accordance with this Article and the City’s Enforcement Response Plan.
(3) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a User.
(4) In the event any User violation(s) results in the imposition of a fine or
other penalty on the City by EPA, the state, or any other agency, such
violation(s) shall be punishable by a civil penalty at least equal to the
dollar amount imposed upon the City plus its administrative, legal,
engineering costs, and expenses, but not more than $25,000, per day, per
violation.
(c) Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(A), any penalties required under this
section will apply per violation per day. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In the case of weekly, monthly or other longterm
average discharge limits, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable costs for
any loss, damage, cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation, attorney's fees,
court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this Article or the orders, rules, regulations, and
permits issued hereunder. (Ord. 3028. Passed 10/15/85; Ord. 3242 - Passed 2/7/89; Ord. 3305.
Passed 12/5/89; Ord. 3470. Passed 3/3/92; Ord. 4116. Passed 12/18/01)
Art icle 923 43
ARTICLE 925
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
925.01 SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Bethlehem Stormwater
Management Ordinance”.
925.02 STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from
development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes
to erosion and sedimentation, changes the natural hydrologic patterns, destroys
aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and
flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and
threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable
regulation of development and activities causing accelerated erosion and loss of
natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare and the
protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of the Commonwealth,
their resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important resource by providing groundwater recharge for
water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface
water quality.
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential
component in successfully addressing stormwater.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of
stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for
stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
F. Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can contribute
to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth by the municipality.
ARTICLE 925
2
925.03 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and welfare within the
City’s Watersheds by minimizing the damages and maximizing the benefits described in Section
925.02 of this Ordinance by provisions designed to:
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating activities which cause
such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to maintain groundwater
recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to otherwise
protect water resources.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
municipality and the Commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management BMPs that
are implemented in the City.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning,
design and management.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source which requires a minimum of
structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain “existing uses” and maintain the level of
water quality to support those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in “special protection” streams.
J. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
925.04 STATUTORY AUTHORITY
The City is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the “Stormwater
Management Act” and the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code”, 53. P.S. Section 10101,
et seq.
*
ARTICLE 925
3
925.05 APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to those areas of the City which are located within the
Catasauqua Creek & Lehigh River Sub-Basin, Monocacy Creek, Nancy Run and Saucon Creek
Watersheds as delineated on the official maps available for inspection at the City, Engineering
Bureau.
The following activities are defined as Regulated Activities and shall be regulated by this
Ordinance:
A. Land development.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings, including residential
construction.
E. Earth moving
F. Agricultural Operations
G. Forest Management Operations
H. Nursery Operations
I. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
J. Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
K. Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities.
L. Other than that included in 925.05A though K, any Earth Disturbance Activities or
any activities that include the alteration or development of land in a manner that may
affect stormwater runoff onto adjacent property. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.06 EXEMPTIONS
A. Impervious Cover - Any proposed Regulated Activity, except those defined in Section
925.05I and 925.05J, which would create 10,000 square feet or less of additional
impervious cover is exempt from the Drainage Plan preparation provisions of this
Ordinance except as cited in Section 925.06D and E. The date of the City Ordinance
adoption of the original Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinances (1988) shall be
the starting point from which to consider tracts as “parent tracts” in which future
ARTICLE 925
4
subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively
considered. For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must
be used in determining conformance with this criteria. Additional impervious cover
shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new
streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the proposed Regulated Activity.
Any additional areas proposed to initially be gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement,
etc. shall be assumed to be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the
exemption criteria. Any existing gravel, crushed stone or hard packed soil areas on a
site shall be considered as pervious cover for the purpose of exemption evaluation.
All of the impervious cover added incrementally to a site above the initial 10,000
square feet shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. If a site has
previously received an exemption and is proposing additional development such that
the total impervious cover on the site exceeds 10,000 square feet, the total impervious
cover on the site proposed since the original ordinance date must meet the provisions
of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
B. Prior Drainage Plan Approval - Any Regulated Activity for which a Drainage Plan
was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land development proposal that
received preliminary plan approval from the municipality prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance is exempt from the water quantity provisions of this Ordinance, except
as cited in Section 925.06D, provided that the approved Drainage Plan included
design of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site currently proposed for
development consistent with ordinance provisions in effect at the time of approval
and the approval has not lapsed under the Municipalities Planning Code. If significant
revisions are made to the Drainage Plan after both the preliminary plan approval and
the effective date of this Ordinance, preparation of a new Drainage Plan, subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be required. Significant revisions would
include a change in control methods or techniques, relocation or redesign of control
measures or changes necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the original Drainage Plan. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
C. Activities associated with 925.05L shall be exempt from the Drainage Plan
preparation requirements of the Ordinance unless the municipality determines that the
activity could create a new or relocated concentrated drainage discharge. Agricultural
plowing and tilling as may be covered by Section 925.05H are exempt from the
drainage Plan provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
D. These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as
are necessary to protect health, safety and property and to meet State Water Quality
Requirements. These measures include adequate and safe conveyance of stormwater
on the site and as it leaves the site. These exemptions do not relieve the applicant
from the responsibility to secure permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
E. Any regulated activity that meets the exemption criteria in Section 925.06A or B, in
lieu of meeting the water quality criteria in Section 925.15, will be consistent with the
ARTICLE 925
5
Ordinance if one of the BMPs listed below is employed on the site to control water
quality.
1. Controlling runoff through a “sheet flow” system of vegetative or similar buffers
having a minimum flow length equal to the length of the impervious areas.
2. Disconnecting roof downspouts from direct discharge to curb/gutter or storm
sewer systems and allowing the downspout discharge to flow over plant, lawn or
woodland areas in such a manner as to avoid rill or gully erosion.
3. Infiltration designed to meet the provisions of this Ordinance.
4. Employing any one of the BMPs listed in Section 304.O.
Sites that meet the exemption criteria in Section 925.06A or B are not required to
conduct a Preliminary Site Investigation (as defined in Section 925.11) as long as
infiltration BMPs are not proposed. If infiltration BMPs are proposed, a Preliminary
Site Investigation shall be performed. The City shall have the authority to require,
review, approve, reject or recommend alternative methods for meeting the water
quality requirements of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
F. No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in Sections
925.05I and 925.05J. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
G. Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and Drainage Plan preparation
requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
H. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate control and
Drainage Plan preparation requirements of the Ordinance provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed
7/2/2019)
I. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this Section at any
time for any project that the municipality believes may pose a threat to public health,
safety, property or the environment. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.07 REPEALER
Any ordinance of the City inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is
hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
925.08 SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining
provisions of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 925
6
925.09 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS
Approvals issued pursuant to this Ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other
applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
925.10 DUTY OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Ordinance, including exemption and waiver
provisions, any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures as are
reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall
include such actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health and property from
possible injury.
925.11 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include
feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word “includes” or “including” shall not limit the term to the specific example but is
intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
C. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory; the words “may” and “should” are
permissive.
Accelerated Erosion – The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of
human activities and natural processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
Act 167 – Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, the “Stormwater Management Act.”
Act 247 – Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 “ Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.”
Best Management Practice (BMP) – Activities, facilities, measures or procedures used to
manage stormwater quantity and quality impacts from the regulated activities listed in Section
105, to meet State Water Quality Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to
otherwise meet the purposes of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 925
7
Best Management Practice Operations and Maintenance Plan – Documentation, included as
part of a Drainage Plan, detailing the proposed BMPs, how they will be operated and maintained
and who will be responsible.
Bioretention – Densely vegetated, depressed features that store stormwater and filter it through
vegetation, mulch, planting soil, etc. Ultimately stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated, or
discharged. Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest ecosystems in terms of species
diversity, density, distribution, use of native plants, etc.
Buffer – (1) Streamside Buffer - A zone of variable width located along a stream that is
vegetated and is designed to filter pollutants from runoff.
(2) Special Geologic Feature Buffer – A required isolation distance from a special
geologic feature to a proposed BMP needed to reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due to
stormwater management activities.
Capture/Reuse – Stormwater management techniques such as cisterns and rain barrels which
direct runoff into storage devices, surface or sub-surface, for later re-use, such as for irrigation of
gardens and other planted areas. Because this stormwater is utilized and no pollutant discharge
results, water quality performance is superior to other non-infiltration BMPs.
Carbonate Bedrock – Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate minerals, such as limestone and
dolomite; specifically a sedimentary rock composed of more than 50% by weight of carbonate
minerals that underlies soil or other unconsolidated, superficial material.
Cistern – An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
City – City of Bethlehem.
Closed Depression – A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the land surface. It is
characterized by internal drainage, varying magnitude, and an unbroken ground surface.
Concentrated Drainage Discharge – Stormwater runoff leaving a property via a point source.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Conservation District – The Lehigh or Northampton County Conservation District, as
applicable.
Constructed Wetlands – Constructed wetlands are similar to wet ponds (see below) and consist
of a basin which provides for necessary stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool or water
level, planted with wetland vegetation. To be successful, constructed wetlands must have
adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for
maintenance of a permanent pool of water). In these cases, the permanent pool must be designed
carefully, usually with shallow edge benches, so that water levels are appropriate to support
carefully selected wetland vegetation.
ARTICLE 925
8
Culvert – A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant works which carries surface
water.
Dam – An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of
impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for
highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEP – The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (formerly the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources).
Design Storm – The depth and time distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., 50-yr. storm) and duration (e.g. 24-hour), and used in computing
stormwater management control systems.
Detention Basin – A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the
runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
Developer – A person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity, or any responsible
person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any Regulated Activity of this Ordinance.
Development Site – The specific tract of land for which a Regulated Activity is proposed.
Diffused Drainage – See Sheet Flow.
Direct Recharge (D-RE) BMP – A BMP designed to direct runoff to groundwater recharge
without providing for vegetative uptake. Examples include infiltration trenches, seepage, beds,
drywells and injection wells such that nearly all runoff becomes recharge to groundwater. (Ord.
2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Drainage Easement – A right granted by a land owner to a grantee, allowing the use of private
land for stormwater management purposes.
Drainage Plan – The documentation of the proposed stormwater quantity and quality
management controls to be used for a given development site, including a BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan, the contents of which are established in Section 925.22. (Ord. 2019-20.
Passed 7/2/2019)
Earth Disturbance Activity – A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface
of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations,
embankments, road maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling
or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
Erosion – The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological
agents.
ARTICLE 925
9
Evapotranspiration (ET) BMP – A BMP designed to provide opportunity for runoff
evaporation and transpiration by vegetation and or surface infiltration of runoff. Capture/reuse
BMPs are included if the water is applied to vegetated areas. Examples include bioretention and
surface infiltration basins. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Existing Uses – Those uses actually attained in the water body on or after November 28, 1975,
whether or not they are included in the water quality standards. (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1)
Fill – Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and waste materials.
Filter Strips – see Vegetated Buffers.
Freeboard – The incremental depth in a stormwater management structure, provided as a safety
factor of design, above that required to convey the design runoff event.
Groundwater Recharge – Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
Hardship Waiver Request – A written request for a waiver alleging that the provisions of this
Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Waivers from the water quality
provisions of this Ordinance shall not be granted.
Hydrologic Engineering Center – Hydrologic Modeling System (HEC-HMS) – The Comcomputer-
based hydrologic modeling technique developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and adapted to the Monocacy Creek Watershed for the Act 167 Plan. The Model was “calibrated”
to reflect actual flow values by adjusting key model input parameters. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed
7/2/2019)
Hot Spot Land Uses – A Land Use or activity that generates higher concentrations of
hydrocarbons, trace metals or other toxic substances than typically found in stormwater runoff.
These land uses are listed in Section 925.15P.
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) – Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C and D) to indicate
the minimum infiltration rates, which are obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the US Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey
report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less permeable as the HSG varies from A to D.
Impervious Surface (Impervious Cover) – A surface which prevents the percolation of water
into the ground.
Infiltration Practice – A practice designed to direct runoff into the ground, e.g. French drain,
seepage pit, seepage trench or bioretention area.
ARTICLE 925
10
Infiltration Structure – A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground, e.g. French drain,
seepage pit, trench or perforated pipe or similar.
Karst – A type of topography or landscape characterized by depressions, sinkholes, limestone
towers and steep-sided hills, underground drainage and caves. Karst is usually formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestones or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
Land Development – (i) the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings, or (b) the division
or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features; (ii) a subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section
503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Loading Rate – The ratio of the land area draining to the system, as modified by the weighting
factors in Section 925.19B, compared to the base area of the infiltration system. (Ord. 2019-20.
Passed 7/2/2019)
Low Impact Development – A development approach that promotes practices that will
minimize post-development runoff rates and volumes thereby minimizing needs for artificial
conveyance and storage facilities. Site design practices include preserving natural drainage
features, minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious
surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage.
“Local” Runoff Conveyance Facilities – Any natural channel or manmade conveyance system
which has the purpose of transporting runoff from the site to the mainstream.
LVPC – Lehigh Valley Planning Commission of Lehigh and Northampton Counties.
Mainstem (main channel) – Any stream segment or other conveyance used as a reach in the
Lehigh, Monocacy, Nancy Run or Saucon Creek hydrologic model.
Manning Equation (Manning formula) – A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g.
feet per second) and flow rate (e.g. cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel
shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. “Open channels” may include closed conduits so long
as the flow is not under pressure.
Maryland Stormwater Design Manual – A stormwater design manual written by the Maryland
Department of the Environment and the Center for Watershed Protection. As of January 2004,
the Manual can be obtained through the following web site: www.mde.state.md.us.
Minimum Disturbance/Minimum Maintenance Practices (MD/MM) – A site design practice
in which careful limits are placed on site clearance prior to development allowing for maximum
retention of existing vegetation (woodlands and other), minimum disturbance and compaction of
existing soil mantle and minimum site application of chemicals post-development. Typically,
MD/MM includes disturbance setback criteria from buildings as well as related site
ARTICLE 925
11
improvements such as walkways, driveways, roadways, and any other improvements. These
criteria may vary by community context as well as by type of development being proposed.
Additionally, MD/MM also shall include provisions (e.g., deed restrictions, conservation
easements) to protect these areas from future disturbance and from application of fertilizers,
pesticides, and herbicides.
Municipality – City of Bethlehem, Lehigh or Northampton County (as applicable),
Pennsylvania.
No Harm Option – The option of using a less restrictive runoff quantity control if it can be
shown that adequate and safe runoff conveyance exists and that the less restrictive control would
not adversely affect health, safety and property.
NPDES – National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NRCS – Natural Resource Conservation Service - U.S. Department of Agriculture. (Formerly the
Soil Conservation Service.)
Oil/Water Separator – A structural mechanism designed to remove free oil and grease (and
possibly solids) from stormwater runoff.
Open Channel – Any storm water conveyance facility through which water normally flows by
gravity. An open channel may be exposed, such as a swale, street gutter, or stream; or unexposed
such as a culvert.
Outfall – “Point source” as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point where the City’s storm
sewer system discharges to surface waters of the Commonwealth.
Peak Discharge – The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at a given location and time
resulting from a specified storm event.
Penn State Runoff Model (PSRM) – The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique used
in previous Act 167 Plans. PSRM was also updated to include water quality modeling
capabilities and renamed PSRM-QUAL. The PSRM and PSRM-QUAL calculation
methodologies were used as the basis for writing the WATERSHED model.
Person – An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, or a
governmental unit, public utility or other for or not for profit statutory entity or other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Point Source – any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to,
any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as
defined in State regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
Preliminary Site Investigation – The determination of the depth to bedrock, the depth to the
seasonal high water table and the soil permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site
ARTICLE 925
12
through the use of published data and on-site surveys. In carbonate bedrock areas, the location of
special geologic features must also be determined along with the associated buffer distance to the
possible infiltration area. See Appendix G.
Pretreatment – Measures implemented for Hot Spot Land Uses designed to reduce the
concentration of hydrocarbons, trace metals, and other toxic substance to levels typically found in
Stormwater runoff. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Public Water Supplier – A person who owns or operates a public water system.
Public Water System – A system which provides water to the public for human consumption
which has at lest 15 service connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals
daily at least 60 days out of the year. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 109)
Qualified Geotechnical Professional – A licensed professional geologist or a licensed
professional engineer who has a background or expertise in geology or hydrogeology.
Rational Method – A method of peak runoff calculation using a standardized runoff coefficient
(rational ‘c’), acreage of tract and rainfall intensity determined by return period and by the time
necessary for the entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational method formula is stated as
follows: Q = ciA, where “Q” is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second, “c” is the
dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix C), “i” is the rainfall intensity in inches per hour,
and “A” is the area of the tract in acres.
Reach – Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels used for watershed runoff
modeling purposes to connect the subareas and transport flows downstream.
Recharge Volume (Rev) – The portion of the water quality volume (WQv) used to maintain
groundwater recharge rates at development sites. (see Section 925.15J)
Regulated Activities – Actions or proposed actions which impact upon proper management of
stormwater runoff and which are governed by this Ordinance as specified in Section 925.05.
Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities – Earth disturbance activity of one acre or more with a
point source discharge to surface waters or to the municipality’s storm sewer system or earth
disturbance activity of five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth
disturbance on any portion of, part or during any stage of a larger common plan of development.
Release Rate – The percentage of the pre-development peak rate of runoff for a development site
to which the post-development peak rate of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow
increases throughout the watershed.
Return Period – An expression of the intensity of an event based on its statistical chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. An event with a 1% chance in any given year is
stated to have 100-year return period. And event with a 50% chance is stated to have a 2-year
return period. Over a very long period of record, events might be expected to recur on average in
ARTICLE 925
13
accordance with their return period. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Road Maintenance – Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross-section such as
grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
Runoff – That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
Runoff BMP – A BMP designed for essentially the full volume of runoff entering the BMP to
discharged off-site. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Sediment Traps/Catch Basin Sumps – A chamber which provides storage below the outlet in a
storm inlet to collect sediment, debris and associated pollutants, typically requiring periodic clean
out.
Seepage Pit/Seepage Trench – An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar
material and into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
Separate Storm Sewer System – A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or
storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
Sheet Flow – Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the ground surface.
Soil-Cover-Complex Method – A method of runoff computation developed by NRCS which is
based upon relating soil type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called a Curve Number.
Special Geologic Features – Carbonate bedrock features, including but not limited to closed
depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces, lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles,
which may exist and must be identified on a site when stormwater management BMPs are being
considered.
Spill Prevention and Response Program – A program that identifies procedures for preventing
and, as needed, cleaning up potential spills and makes such procedures known and the necessary
equipment available to appropriate personnel.
State Water Quality Requirements – As defined under state regulations -- protection of
designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa. Code Chapters 93 and 96)--including:
A. Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a “designated use,” such as “cold water fishes”
or “potable water supply,” which are listed in Chapter 93. These uses must be protected
and maintained, under state regulations.
B. “Existing uses” are those attained as of November 1975, regardless whether they have
been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated Earth Disturbance activities must be designed
to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
ARTICLE 925
14
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
C. Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical characteristics of surface
water bodies. After Regulated Earth Disturbance activities are complete, these
characteristics can be impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes in
habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes in land surface
area from those activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters must be
managed to protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway,
to prevent these impacts.
Storage Indication Method – A method of routing or moving an inflow hydrograph through a
reservoir or detention structure. The method solves the mass conservation equation to determine
an outflow hydrograph as it leaves the storage facility.
Storm Drainage Problem Areas – Areas which lack adequate stormwater collection and/or
conveyance facilities and which present a hazard to persons or property.
Storm Sewer – A system of pipes or other conduits which carries intercepted surface runoff,
street water and other wash waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
Stormwater – The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground surface.
Stormwater Filters – Any number of structural mechanisms such as multi-chamber catch
basins, sand/peat filters, sand filters, and so forth, which are installed to intercept stormwater,
flow and remove pollutants prior to discharge. Typically, these systems require periodic
maintenance and clean out.
Stormwater Management Plan – The plan for managing stormwater runoff adopted by Lehigh
and Northampton Counties for the Lehigh, Monocacy, Nancy Run or Saucon Creek Watersheds
as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
“Stormwater Management Act”.
Stream – A watercourse.
Subarea – The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic modeling purposes for
which the runoff control criteria have been established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
Subdivision – The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot ownership: Provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
ARTICLE 925
15
Surface Waters of the Commonwealth – Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,
springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
Swale – A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff. See also
Vegetated Swale.
Technical Best Management Practice Manual & Infiltration Feasibility Report, November
2002 – The report written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of infiltration in
carbonate bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed. The report is available at the
LVPC offices.
Trash/Debris Collectors – Racks, screens or other similar devices installed in a storm drainage
system to capture coarse pollutants (trash, leaves, etc.).
Vegetated Buffers – Gently sloping areas that convey stormwater as sheet flow over a broad,
densely vegetated earthen area, possibly coupled with the use of level spreading devices.
Vegetated buffers should be situated on minimally disturbed soils, have low-flow velocities and
extended residence times.
Vegetated Roofs – Vegetated systems installed on roofs that generally consist of a waterproof
layer, a root-barrier, drainage layer (optional), growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated
roofs store and eventually evapotranspirate the collected rooftop rainfall; overflows may be
provided for larger storms.
Vegetated Swales – (1) Vegetated earthen channels designed to convey stormwater. These
swales are not considered to be water quality BMPs. (2) Broad, shallow, densely vegetated,
earthen channels designed to treat stormwater while slowly infiltrating, evapotranspirating, and
conveying it. Swales should be gently sloping with low flow velocities to prevent erosion.
Check dams may be added to enhance performance.
Water Quality Inserts – Any number of commercially available devices that are inserted into
storm inlets to capture sediment, oil, grease, metals, trash, debris, etc.
Water Quality Volume (WQv) – The volume needed to capture and treat 90% of the average
annual rainfall volume. (see Section 925.15B)
Watercourse – Any channel of conveyance of surface water having defined bed and banks,
whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
Watershed – The entire region or area drained by a river or other body of water, whether natural
or artificial.
WATERSHED – The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Lehigh,
Monocacy, Nancy Run or Saucon Creek Watersheds for the Act 167 Plan. This model was
ARTICLE 925
16
written by Tarsi Software Laboratories and uses the same algorithms found in the Penn State
Runoff Quality Model (PSRM-QUAL). The model has been “calibrated” to reflect actual flow
values by adjusting key model input parameters.
Wet Detention Ponds – A basin that provides for necessary stormwater storage as well as a
permanent pool of water. To be successful, wet ponds must have adequate natural hydrology
(both runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for maintenance of a permanent
pool of water) and must be able to support a healthy aquatic community so as to avoid creation of
mosquito and other health and nuisance problems.
SECTION 2
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS
925.12 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. All storm drainage systems shall be constructed as necessary to convey the flow of
surface waters without damage to persons or property. These drainage systems shall
be constructed as approved by the City Engineer to drain the storm water runoff from
the applicant’s land, as well as the collected runoff from development(s) at higher
elevations in the same watershed. Should the land at a higher elevation be
undeveloped, the design of the storm drainage system local to the applicant shall be
designed as if the land above were fully developed in accordance with current zoning
regulations and assuming that required runoff controls are in effect in all tributary
areas.
B. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded flow in natural
watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention facilities, recharge facilities,
water quality facilities, pipe systems or open channels consistent with this Ordinance.
Storm drainage systems shall provide positive drainage away from buildings and onsite
sewage disposal systems and prevent overloading of downstream drainage
systems and watercourses as a result of increased rate of runoff caused by the
proposed development.
C. The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall
not be altered without written approval of the affected property owner(s) and the City
Engineer.
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall be managed
such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does not increase in the general
direction of discharge, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. If diffused
flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the
developer must document that there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to
safely transport the concentrated discharge to the point of pre-development flow
concentration, to the stream reach or otherwise prove that no harm will result from the
ARTICLE 925
17
concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject
to any applicable release rate criteria in the general direction of existing discharge
whether they are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage
areas.
E. Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a 100-year
floodplain is defined by the municipality, there shall be provided drainage easements
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourses. The width of any
easement shall be adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based on
calculations made in conformance with Section 925.18 for the 100-year return period
runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of one-half (0.5) foot above the design
water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing
of fill or structures, and any alterations which may adversely affect the flow of
stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the
easement to ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for
which the 100-year floodplain is formally defined are subject to the applicable
municipal floodplain regulations.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainage swales on
the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed
conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainage swales.
Capacities of open channels shall be calculated using the Manning equation.
G. Post Construction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained to
meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law and implementing regulations,
including the established practices in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and specifications of
this Ordinance as to prevent accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all
points of discharge. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
H. No Earth Disturbance activities associated with any Regulated Activities shall
commence until approval by the City of a plan which demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of this Ordinance.
I. Techniques described in Appendix F (Low Impact Development) of this Ordinance
are encouraged because they reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of
this Ordinance and the State Water Quality Requirements.
J. Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and geology
permit, consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and, where appropriate, the
Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D. Infiltration is encouraged for capturing and treating the
Water Quality Volume (as calculated in Section 925.15), any part of the Water
Quality Volume or for otherwise meeting the purposes of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 925
18
925.13. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS BY OTHER GOVERNMENT ENTITIES
A. The following permit requirements apply to certain Regulated and Earth
Disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of Regulated and
Earth Disturbance activities, as applicable:
1. All Regulated and Earth Disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
2. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102.
3. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or adjacent
to surface waters of the Commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to
permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
4. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a State
highway right-of-way or require access from a State highway shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PENNDOT).
5. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or
convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may constitute
a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
925.14. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DURING REGULATED EARTH
DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES
A. No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the City shall commence until
approval by the City of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for construction
activities.
It is the intent of this section of this ordinance to require that proper erosion control be
maintained on all land regardless of the area of land intentionally disturbed (if any)
and regardless of the status of any construction on the land. Should the City Engineer
determine that erosion control on any area of land is deficient and impacting or
threatening to impact on offsite land, either directly or indirectly (such as through the
creation of sinkholes that may travel offsite), the City Engineer may require that
corrective action be taken in an expeditious manner. This corrective action shall be
completed as soon as possible, but no later than 10 days from the date of notification
of the deficiency.
Should the City Engineer determine that erosion control is deficient during
construction, the City Engineer may pull all construction permits acquired from the
City and- except for corrective erosion control work- stop the job until, in the opinion
of the City Engineer, adequate correction of erosion control deficiencies has been
ARTICLE 925
19
made.
B. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is required by DEP regulations for any earth
disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. A DEP NPDES Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activities
permit is required for Regulated Earth Disturbance activities under Pa. Code Chapter
92.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities from
the appropriate DEP regional office or County Conservation District must be provided
to the City before the commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
E. A copy of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and any permit, as required by DEP
regulations, shall be available at the project site at all times.
925.15 POST CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY CRITERIA
A. No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the City shall commence until
approval by the City of a Drainage Plan which demonstrates compliance with this
Ordinance. This Ordinance provides standards to meet NPDES Permit requirements
associated with construction activities and MS4 permit requirements.
B. The Water Quality Volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated with
evapotranspiration and/or direct recharge BMPs. The WQv shall be calculated two
ways. First, WQv shall be calculated using the following formula:
? ?? ?? ?
12
c P A
WQv ?
Where WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
c = Rational Method post-development runoff coefficient
for the 2-year storm
P = 1.25 inches
A = site area in acres
Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff volume from predevelopment
to post-development for the 2-year return period storm. The effect of
closed depressions on the site shall be considered in this calculation. The larger of
these two calculated volumes shall be used as the WQv to be captured and treated,
except that in no case shall the WQv be permitted to exceed 1.25-inches of runoff
over the site area. This standard does not limit the volume of infiltration an applicant
may propose for purposes of water quantity/peak rate control.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
20
C. The WQv shall be calculated for each post-development drainage direction on a site
for sizing BMPs. Site areas having no impervious cover and no proposed disturbance
during development may be excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require
treatment.
D. If an applicant is proposing to use a dry extended detention basin, wet pond,
constructed wetland or other BMP that ponds water on the land surface and may
receive direct sunlight, the discharge from that BMP must be treated by infiltration, a
vegetated buffer, filter strip, bioretention, vegetated swale or other BMP that provides
a thermal benefit to protect the High Quality waters of the Monocacy and Saucon
Creeks from thermal impacts.
E. The WQv for a site as a result of the Regulated Activities must either be treated with
infiltration or two acceptable BMPs as listed in Section 925.15O, except for minor
areas on the periphery of the site that cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration
facility or other BMP.
F. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill unless the applicant demonstrates
that the fill is stable and otherwise meets the infiltration BMP standards of this
Ordinance.
G. The applicant shall document the bedrock type(s) present on the site from published
sources. Any apparent boundaries between carbonate and non-carbonate bedrock shall
be verified through more detailed site evaluations by a qualified geotechnical
professional.
H. For each proposed development in the watershed, the applicant shall conduct a
preliminary site investigation on the portion of the site that is judged to be the best
candidate hydrogeologically for possible infiltration, including gathering data from
published sources, a field inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a
minimum of two percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix G. This investigation will
determine depth to bedrock, depth to the seasonal high water table, soil permeability
and location of special geologic features, if applicable. This investigation may be
done by a certified Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) except that the location(s) of
special geologic features shall be verified by a qualified geotechnical professional.
I. Sites where applicants intend to use infiltration BMP’s must meet the following
criteria:
? Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal to 2 feet
? Depth to seasonal high water table below the invert of the BMP greater than or
equal to 3 feet; except for infiltration of residential roof runoff where the seasonal
high water table must be below the invert of the BMP. (If the depth to bedrock is
between 2 and 3 feet and the evidence of the seasonal high water table is not
ARTICLE 925
21
found in the soil, no further testing to locate the depth to seasonal high water table
is required)
? Soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code 73.15. percolation test
in Appendix G) greater than or equal to 0.5 inches/hour and less than or equal to
12 inches per hour
? Setback distances or buffers as follows:
– 100 feet from water supply wells
– 15 feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations; except for residential development where the required
set back is 15 feet downgradient or 40 feet upgradient from
building foundations.
– 50 feet from septic system drainfields; except for residential
development where the required setback is 25 feet from septic
drainfields.
– 50 feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock unless a
preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate bedrock to
show the absence of special geologic features within 50 feet of the
proposed infiltration area.
– 100 feet from the property line unless documentation is provided to
show that all setbacks from wells, foundations and drainfields on
neighboring properties will be met; except for one and two family
residential dwellings where the required setback is 40 feet unless
documentation is provided to show that all setbacks from existing
or potential future wells, foundations and drainfields on
neighboring properties will be met.
If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full WQv, the applicant shall infiltrate that portion
of the WQv that is feasible based on the site characteristics.
J. For entirely non-carbonate sites, the Recharge Volume (REv) shall be infiltrated
unless the applicant demonstrates that it is infeasible to infiltrate the REv for reasons
of seasonal high water table, permeability rate, soil depth or setback distances; or
except as provided in Section 925.15U.
1. The REv shall be calculated as follows:
REv = (0.25) * (I)/12
Where REv = Recharge Volume in acre-feet
I = impervious area in acres
2. The Preliminary Site Investigation described in Section 925.15H. is required and
shall continue on different areas of the site until a potentially suitable infiltration
location is found or the entire site is determined to be infeasible for infiltration.
For infiltration areas that appear to be feasible based on the preliminary site
investigation, the Additional Site Investigation and Testing as outlined in
ARTICLE 925
22
Appendix G shall be completed.
3. If an Applicant proposes infiltration, the municipality may determine infiltration
to be infeasible if there are known existing conditions or problems that may be
worsened by the use of infiltration.
4. The site must meet the conditions listed in Section 925.15I.
5. If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full REv, the applicant shall infiltrate that
portion of the REv that is feasible based on the site characteristics. If none of
the REv can be infiltrated, REv shall be considered as part of the WQv and shall
be captured and treated as described in Section 925.15O.
6. If REv is infiltrated, it may be subtracted from the WQv required to be captured
and treated.
K. In entirely carbonate areas, where the applicant intends to use infiltration BMPs, the
Preliminary Site Investigation described in Section 925.15H. shall be conducted. For
infiltration areas that appear feasible based on the Preliminary Site Investigation, the
applicant shall conduct the Additional Site Investigation and Testing as outlined in
Appendix G. The soil depth, percolation rate and proposed loading rate, each
weighted as described in Section 925.19, along with the buffer from special geologic
features shall be compared to the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D to determine if the site is
recommended for infiltration. In addition to the recommendation from Appendix D,
the conditions listed in Section 925.15.I. are required for infiltration in carbonate
areas. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Applicants are encouraged to infiltrate the REv, as calculated in Section 925.15J, but
are not required to use infiltration BMPs on a carbonate site even if the site falls in
the “Recommended” range on the chart in Appendix D. Any amount of volume
infiltrated can be subtracted from the WQv to be treated by non-infiltration BMPs. If
infiltration is not proposed, the full WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs, as
specified in Section 925.15O.
L. If a site has both carbonate and non-carbonate areas, the applicant shall investigate
the ability of the non-carbonate portion of the site to fully meet this Ordinance to
meet the requirements for REv for the whole site through infiltration. If that proves
infeasible, infiltration in the carbonate area as described in Section 304.K. or 2 other
non-infiltration BMPs as described in Section 304.O. must be used. No infiltration
structure in the non-carbonate area shall be located within 50 feet of a boundary with
carbonate bedrock, except when a Preliminary Site Investigation has been done
showing the absence of special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed
infiltration area.
ARTICLE 925
23
M. If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the post-development 2-year
runoff volume leaving the site shall be 80% or more of the pre-development runoff
volume for the carbonate portion of the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in
excess of the pre-development infiltration volume.
N. Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance and compaction
except as necessary for construction of infiltration BMPs.
O. If infiltration is not proposed, the WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs in
series for each discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area can be
considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and concentrated flow
shall flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an impervious area is to be drained
across a pervious area as one BMP, the length of the pervious area must be equal to or
greater than the length of impervious area. In no case, may the same BMP be
employed consecutively to meet this requirement. Acceptable BMPs are listed below
along with the recommended reference for design.
Best Management Practice Design Reference
BioretentionA 4,5,11,16
Capture/Reuse1B 4,14
Constructed Wetlands 4,5,8,10,16
Dry Extended Detention Ponds 4,5,8,12,18
Minimum Disturbance/
Minimum Maintenance Practices
1,9
Significant Reduction of Existing
Impervious Cover
N/A
Stormwater FiltersA (Sand, Peat,
Compost, etc.)
4,5,10,16
Vegetated Buffers/Filter Strips 2,3,5,11,16,17
Vegetated Roofs 4,13
Vegetated SwalesA 2,3,5,11,16,17
Water Quality Inserts for InletsD 4,7,15,16,19
Wet Detention Ponds
4,5,6,8
A This BMP could be designed with or without an infiltration component. If infiltration is proposed, the
site and BMP will be subject to the testing and other infiltration requirements in this Ordinance.
B If this BMP is used to treat the entire WQv then it is the only BMP required because of this BMPs
superior water quality performance.
C See table below.
D Water Quality Inlets include such BMPs as Oil/Water Separators, Sediment Traps/Catch Basin
Sumps, and Trash/Debris Collectors in Catch Basins.
ARTICLE 925
24
Number Design Reference Title
1 “Conservation Design For Stormwater Management – A Design Approach to
Reduce Stormwater Impacts From Land Development and Achieve Multiple
Objectives Related to Land Use”, Delaware Department of Natural
Resources
and Environmental Control, The Environmental Management Center of the
Brandywine Conservancy, September 1997
2 “A Current Assessment of Urban Best Management Practices: Techniques
for Reducing Nonpoint Source Pollution in the Coastal Zone”, Schueler, T.
R., Kumble, P. and Heraty, M., Metropolitan Washington Council of
Governments, 1992.
3 “Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings”, Federal Highway
Administration, Chen, Y. H. and Cotton, G. K., Hydraulic Engineering
Circular 15, FHWA-IP-87-7, McLean Virginia, 1988.
4 “Draft Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual”, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, January 2005.
5 “Evaluation and Management of Highway Runoff Water Quality”, Federal
Highway Administration, FHWA-PD-96-032, Washington, D.C., 1996.
6 “Evaporation Maps of the United States”, U.S. Weather Bureau (now
NOAA/National Weather Service) Technical Paper 37, Published by
Department of Commerce, Washington D.C., 1959.
Number Design Reference Title
7 “Georgia Stormwater Manual”, AMEC Earth and Environmental, Center for
Watershed Protection, Debo and Associates, Jordan Jones and Goulding,
Atlanta Regional Commission, Atlanta, Georgia, 2001.
8 “Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts”, Federal Highway Administration,
FHWA HDS 5, Washington, D.C., 1985 (revised May 2005).
9 “Low Impact Development Design Strategies An Integrated Design
Approach, Prince Georges County, Maryland Department of Environmental
Resources, June 1999.
10 “Maryland Stormwater Design Manual”, Maryland Department of the
Environment, Baltimore, Maryland , 2000.
11 “Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing
Areas”, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, 1998.
12 “Recommended Procedures for Act 167 Drainage Plan Design”, LVPC,
Revised 1997.
13 “Roof Gardens History, Design, and Construction”, Osmundson, Theodore.
New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1999.
14 “The Texas Manual on Rainwater Harvesting”, Texas Water Development
Board, Austin, Texas, Third Edition, 2005.
15 “VDOT Manual of Practice for Stormwater Management”, Virginia
Transportation Research Council, Charlottesville, Virginia, 2004
16 “Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook”, Virginia Department of
Conservation and Recreation, Richmond, Virginia, 1999.
17 “Water Resources Engineering”, Mays, L. W., John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2005.
18 “Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds”, Technical Report 55, US
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, 1986.
ARTICLE 925
25
19 US EPA, Region 1 New England web site (as of August 2005)
http://www.epa.gov/NE/assistance/ceitts/stormwater/techs/html.
P. Stormwater runoff from Hot Spot land uses, as defined in Section 925.11, shall be pretreated.
In no case, may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement and the requirement in Section 925.15O. Acceptable methods of pretreatment
are listed below.
Hot Spot Land Use Pre-treatment Method(s)
Vehicle Maintenance and Repair
Facilities including Auto Parts Stores
-Water Quality Inlets
-Use of Drip Pans and/or Dry Sweep Material Under
Vehicles/Equipment
-Use of Absorbent Devices to Reduce Liquid
Releases
-Spill Prevention and Response Program
Vehicle Fueling Stations -Water Quality Inserts for Inlets
-Spill Prevention and Response Program
Hot Spot Land Use Pre-treatment Method(s)
Storage Areas for Public Works -Water Quality Inserts for Inlets
-Use of Drip Pans and/or Dry Sweep Material Under
Vehicles/Equipment
-Use of Absorbent Devices to Reduce Liquid
Releases
-Spill Prevention and Response Program
-Diversion of Stormwater away from Potential
Contamination Areas
Outdoor Storage of Liquids -Spill Prevention and Response Program
Commercial Nursery Operations -Vegetated Swales/Filter Strips
-Constructed Wetlands
-Stormwater Collection and Reuse
Salvage Yards and Recycling
Facilities*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan under an NPDES Permit
Fleet Storage Yards and Vehicle
Cleaning Facilities*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan under an NPDES Permit
Facilities that Store or Generate
Regulated Substances*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan under an NPDES Permit
Marinas* -BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan under an NPDES Permit
Certain Industrial Uses (listed under
NPDES)*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan under an NPDES Permit
*Regulated under the NPDES Stormwater Program
Design references for the pre-treatment methods, as necessary, are listed below. An
applicant may use an alternate design reference if use of the alternate reference can be
justified. Alternatives may include providing documentation demonstrating that
ARTICLE 925
26
water quality has been protected or otherwise demonstrating that due to the site
characteristics the land use is not a Hot Spot as defined in Section 925.11. Where the
documented design methodology conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance, this
Ordinance shall govern.
Pre-treatment Method Design ReferenceA
Constructed Wetlands 5,6,10,12,18
Diversion of Stormwater away from
Potential Contamination Areas
5,13
Stormwater Collection and Reuse
(especially for irrigation)
5,16
Stormwater Filters (Sand, Peat,
Compost, etc.)
5,6,12,18
Vegetated Swales 2,4,6,13,18,19
Water Quality Inlets 5,9,17,18,21
AThese numbers refer to the Design Reference Title Chart in Section 925.15O
Q. The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on Hot Spot land uses.
R. Stormwater infiltration facilities shall not be placed in or on a special geologic
feature(s). Additionally, stormwater runoff shall not be discharged into existing onsite
sinkholes.
S. Applicants shall request, in writing, Public Water Suppliers to provide the Zone I
Wellhead Protection radius, as calculated by the method outlined in the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Wellhead Protection regulations, for any
public water supply well within 400 feet of the site. In addition to the setback
distances specified in Section 925.15J and 925.15K, infiltration is prohibited in the
Zone I radius as defined and substantiated by the Public Water Supplier in writing. If
the applicant does not receive a response from the Public Water Supplier, the Zone I
radius is assumed to be 100 feet.
T. The volume and rate of the net increase in stormwater runoff from the Regulated
Activities must be managed to prevent the physical degradation of receiving waters
from such effects as scour and streambank destabilization, to satisfy State Water
Quality Requirements, by controlling the 2-year post-development runoff to a 30%
Release Rate.
U. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve alternative methods for
meeting the State Water Quality Requirements other than those in this Section,
provided that they meet the minimum requirements of and do not conflict with State
law including but not limited to the Clean Streams Law.
ARTICLE 925
27
925.16 GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE AND EXISTING WATER BALANCE
PRESERVATION STANDARDS
A. The entire WQv as calculated in Section 925.15B of this Ordinance shall be captured
and treated by either direct recharge (D-RE) and/or evapotranspiration (ET) BMPs.
B. As much proposed impervious areas as practical shall be directed to water quality
BMPs.
C. Existing impervious area that is not proposed to be treated by D-RE BMPs should be
excluded from all water balance calculations.
D. Evapotranspiration BMPs (ET BMPs) shall be employed “first” for the site to capture
the equivalent of the minimum of 0.38 inches of runoff for each square foot of
impervious area. Unless proven not feasible by the applicant for proposed impervious
cover directed to multiple BMPs, the ET BMP capture volume chart in Appendix C
shall be used to determine overall site compliance. Direct recharge BMPs may be
used “first” for portions of the impervious cover provided the overall ET BMP “first”
standard is met.
E. A maximum of 30% of the total annual rainfall for a site may be directly recharged to
groundwater using direct recharge (D-RE) BMPs. For runoff from impervious areas.
1. For development sites with greater than 33% proposed impervious cover:
a. If all impervious cover is directed to ET BMPs to capture the entire 2-year,
24-hour even, the D-RE standard is met.
b. Up to 33% of the site as impervious cover may be directed to D-RE BMPs
designed to capture the entire 2-year, 24-hour event provided the overall ET
BMP “First” standard is met. All remaining impervious cover shall be
directed to ET BMPs designated to capture the remainder of the WQv.
c. For ET and/or D-RE BMPs designed for runoff from impervious areas
designed to capture less than the entire 2-year, 24-hour event, Appendix C
shall be used to assure that the maximum D-RE standard is met.
2. For the maximum 30% D-RE standard applies on an overall site basis, rather than
in each drainage direction.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS
A. Mapping of Stormwater Management Districts - To implement the provisions of the
Catasauqua Creek and Lehigh River Sub-Basin 4, Monocacy, Nancy Run and Saucon
Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plans, the City is hereby divided into
ARTICLE 925
28
Stormwater Management Districts consistent with the Lehigh, Monocacy, Nancy Run
and Saucon Creek Release Rate Maps presented in the Plans. The boundaries of the
Stormwater Management Districts are shown on an official map which is available for
inspection at the City Engineer’s office.
B. Description of Stormwater Management Districts - Two types of Stormwater
Management Districts may be applicable to the municipality, namely
Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts and Dual Release Rate Districts as
described below.
1. Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts - Within these districts, the
capacity of the “local” runoff conveyance facilities (as defined in Section 2)
must be calculated to determine if adequate capacity exists. For this
determination, the developer must calculate peak flows assuming that the site is
developed as proposed and that the remainder of the local watershed is in the
existing condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows assuming that
the entire local watershed is developed per current zoning and that all new
development would use the runoff controls specified by this Ordinance. The
larger of the two peak flows calculated will be used in determining if adequate
capacity exists. If adequate capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the
site to the main channel (as defined in Article 2), these watershed areas may
discharge post-development peak runoff without detention facilities. If the
capacity calculations show that the “local” runoff conveyance facilities lack
adequate capacity, the developer shall either use a 100% release rate control or
provide increased capacity of downstream elements to convey increased peak
flows consistent with Section 925.18P. Any capacity improvements must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all areas tributary to the
improvement consistent with the capacity criteria specified in Section 306.D.
By definition, a storm drainage problem area associated with the “local” runoff
conveyance facilities indicates that adequate capacity does not exist. Sites in
these districts are still required to meet all of the water quality requirements in
Section 304.
2. Dual Release Rate Districts - Within these districts, the 2-year post-development
peak discharge must be controlled to 30% of the pre-development
2-year runoff peak. Further, the 10-year, 25-year and 100-year postdevelopment
peak runoff must be controlled to the stated percentage of the predevelopment
peak. Release Rates associated with the 10- through 100-year
events vary from 50% to 100% depending upon location in the watershed. [For
the Monocacy Creek and Nancy Run Watersheds, the original Single Release
Rate Districts become Dual Release Rate Districts due to the channel protection
standard requiring developments to meet a 2-year 30% Release Rate.]
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
29
925.18. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT IMPLEMENTATION
PROVISIONS
A. Applicants shall provide a comparative pre- and post-construction stormwater
management hydrograph analysis for each direction of discharge and for the site
overall to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Any stormwater management controls required by this Ordinance and subject to a
dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable release rate criteria for each of the
2-, 10-, 25- and 100-year return period runoff events consistent with the calculation
methodology specified in Section 925.19. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
C. The exact location of the Stormwater Management District boundaries as they apply
to a given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the
two-foot topographic contours provided as part of the Drainage Plan. The District
boundaries as originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a physical feature
such as the confluence with another watercourse or a potential flow obstruction (e.g.
road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical feature is the downstream limit of the subarea
and the subarea boundary is drawn from that point up slope to each topographic
divide along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
D. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this Ordinance shall
use the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased peak flow
rates:
1. Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased
runoff associated with a 2-year return period event within their banks at
velocities consistent with protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable
velocities shall be based upon criteria included in the most current DEP Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Permissible velocities from
the DEP manual for selected channels are presented in Appendix C of this
Ordinance.
2. Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased
25-year return period runoff without creating any hazard to persons or property.
A one hundred (100) year design storm is required where a storm of this return
period would likely cause damage to existing or future structures or their
contents were it not for implementation of proper storm water management
provisions.
3. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or
convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in accordance with DEP
Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and, at minimum, pass the increased 25-
year return period runoff.
ARTICLE 925
30
E. For a proposed development site located within one release rate category subarea, the
total runoff from the site shall meet the applicable release rate criteria. For
development sites with multiple directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage
directions may be designed for up to a 100% release rate so long as the total runoff
from the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
F. For a proposed development site located within two or more release category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be the pre-development peak
discharge for that subarea multiplied by the applicable release rate. The calculated
peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan changes the
drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges
from multiple subareas re-combine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate provided that the overall site
discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
G. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate category
subarea and partially within a Conditional/Provisional No Detention subarea, the size
of the pre-development drainage area on a site may not be changed post-development
to create potentially adverse conditions on downstream properties except as part of a
“No Harm” or Hardship waiver procedure.
H. No portion of a site may be regraded between adjacent watershed(s) except as part of
a “No Harm” or Hardship Waiver procedure.
I. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site which has areas
which drain to a closed depression(s), the design release from the site will be the
lesser of (a) the applicable release rate flow assuming no closed depression(s) or (b)
the existing peak flow actually leaving the site. In cases where (b) would result in an
unreasonably small design release, the design discharge of less than or equal to the
release rate will be determined by the available downstream conveyance capacity to
the main channel calculated using Section 925.18D and the minimum orifice criteria.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
J. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not subject to
release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site
drainage facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows through the
development site using the capacity criteria in Section 925.18D and the detention
criteria in Section 925.18. In addition to the criteria in section 925.18D, on-site
conveyance systems designed to carry runoff to a detention basin must be able to
transport the basin’s 100-year tributary flow either in-system, in-gutter, or over land.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
K. For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention ponds shall be
designed to meet the applicable release rate(s) applied to all site areas tributary to the
proposed pond discharge direction. All site tributary areas will be assumed as
developed, regardless of whether all site tributary acres are proposed for development
ARTICLE 925
31
at that time. An exception shall be sites with multiple detention ponds in series where
only the downstream pond must be designed to the stated release rate.
L. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity differs
significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact area shall be subject to
the release rate criteria. The impact area includes any proposed cover or grading
changes.
M. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other means, do not
increase either the rate or volume of runoff discharged from the site compared to predevelopment
are not subject to the release rate provisions of this Ordinance.
N. “No Harm” Water Quantity Option - For any proposed development site not located
in a conditional no detention district, the developer has the option of using a less
restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the developer can prove that
special circumstances exist for the proposed development site and that “no harm”
would be caused by discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the Plan.
Special circumstances are defined as any hydrologic or hydraulic aspects of the
development itself not specifically considered in the development of the Plan runoff
control strategy. Proof of “no harm” would have to be shown from the development
site through the remainder of the downstream drainage network to the confluence of
the creek with the Lehigh River. Proof of “no harm” must be shown using the
capacity criteria specified in Section 925.18D if downstream capacity analysis is a
part of the “no harm” justification. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Attempts to prove “no harm” based upon downstream peak flow versus capacity
analysis shall be governed by the following provisions:
1. The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the design return
period storms (2-, 10-, 25- and 100-year) shall be the values from the calibrated
WATERSHED Models or as calculated by an applicant using an alternate
method acceptable to the municipality. The flow values from the WATERSHED
Model would be supplied to the developer by the municipality upon request.
2. Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system as documented by
a developer may be used by the developer only in proportion to his development
site acreage relative to the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the
identified capacity (i.e. if his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped acreage,
he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream available capacity).
3. Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate increased peak flow
rates at storm drainage problem areas would, by definition, be precluded from
successful attempts to prove “no harm”, except in conjunction with proposed
capacity improvements for the problem areas consistent with Section 925.18P.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
32
Any “no harm” justifications shall be submitted by the developer to the Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission and the City Engineer for review as part of the
Drainage Plan submission per Section 3. Any extra submission costs resulting
from the dual submission and review shall be borne by the developer. The
developer completely assumes all risks in so much that the submission of “no
harm” requires a rigorous review for its approval and this approval is not
guaranteed.
O. Regional Detention Alternatives - For certain areas within the study area, it may be
more cost-effective to provide one control facility for more than one development site
than to provide an individual control facility for each development site. The initiative
and funding for any regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of
prospective developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak outflow of a
regional basin would be determined based on the required release rate at the point of
discharge. Peak runoff rates of discharge from a regional detention basin shall be
based upon maintaining existing peak runoff rates for the tributary area, except that
other criteria for discharge may apply for regional detention facilities located within a
watershed with a county approved Act 167 Storm Water Management Plan. Any
developer relying upon regional detention facilities in lieu of on-site controls shall pay
an appropriate fee to the owner of the regional facility. Any proposed regional
detention facility shall have the approval of the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission
as well as the City Engineer.
P. Capacity Improvements - In certain instances, primarily within the
Conditional/Provisional No Detention areas, local drainage conditions may dictate
more stringent levels of runoff control than those based upon protection of the entire
watershed. In these instances, if the developer could prove that it would be feasible to
provide capacity improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency in the local drainage
network, then the capacity improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu
of runoff controls on the development site. Peak flow calculations shall be done
assuming that the local watershed is in the existing condition and then assuming that
the local watershed is developed per current zoning and using the specified runoff
controls. Any capacity improvements would be designed using the larger of the above
peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in Section 925.18D. All new
development in the entire subarea(s) within which the proposed development site is
located shall be assumed to implement the developer’s proposed discharge control, if
any. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to implement any regional
detention alternatives or to implement a modified “no harm” option which proposes
specific capacity improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
ARTICLE 925
33
925.19 CALCULATION METHODOLOGY
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using either the
rational method or the soil-cover-complex methodology. Complete detailed drainage
calculations and applicable charts and nomographs certified (i.e. P.E. Stamp) by the
design engineer shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
B. Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation Chart for
Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D
shall be calculated as follows:
*100%
Base area of infiltration BMP
Area Tributary to infiltration BMP
??
?
??
?
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as follows:
All disturbed areas to be made impervious: weight at 100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious: weight at 50%
All undisturbed pervious areas: weight at 0%
All existing impervious areas: weight at 100%
C. Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed infiltration system.
The effective soil thickness in the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D is the measured soil
thickness multiplied by the thickness factor based on soil permeability (as measured
by the adapted 25 PA Code 73.15. percolation test in Appendix G), as follows:
*If the permeability rate (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code 73.15. percolation test in Appendix
G) falls on a break between two thickness factors, the smaller thickness factor shall be used.
Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 in./hr. or less than 0.5 in./hr., as
measured by the adapted 25 PA Code 73.15. percolation test in Appendix G, are not
recommended for infiltration.
D. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of this Ordinance
shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph through the proposed basin
using the storage indication method or other methodology demonstrated to be more
appropriate. For basins designed using the rational method technique, the design
hydrograph for routing shall be either the Universal Rational Hydrograph or the
modified rational method trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes detention volume.
Use of the Modified Rational hydrograph shall be consistent with the procedure
PERMEABILITY RANGE* THICKNESS FACTOR
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hour 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 inches/hour 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hour 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hour 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hour 1.0
ARTICLE 925
34
described in Section “PIPERAT” of the Users’ Manual for the Penn State Urban
Hydrology Model (1987).
Detention ponds shall be designed so that they return to normal conditions within
approximately twelve (12) hours after the termination of the storm, unless the City
Engineer finds that downstream conditions may warrant other design criteria for
storm water release. (See Appendix ‘A’ – Stormwater Design Standards)
The developer shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed, protected and located
to assure that public safety is maximized and health problems are prevented. Certain
protective devices and/or screenings such as fencing and landscaping may be required
at the discretion of the City Engineer or Planning Commission. The depth of the
facility in conjunction with the surrounding structures shall be taken into account
when considering the need for the above improvements.
The developer shall verify that the operation of the detention facilities will not
aggravate potential downstream peaking conditions, unless the detention facilities
have been designed in accordance with an approved Act 167 Storm Water
Management Plan for the applicable watershed.
E. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface runoff or pipe
flow shall be routed using the storage indication method.
F. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface runoff or pipe
flow shall provide storage volume for the full WQv below the lowest outlet invert.
G. Wet Detention Ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv shall assume
that the permanent pool volume below the primary outlet is full at the beginning of
design event routing for the purposes of evaluating peak outflows.
H. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum 1.0 foot freeboard above
the maximum pool elevation associated with the 2- through 25-year runoff events. A
0.5 foot freeboard shall be provided above the maximum pool elevation of the 100-
year runoff event or an additional ten percent of the 100-year storage volume as
freeboard volume, whichever is greater. All below ground stormwater detention and
infiltration facilities shall have an additional ten percent of the 100-year storage
volume available within the storage medium, as well as a minimum of 0.5 feet of
freeboard. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool elevation to the
invert of the emergency spillway for above ground facilities, and from the maximum
pool elevation to the lowest overflow elevation for below-ground facilities. The 2-
through 100-year storm events shall be controlled by the primary outlet structure. An
emergency spillway for each basin shall be designed to pass the 100-year return
frequency storm peak basin inflow rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured
to the top of basin. The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any offsite areas
tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this detention facility is
considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design of the facility must be
ARTICLE 925
35
consistent with the Chapter 105 regulations, and may be required to pass a storm
greater than the 100-year event. The City Engineer may allow some relief from the
freeboard requirements, depending upon construction methods and other extenuating
circumstances. Exceptions to the freeboard requirements are as follows:
1. Bioretention BMPs with a ponded depth less than or equal to 0.5 feet are
exempt from the freeboard requirements.
2. Small detention basins, with a ponded depth less than or equal to 1.5 feet or
having a depth to the top of the berm less than or equal to 2.5 feet, may
provide twenty percent additional storage volume measured from the
maximum ponded depth to the invert of the emergency spillway in lieu of the
above requirements. The depth of the emergency spillway must be sufficient
to pass either two times the 100-year peak or the 100-year peak with 0.2’ of
the freeboard to the top of berm. Whichever is greater
3. Small infiltration basins, with a ponded depth less than or equal to 1.5 feet or
having a depth to the top of the berm less than or equal to 2.5 feet, may
provide twenty percent additional storage volume measured from the
maximum ponded depth to the top of the berm in lieu of the above
requirements. In this case, and emergency spillway is only necessary if runoff
in excess of the basin volume would cause harm to downstream owners. If a
spillway is necessary, it must be sufficiently sized to pass the 100-year peak
inflow.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
I. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates from detention
facilities shall be three (3) inches. Designs where a lesser size orifice would be
required to fully meet release rates shall be acceptable provided that as much of the
site runoff as practical is directed to the detention facilities. The minimum 3 inch
diameter does not apply to the control of the WQv.
J. Runoff calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the Natural
Resources Conservation Service Type II 24-hour rainfall distribution. The 24-hour
rainfall depths for the various return periods to be used consistent with this Ordinance
are taken from the PennDOT Intensity - Duration - Frequency Field Manual (May
1986) for Region 4:
Return Period 24-Hour Rainfall Depth
1 year 2.40 inches
2 year 3.00 inches
5 year 3.60 inches
10 year 4.56 inches
25 year 5.52 inches
50 year 6.48 inches
ARTICLE 925
36
100 year 7.44 inches
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-24 hour distribution is included in
Appendix C.
K. Stormwater runoff from watersheds of one hundred (100) or less acres may be
calculated using the Rational Method as described in the latest manual of the
American Society of Civil Engineers. For the Rational Method use runoff
coefficients, rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and the Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix
C and appropriate to this topic, as stated in the most up-to-date issue of the “Storm
Water Design Policy Manual of the Department of Public Works.”
L. Stormwater runoff from watersheds of more than one hundred (100) acres shall be
calculated using the soil-cover-complex method developed by the Soil Conservation
Service or other appropriate method acceptable to the City Engineer.
All calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the Soil Conservation
Service Type II 24-hour rainfall distribution. The 24-hour rainfall depths for the
various return periods shall be from the current issue of the PennDOT Intensity –
Duration- Frequency field Manual for Region 4, as indicated in the most up-to-date
issue of the “Storm Water Design Policy Manual of the Department of Public
Works.”
Runoff Curve Numbers (CN’s) to be used in the soil-cover-complex method shall be
based upon the matrix presented in Appendix C.
M. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon the table
presented in Appendix C.
N. All time of concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach which may
include one or all of the flow types below:
1. Sheet Flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS average
velocity chart (Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or the modified
kinematic wave travel time equation (equation 3-3, NRCS TR-55, June 1986).
If using the modified kinematic wave travel time equation, the sheet flow
length shall be limited to 50 feet for designs using the Rational Method and
limited to 150 feet for designs using the Soil-Cover-Complex method.
2. Shallow Concentrated Flow travel times shall be determined from the
watercourse slope, type of surface and the velocity from Figure 3-1 of TR-55,
June 1986.
3. Open Channel Flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated by the Manning equation. Bankfull flows shall be used for
ARTICLE 925
37
determining velocities. Manning ‘n’ values shall be based on the table
presented in Appendix C.
4. Pipe Flow travel times shall be determined from velocities calculated using
the Manning equation assuming full flow and the Manning ‘n’ values from
Appendix C.
O. If using the Rational Method, all pre-development calculations for a given discharge
direction shall be based on a common time of concentration considering both on-site
and any off-site drainage areas. If using the Rational Method, all post-development
calculations for a given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
P. When the conditions exist such that a proposed detention facility may experience a
tailwater effect, the basin shall be analyzed without any trailwater effect for all storm
events for comparison against the required Release Rates. An additional routing of the
100-year storm with the full trailwater effect shall be performed to check that the
basin has sufficient storage to contain 100-year tributary flow with a trailwater. (Ord.
2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
Q. The Manning equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of watercourses and
storm sewers. Culverts shall be designed using standard engineering methods
acceptable to the City Engineer. Manning ‘n’ values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
R. The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to the construction,
modification, operation or maintenance of both existing and proposed dams, water
obstructions and encroachments throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and
construction of stormwater management facilities according to this Ordinance may
not be the same criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the Dam Safety
Program. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
SECTION 3
DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
925.20 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
For any of the Regulated Activities of this Ordinance, prior to the final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of any permit, or the commencement
of any land disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a
Drainage Plan and receive City approval of the Plan. (Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
38
925.21 EXEMPTIONS
Exemptions from the Drainage Plan Requirements are as specified in Section 925.06. (Ord.
2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.22 DRAINAGE PLAN CONTENTS
The following items shall be included in the Drainage Plan:
A. General
1. General description of project.
2. General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
3. The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of the property
and the name of the individual or firm preparing the Drainage Plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
1. The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or other
identifiable landmarks.
2. Existing contours at intervals of two (2) feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater
than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Off-site drainage areas
impacting the project including topographic detail. Scale shall be 1”= 40’or 1”=
30’ or other scale acceptable to the City Engineer.
3. Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project area.
4. Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, existing drainage
swales, wetlands, closed depressions, sinkholes and areas of natural vegetation
to be preserved.
5. Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water lines. The
locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers and water lines
within 50 feet of property lines of the project site.
6. An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the Lehigh or
Northampton County Soil Survey, as applicable, latest edition. Any hydric soils
present on the site should be identified as such.
7. An overlay showing geologic types and boundaries .
8. Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover. Stormwater calculations
shall show and quantify the area of additional impervious surfaces.
ARTICLE 925
39
9. Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
10. Final contours at intervals of two (2) feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than
15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
11. Stormwater Management District boundaries applicable to the site.
12. Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent stormwater BMPs.
13. An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs that would provide
City ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
14. A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site and all existing
man-made features beyond the property boundary that would be affected by the
project.
15. The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of the project and
all private water supply wells within 100 feet of the project.
C. Stormwater management controls and BMPs
1. All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown on a map and
described, including:
a. Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches.
When these structures are used, the locations of septic tank infiltration
areas and wells shall be shown.
b. Other control devices or methods such as roof-top storage, semi-pervious
paving materials, grass swales, parking lot ponding, vegetated strips,
detention or retention ponds, storm sewers, etc.
2. All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the BMPs shall
be shown.
3. All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of infiltration on a site.
4. All details and specifications for the construction of the stormwater
management controls and BMPs.
C. The BMP Operations and Management Plan, as required in Section 6, describing how
each permanent stormwater BMP will be operated and maintained and the identity of
the person(s) responsible for operations and maintenance. A statement must be
included, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater BMPs are
fixtures that cannot be altered or removed without approval by the municipality.
ARTICLE 925
40
D. An Environmental Resources Site Design Assessment that describes the following:
1. The extent to which the proposed grading and impervious cover avoid
disturbance of significant environmental resources and preserve existing site
hydrology.
2. An assessment of whether alternative grading and impervious cover site design
could lessen the disturbance of significant environmental resources and/or make
better use of the site hydrologic resources.
3. A description of how the proposed stormwater management controls and BMPs
serve to mitigate any adverse impacts on environmental resources on the site.
Significant environmental resources considered in the site design assessment
include, but are not limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands,
hydric soils, floodplains, riparian vegetation, native vegetation and special
geologic features.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.23 PLAN SUBMISSION
A. For Regulated Activities specified in Sections 925.05A and 925.05B:
1. The Drainage Plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Planning Bureau
as part of the Plan submission for the subdivision or land development.
2. Two (2) copies of the Drainage Plan shall be submitted.
3. Distribution of the Drainage Plan will be as follows:
a. One (1) copy to the City Planning Bureau.
b. One (1) copy to the City Engineering Bureau.
4. Drainage Plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of additional impervious
cover shall be submitted by the developer to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission as part of the Plan submission. The Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission will conduct an advisory review of the Drainage Plan for
consistency with the appropriate Watershed Stormwater Management Plan(s).
The LVPC will not review details of the Erosion and Sedimentation Plan or the
BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan.
a. Two (2) copies of the Drainage Plan shall be submitted.
ARTICLE 925
41
b. The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and the City,
within a time frame consistent with established procedures under the
Municipalities Planning Code, as to whether the Drainage Plan has been
found to be consistent with the Stormwater Management Plan.
B. For Regulated Activities specified in Sections 925.05C and 925.05D, the Drainage
Plan shall be submitted by the developer to the City building permit officer as part of
the building permit application.
C. For Regulated Activities specified in Sections 925.05E and 925.05F:
1. The Drainage Plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP permit application process
under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management), Chapter 106
(Flood Plain Management) of DEP’s Rules and Regulations and the NPDES
regulations.
2. One (1) copy of the Drainage Plan shall be submitted.
D. Earthmoving for all regulated activities under Section 925.05 shall be conducted in
accordance with the current federal and State regulations relative to the NPDES and
DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.24 DRAINAGE PLAN REVIEW
A. The City Engineer shall review the Drainage Plan, including the BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan, for consistency with the appropriate adopted Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan as embodied by this Ordinance and with any permits
issued by DEP. The City shall also review the Drainage Plan against any additional
storm drainage provisions contained in the City subdivision and land development or
zoning ordinance, as applicable.
B. The City shall notify the applicant in writing whether the Drainage Plan, including the
BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan is approved.
C. The City shall not approve any subdivision or land development (Regulated Activities
925.05A and 925.05B) or building permit application (Regulated Activities 925.05C
and 925.05D) if the Drainage Plan has been found to be inconsistent with the
Stormwater Management Plan.
D. The City will require an “As-Built Survey” of all stormwater BMPs and an
explanation of any discrepancies with the Drainage Plan.
The developer shall ensure that current as-built records are maintained during
construction. Upon completion of construction, Certified (i.e. P.E. stamped) as-built
drawings shall be submitted by the developer’s engineers. These as-built drawings
ARTICLE 925
42
shall be found acceptable by the City Engineer prior to release of any remaining
security. The City retains the option to require the final as-built data to be in
AUTOCAD 2000 format and compatible with the City’s current GIS system.
E. The Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall provide an advisory review of the
Drainage Plan for consistency with the applicable Storm Water Management Plan.
F. For activities specified in Section 925.05A and 925.05B, the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission shall provide written comments to the City, within a time frame
consistent with established procedures under Act 247, as to whether the Drainage
Plan has been found to be consistent with the Storm Water Management Plan.
G. For activities specified in Sections 925.05I and 925.05J, the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission shall notify PA DEP whether the Drainage Plan is consistent with the
Storm Water Management Plan and forward a copy of the review letter to the City
and developer.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.25 MODIFICATION OF PLANS
A modification to a submitted Drainage Plan for a proposed development site which
involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign
of control measures, or which is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the Drainage Plan (as determined by the municipality) shall require a resubmission of the
modified Drainage Plan consistent with Section 925.23 subject to review per Section 925.24 of
this Ordinance.
In order to maintain continuity between plan revisions, any changes to a previous plan
submission shall be flagged with a triangle. Any changes not flagged may be considered not
approved. Flagged changes that have been documented shall be referenced to the appropriate
revision date.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.26 HARDSHIP WAIVER PROCEDURE
A. The City may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged that the provisions of this
Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall
be in writing and accompanied by a $1,000.00 fee. A copy of the waiver request shall
be provided to each of the following: City Planning Bureau, City engineer, City
solicitor and Lehigh Valley Planning Commission. The request shall fully document
the nature of the alleged hardship.
B. The City may grant a waiver provided that all of the following findings are made in a
given case:
ARTICLE 925
43
1. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship
is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this Ordinance in the Stormwater Management
District in which the property is located;
2. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, including the “no harm” provisions, and that the
authorization of a waiver is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of
the property;
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant;
4. That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver that will
afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation
in issue; and
5. That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship waiver.
In granting any waiver, the City may attach such conditions and safeguards as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of Act 167 and this ordinance,
including the requirement of a fee in lieu of detention as stipulated in
APPENDIX ‘A’ Section E. If a Hardship Waiver is granted, the applicant must
still manage the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm
runoff as is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property. The
City shall not grant any waiver which would result in conditions hazardous to
persons or conducive to property damage, or which would significantly increase
an existing potential for property damage, or which would significantly increase
an already hazardous condition to persons.
C. For regulated activities in Section 925.05, the City shall hear requests for and decide
on hardship waiver requests on behalf of the City.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
SECTION 4
INSPECTIONS
925.27 SCHEDULE OF INSPECTIONS
A. DEP or its designees (e.g. County Conservation District) normally ensure compliance
with any permits issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
DEP compliance programs, the City Engineer or his designee may inspect all phases
of the construction, operations, maintenance and any other implementation of
stormwater BMPs. The City Engineer or his designee may also check that as-built
records are being maintained onsite.
B. During any stage of the Regulated Earth Disturbance activities, if the City Engineer or
ARTICLE 925
44
his designee determines that any BMPs are not being implemented in accordance with
this Ordinance, the City Engineer may suspend or revoke any existing permits or
other approvals until the deficiencies are corrected.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
SECTION 5
FEES AND EXPENSES
925.28 GENERAL
The City may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP Operations and Maintenance
Plans to defray review costs incurred by the City. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
The applicant shall sign an agreement to pay for fees and expenses established by the City
of Bethlehem to compensate the City for the cost incurred during the review and processing of
the Drainage Plan.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.29 EXPENSES COVERED BY FEES
The fees required by this Ordinance shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the Drainage Plan, including the BMP Operations and Maintenance
Plan by the City Engineer or his representative.
B. The site inspections and any necessary testing, including but not limited to the
following:
1. The inspection of required controls and improvements during construction.
2. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements required
in the plan.
3. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit provisions,
regulated by this Ordinance, correct violations, and assure the completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
4. Administrative and clerical costs.
C. Any person desiring to make a connection to the City’s storm sewer system shall
obtain a permit from the Department of Public Works and pay a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for a residential connection and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a
commercial connection. The permit application may be required to be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the approving authority. Permit fees for excavating in the street or sidewalk area
remain in force and shall be paid in addition to the storm sewer connection permit.
(Ord. 2010-35. Passed 12/21/2010; Ord. 2017-56. Passed 12/19/2017.)
ARTICLE 925
45
Each applicant shall receive an invoice which explains the labor, material, and equipment
cost at the conclusion of the review and processing.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
SECTION 6
STORMWATER BMP OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
925.30 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the municipality shall commence until
approval by the municipality of the BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan which
describes how the permanent (e.g. post-construction) stormwater BMPs will be properly
operated and maintained.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.31 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE OF BMPS
A. The BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater BMPs, as follows:
1. If a Plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately owned and in
which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the
City, stormwater BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the City;
2. If a Plan includes operations and maintenance by a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be
the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
B. The City shall make the final determination on the continuing operations and
maintenance responsibilities. The City reserves the right to accept or reject the
operations and maintenance responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.32 ADHERENCE TO APPROVED BMP OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
PLAN
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP required by an
approved BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan or to allow the property to remain in a
condition which does not conform to an approved BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan unless
an exception is granted in writing by the City.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
46
925.33 OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT FOR PRIVATELY
OWNED STORMWATER BMPS
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement with the City
covering all stormwater BMPs that are to be privately owned. The agreement shall
include the terms of the format agreement referenced in Appendix E of this
Ordinance.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the City to be
reasonable or necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all
permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.34 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENTS
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner if necessary
for access for inspections and maintenance or for preservation of stormwater conveyance,
infiltration, detention areas and other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The
purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement under Section 925.33.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.35 RECORDING OF APPROVED BMP OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
PLAN AND RELATED AGREEMENTS
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed or
implemented, as described in the BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan, shall record
the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Lehigh or
Northampton County, as applicable, within 90 days of approval of the BMP
Operations Plan by the City:
1. The Operations and Maintenance Plan or summary thereof
2. Operations and Maintenance Agreements under Section 925.33
3. Easements under Section 925.34
B. The City may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project site upon
discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this Section.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
47
925.36 MUNICIPAL STORMWATER BMP OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
FUND
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the City for dedication, the City may require
persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of operations
and maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
1. If the BMP is to be privately owned and maintained, the amount shall cover the
cost of periodic inspections by the municipality in perpetuity, as determined by
the municipality.
2. The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g. ball field, lake), the
City may adjust the amount due accordingly.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
SECTION 7
PROHIBITIONS
925.37 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
A. No person in the City shall allow or cause to allow stormwater discharges into the
City’s separate storm sewer system which are not composed entirely of stormwater
except as provided in subsection B below or as allowed under a State or Federal
permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on the City finding that the discharge(s) do not
significantly contribute pollution to surface waters of the Commonwealth are listed
below.
1. Discharges from fire fighting activities
2. Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire hydrant
flushings
3. Irrigation drainage
4. Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents or other
compounds
5. Air conditioning condensate
6. Water from individual residential car washing
7. Springs
ARTICLE 925
48
8. Water from crawl space pumps
9. Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains
10. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands
11. Lawn watering
12. Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials
have not occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where
detergents are not used
13. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges
14. Uncontaminated groundwater
C. In the event that the City determines that any of the discharges identified in Section
925.37B significantly contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth or is so
notified by DEP, the City will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the City under Section 925.37C, the discharger will have a
reasonable time, as determined by the City, to cease the discharge consistent with the
degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this Section shall affect a discharger’s responsibilities under state law.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.38 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in Section 925.37B
above:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows
any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash
water to enter the separate storm sewer system and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks.
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to
the separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent records and approved by the City.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
49
925.39 ROOF DRAINS
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside
ditches, except as provided in Section 925.39B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers,
connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be permitted by the City.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to the maximum
extent practicable.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.40 ALTERATION OF BMPS
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing stormwater BMP
without the written approval of the City unless it is part of an approved maintenance
program.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into a stormwater
BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or alter the functioning of the
BMP, without the written approval of the City.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
SECTION 8
RIGHT OF ENTRY, NOTIFICATION AND ENFORCEMENT
925.41 RIGHT OF ENTRY
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the City
may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the City to inspect the
implementation, condition or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs or
to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to any aspect
regulated by this Ordinance.
B. Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a BMP shall be considered a
violation of this Section.
C. In the event that the land owner refuses admission to the property, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may seek an administrative search warrant issued
by a district justice to gain access to the property.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
50
925.42 NOTIFICATION
A. Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this Ordinance, the City may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting
2. The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges
3. Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards
and the restoration of any affected property
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs
6. The implementation of stormwater BMPs
7. Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs
8. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the City
intends to take action
9. The location of the property in violation
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit
for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may further advise that should the
violator fail to take the required action within the established deadline, the work will
be done by the City or designee and the expense thereof, together with all related lien
and enforcement fees, charges and expenses, shall be charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such person to the
penalty provisions of this Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative
and shall not prevent the City from pursuing any and all other remedies available in
law or equity.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.43 PUBLIC NUISANCE
A. The violation of any provision of this Ordinance is hereby deemed a Public Nuisance.
B. Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
ARTICLE 925
51
925.44 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by the City may be
suspended or revoked by the City for:
1. Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit
2. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance.
3. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or
development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which
endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the City when:
1. The City Engineer or designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the
stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance.
2. The City is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law or rule and
regulation has been corrected.
3. Payment of all City fees, costs and expenses related to or arising from the
violation has been made.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the City cannot be reinstated. The
applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined in this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2019-20. Passed 7/2/2019)
925.99 PENALTIES
A. Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the following penalties:
1. First violation – A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
2. Second violation – A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
3. Third and each subsequent violation – A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. This Article and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the
right of the City or any person to such equitable or other remedies as may otherwise
be available with or without process of law, including payment of damages to the City
by any person causing damage or injury to the City’s storm sewer system.
C. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay upon cause
shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and
ARTICLE 925
52
judgment.
D. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this Section.
E. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought under this
Section.
F. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus
or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement
of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
(Ord. 4304. Passed 2/15/2005; Ord. 4423. Passed 4/17/2007.)
ARTICLE 925
53
APPENDIX ‘A’
(City of Bethlehem Stormwater Design Standards)
GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
A.) No person shall discharge into any watercourse within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other pollution waters or industrial waste, except
as hereinafter provided.
B.) Residential, commercial or industrial property may be connected to the storm sewer
system providing the waste to be discharged thereto conforms to the following:
B.1.- All discharge of waste to storm sewers shall be in compliance with the laws of
Pennsylvania or the Federal Government or any agency thereof having jurisdiction
over streams, rivers, waterways, or water resources.
B.2.- No waste other than unadulterated rain, roof, or surface drainage water or
authorized industrial waste shall be discharged into a storm sewer.
B.3.- No storm water runoff, natural drainage or authorized industrial waste shall be so
diverted as to overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or the need
for additional drainage structures on other private properties or public lands,
without City approved provisions being made by the developer for properly
handling such conditions.
C.) Storm Water Flow Impedance - No storm water drainage system, including detention
and retention ponds, catch basins, swales, pipes, etc., shall, with the exception of
natural causes, have the water flow impeded in any manner, such as by the construction
or erection of any structure, placing or dumping of dirt, leaves, grass, debris, etc., or the
parking of vehicles or equipment that in any way causes a pond or channel flow to be
restricted, except for properly operating design outlet structures of detention or
retention ponds.
D.) Improvement Specifications - The City Engineer may supply additional specifications
necessary for the spacing and type of inlets and manholes, minimum pipe sizes, and
materials and construction methods.
E.) Storm water Discharge to A Deficient Culvert or Watercourse - Should it be evident
that an offsite storm water drainage channel, into which a developer desires to discharge
post-development storm water at a flow rate greater than the predevelopment storm
water flow rate, is deficient either from a safety, hydraulic, or erosion control
standpoint, the developer shall - as determined by the City Engineer and consistent with
any applicable Act 167 watershed plans - provide an appropriate detention facility, or
upgrade the deficient storm water channel to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, or
ARTICLE 925
54
provide the City a monetary compensation according to the following formula:
(1) Monetary compensation (in dollars) = 0.1 times the Area of additional
impervious surfaces in square feet.
(2) Monetary compensation collected herein shall be placed into a special escrow
account of the City for the sole purpose of providing funds to finance
construction work necessary to upgrade storm water drainage systems
throughout the City
F.) Drainage of Swimming Pools - Refer to Article 921, Sanitary Sewer Regulations
(Section 921.05 – Drainage of Swimming Pools). Only de-chlorinated pool water may
be allowed to discharge to the storm sewer system.
DETENTION BASIN REQUIREMENTS:
A.) All storm drainage systems shall be constructed as necessary to convey the flow of
surface waters without damage to persons or property. These drainage systems shall be
constructed as approved by the City Engineer to drain the stormwater runoff from the
applicants land, as well as the collected runoff from development(s) at higher elevations
in the same watershed. Should the land at a higher elevation be undeveloped, the
design of the storm drainage system local to the applicant shall be designed as if the
land above were fully developed in accordance with current zoning regulations and
assuming required runoff controls in effect in all tributary areas.
B.) All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum 1.0 foot freeboard above
the maximum pool elevation associated with the 2- through 25-year runoff events. A
0.5 foot freeboard shall be provided above the maximum pool elevation of the 100-year
runoff event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool elevation to the
invert of the emergency spillway. The 2- through 100-year storm events shall be
controlled by the primary outlet structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall
be designed to pass the 100-year return frequency storm peak basin inflow rate with a
minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the top of basin. The freeboard criteria shall
be met considering any offsite areas tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If
this detention facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design of
the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105 regulations, and may be required to
pass a storm greater than the 100-year event. The City Engineer may allow some relief
from the freeboard requirements, depending upon construction methods and other
extenuating circumstances.
C.) Detention ponds shall be designed so that they return to normal conditions within
approximately twelve (12) hours after the termination of the storm, unless the City
Engineer finds that downstream conditions may warrant other design criteria for storm
water release.
D.) The bottom of the pond shall be sloped toward the outlet structure a minimum of 1%.
Generally, the side slopes of the pond shall be no steeper than 4 units horizontal to 1
ARTICLE 925
55
unit vertical.
E.) All construction joints are to be watertight.
F.) Unless a geological survey demonstrates the feasibility of encouraging infiltration in a
detention pond, the detention pond shall, generally, be lined with a full 6-inch thick clay
liner with a permeability of 1x10-7 cm/sec. or less. The City Engineer may require a full
12-inch thick clay liner with a permeability of 1x10-7 cm/sec. or less, where
circumstances such as water depth or nearby utilities necessitate a greater degree of
assurance against the formation of sinkholes. Also, the City Engineer may approve a
different liner system that is – in the opinion of the City Engineer – equal to or better
than the above mentioned liners. This clay liner shall, in turn, be covered by a 6-inch
layer of viable topsoil on which a healthy growth of grass shall be established (unless
rip-rapped). This liner system shall extend from the bottom of the pond to the elevation
of the emergency spillway. The liner permeability of 1x10-7 cm/sec. shall be verified by
lab tests on three field samples or other equivalent procedure acceptable to the City
Engineer. Additional tests may be required by the City Engineer should any of the three
original tests yield unacceptable results. All the testing shall be arranged and paid by the
developer; however, the testing lab shall be certified in this area of testing and
acceptable to the City Engineer.
G.) Complete details and sections shall be provided for the outlet structure and only
concrete outlet structures are allowed. A sectional view is also required for the
spillway. A detail of an anti-seep collar around the outlet pipe may also be required.
H.) Fencing may be required around the detention pond at the discretion of the City
Engineer. The design of the fence shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer, Planning Bureau, and Planning Commission.
INLET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A.) Inlets shall be designed and located to prevent hazardous conditions for vehicles,
bicycles and pedestrians.
B.) Inlets shall be spaced to collect design flows from the catchment areas allowing 10%
maximum bypass. In no instance shall inlet spacing be greater than 400 feet.
C.) Inlets shall be depressed appropriately below the grade of the gutter or ground surface.
D.) As a rule, inlets shall be either City Standard No. 9, 7 or 7A, or a curb-opening inlet
approved by the City Engineer. PennDOT Type C inlet is generally not acceptable,
unless specifically approved by the City Engineer.
E.) Developers are required to place inlet markers on all new and existing inlet hoods in
public right-of-way, that adjoin their development tract and within fifty feet (50’) of
ARTICLE 925
56
their tract. The design of the inlet markers shall be approved by the City Engineer.
F.) New inlets may have a casting placed on the hood instead of the inlet marker. Approval
of the hood casting must be secured from the City Engineer.
G.) Inlets adjacent to a developers tract shall be cleaned after construction is completed.
STREET DRAINAGE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A.) Street Drainage - Storm drainage systems shall, among other requirements,
(a) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets
(b) Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, lead water from
springs, and avoid excessive use of cross-gutters at street intersections and
elsewhere
(c) Provide for the eventual discharge of surface water away from the street rightsof-
way
(d) Intercept storm water runoff along streets at intervals related to the extent and
grade of the area drained.
STORM SEWER PIPES DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A.) Generally, the minimum diameter of a storm sewer pipe shall be 18 inches. If
considered hydraulically acceptable, the City Engineer may allow a smaller size storm
sewer pipe for onsite drainage.
B.) Generally, storm sewer pipes shall be watertight, o-ring joint, reinforced concrete pipe
(RCP). The City Engineer may allow a plastic or other type of pipe under certain
conditions.
C.) Storm sewer pipe slopes shall be sufficient to provide a minimum velocity of flow of
2 feet per second for a 1-year storm. If feasible, the maximum velocity of flow shall
be no more than 15 feet per second.
D.) Where outlet velocities exceed five (5) feet per second, approved energy dissipaters
and/or outlet protection shall be designed and installed.
E.) Storm sewer pipes shall be designed for a 25-year design storm.
NATURAL DRAINAGE SWALE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A.) Modification of Natural Drainage Swales
When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainage swales on
the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels - subject to the
approval of the City Engineer - may be constructed conforming substantially to the
line and grade of such natural drainage swales. The City Engineer may require an
ARTICLE 925
57
unexposed open channel (i.e. storm sewer pipe), if an exposed open channel places
nearby residencies and their occupants at risks due to the volume and/or velocity of
water flow in the channel. Should a storm sewer pipe be required, it shall be designed
for a 25-year storm event unless other conditions in this ordinance require a greater
capacity. In general, any unexposed open channel that receives storm water from an
open swale and is greater than 200 feet in length shall have a trash rack, or other
similar protective device, placed at its entrance. This trash rack or similar protective
device shall protect persons from being inadvertently swept into the channel by
hydraulic forces while the channel is carrying storm water. Capacities of open
channels shall be calculated using the Manning equation or other acceptable
engineering equation/method as approved by the City Engineer. (See definition of
Open Channel.)
SINKHOLE PREVENTION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A.) General - Unless a geological survey demonstrates the feasibility of encouraging
storm water infiltration, grading shall be adequate to ensure the continuous flow of
storm water across appropriate watercourses without excessive ponding or other
conditions conducive to storm water infiltration and subsequent sinkhole formations.
B.) Active Sinkhole or Land Subsidence - Any area of sinkhole activity or land
subsidence shall be corrected in a reasonable period of time, and if such activity is
impacting or threatens to impact offsite property (or a nearby street), the corrections
shall be performed as soon as possible but no later than 10 days from the date of
notification from the City Engineer. Such corrections shall be to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer.
ARTICLE 925
58
APPENDIX ‘B’
(City of Bethlehem Required Plan Notes)
PLAN NOTES:
A.) Detention Pond Liner Note
The following note regarding the specification of the detention pond liner shall be
included on the plans, whenever a detention pond is required:
"Unless a geological survey demonstrates the feasibility of encouraging
infiltration in a detention pond, the detention pond shall, generally, be
lined with a full 6-inch thick clay liner with a permeability of 1 x 10-7
cm/sec. or less. This clay liner shall, in turn, be covered by a 6-inch layer
of viable topsoil on which a healthy growth of grass shall be established
(unless rip-rapped). This liner system shall extend from the bottom of the
pond to the elevation of the emergency spillway. The liner permeability of
1 x 10-7 cm/sec. shall be verified by lab tests on three field samples or
other equivalent procedure acceptable to the City Engineer. Additional
tests may be required by the City Engineer should any of the three original
tests yield unacceptable results. All the testing shall be arranged and paid
by the developer; however, the testing lab shall be certified in this area of
testing and acceptable to the City Engineer."
The City Engineer may require a full 12-inch thick clay liner with a
permeability of 1 x 10-7 cm/sec. or less, where circumstances such as water
depth or nearby utilities necessitate a greater degree of assurance against
the formation of sinkholes. Also, the City Engineer may approve a
different liner system that is - in the opinion of the City Engineer - equal to
or better than the above mentioned liners.
B.) Pond cleanout at the end of construction
The following note shall be included in the erosion control section of the
plans whenever a detention pond is utilized as a sedimentation pond
during construction:
"The Contractor shall clean all accumulated sediment and silt from the
pond at the end of the construction, and return the pond to its original
design condition."
C.) Maintenance Note
The following note regarding maintenance of the storm water facilities
ARTICLE 925
59
shall be included on the plans unless these facilities are dedicated to the
City in accordance with Section 6 of this ordinance:
"The maintenance of the storm water facilities, including the detention
pond, shall be the owner's responsibility. The owner's deed, and the deeds
to any subsequent owner, shall note that the owner shall accept the
maintenance responsibilities. The City of Bethlehem shall be permitted to
inspect the storm water facilities on at least an annual schedule to ensure
that any necessary corrective work is performed in a timely manner."
D.) As-built Note
The following note regarding as-built records shall be included on the
plans:
"The developer shall ensure that current as-built records are maintained
during construction. Upon completion of construction, Certified (i.e. P.E.
Stamped) as-built drawings shall be submitted by the developer's
engineers. These as-built drawings shall be found acceptable by the City
Engineer prior to release of any remaining security."
E.) Revision Note
The following note regarding future revisions to the plans shall be
included on the plans upon initial submission:
“In order to maintain continuity between plan revisions, any changes to a
previous plan submission shall be flagged with a triangle. Any changes
not flagged may be considered not approved. Flagged changes shall be
referenced to the appropriate revision date.”
F.) NPDES Note
"By submission of these plans the engineer on record certifies that these
plans are in complete conformance with the City of Bethlehem Storm
Water Management Ordinance."
G.) Inlet Marker Note
“All public inlets shall have inlet markers. The design of the inlet markers
shall be approved by the City Engineer.”
H.) Drainage Easement Note
“The drainage easement provides for the flow of stormwater across lots,
and may not be altered without the written permission of the City
ARTICLE 925
60
Engineer. No obstructions such as planting berms or fences may be
installed in the drainage easements areas without sufficient provision for
the passage of stormwater, and any such proposed provision shall be
approved in writing by the City Engineer.”
ARTICLE 925
61
APPENDIX C
C-1 NRCS Type II 24-Hour Rainfall Distribution
(Graphic & Tabular)
C-2 Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves
C-3 Runoff Curve Numbers and Percent Imperviousness
Values
C-4 Runoff Coefficients for the Rational Method
C-5 Manning ‘n’ Values
C-6 Permissible Velocities for Channels
ARTICLE 925
62
ARTICLE 925
63
ARTICLE 925
64
RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS AND PERCENT IMPERVIOUSNESS VALUES*
Curve numbers for
Cover Description hydrologic soil group**
Average percent
Land Use/Cover Type impervious area A B C D
Open space (lawns, parks, golf
courses, cemeteries, etc.):
Good condition (grass
cover greater than 75%) ...... 39 61 74 80
Impervious areas:
Paved parking lots, roofs,
driveways, etc. (excluding
right-of-way) ....................... 98 98 98 98
Streets and roads:
Paved; curbs and storm sewers
(excluding right-of-way) ..... 98 98 98 98
Paved; open ditches (including
right-of-way) ....................... 83 89 92 93
Gravel (including right-of-way) 76 85 89 91
Urban districts:
Commercial and business ......... 85 89 92 94 95
Industrial ................................... 72 81 88 91 93
Residential districts by average lot
size:
c acre or less (townhouses) . 65 77 85 90 92
¼ acre .................................. 38 61 75 83 87
a acre ................................... 30 57 72 81 86
½ acre .................................. 25 54 70 80 85
1 acre ................................... 20 51 68 79 84
2 acres ................................. 12 46 65 77 82
Woods 30 55 70 77
Agriculture Refer to Table 2-2b in
source document
(TR55) by crop type
and treatment.
*Source: Natural Resources Conservation Service Technical Release No. 55, Second Edition, June 1986.
**Hydrologic Soil Group based on the County Soil Survey latest edition.
ARTICLE 925
65
RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS FOR THE RATIONAL METHOD*
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP AND SLOPE RANGE**
LAND USE
A B C 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ 0-2% 2-6% 6%+ CultivatedA a0.18
b0.23
0.23
0.29
0.28
0.34
0.24
0.30
0.29
0.36
0.33
0.40
0.30
0.36
0.34
0.41
0.38
0.45
0.33
0.39
PastureB 0.09
0.12
0.13
0.17
0.17
0.23
0.19
0.24
0.24
0.30
0.29
0.36
0.27
0.33
0.31
0.38
0.36
0.43
0.31
0.37
Meadow, LawnC 0.05
0.07
0.08
0.12
0.12
0.17
0.15
0.19
0.20
0.25
0.24
0.30
0.23
0.28
0.28
0.34
0.32
0.39
0.28
0.33
Forest, Woods 0.03
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.12
0.11
0.15
0.16
0.21
0.20
0.26
0.20
0.25
0.25
0.31
0.29
0.36
0.25
0.31
Gravel 0.24
0.30
0.29
0.36
0.33
0.40
0.32
0.38
0.36
0.43
0.40
0.47
0.35
0.42
0.39
0.46
0.43
0.50
0.37
0.44
Parking, Other
Impervious
0.85
0.95
0.86
0.96
0.87
0.97
0.85
0.95
0.86
0.96
0.87
0.97
0.85
0.95
0.86
0.96
0.87
0.97
0.85
0.95
Residential, Commercial,
Industrial And Other
“Developed”
Runoff coefficients should be calculated based upon weighted average of impervious pervious area coefficients from above based upon soil type, slope and the proposal.
*Coefficients for all land uses except parking and other impervious cover are based on the Rossmiller Equation
for translating NRCS curve numbers into
Rational Method ‘c’ values. The source for the parking and other impervious cover coefficients is RAWLS,
W.J., S.L. WONG and R.H. McCUEN, 1981.
Comparison of urban flood frequency procedures. Preliminary draft report prepared for the Soil Conservation
Service, Beltsville, MD.
**Hydrologic Soil Group based on the county soil survey latest edition.
a – Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals less than 25 years.
ARTICLE 925
66
b – Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals of 25 years or more.
ARepresents average of cultivated land with and without conservation treatment from TR-55, January 1975.
These values are consistent with several categories of cultivated lands from TR-55, June 1986.
BRepresents grasslands in fair condition with 50% to 75% grass cover.
CRepresents grasslands in good condition with greater than 75% grass cover.
ARTICLE 925
67
MANNING ‘n’ VALUES BY TYPICAL REACH DESCRIPTION
Reach Description Manning ‘n’
Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts
Or pools
Natural stream, clean, winding, some pools
And shoals
Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals,
Stony with some weeds
Natural stream, sluggish with deep pools
And weeds
Natural stream or swale, very weedy or
With timber under brush
0.030
0.040
0.050
0.070
0.100
Concrete pipe, culvert or channel
Corrugated metal pipe
0.012
0.012-0.027*
*Depending upon type and diameter.
ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENTS (MANNING ‘n’) FOR SHEET FLOW
Surface Description Manning ‘n’1
Smooth surfaces (concrete, asphalt, gravel, or
bare soil) 0.011
Fallow (no residue) 0.050
Cultivated soils:
Residue cover <= 20%
Residue cover > 20%
0.060
0.170
Grass:
Short grass prairie
Dense grasses2
Bermuda grass
0.150
0.240
0.410
Range (natural) 0.130
Woods:3
Light underbrush
Dense underbrush
0.400
0.800
1The n values are a composite of information compiled by Engman (1986).
2Includes species such as weeping lovegrass, bluegrass, buffalo grass, blue grama grass and
native grass mixtures.
3When selecting n, consider cover to a height of about 0.1 ft. this is the only part of the plant
cover that will obstruct sheet flow.
ARTICLE 925
68
PERMISSIBLE VELOCITIES FOR SELECTED CHANNELS
PERMISSIBLE CHANNEL
CHANNEL LINING VELOCITY (FEET PER SECOND)
Vegetation1
Grass Mixture 4.0 - 5.0
Kentucky Bluegrass 5.0 - 7.0
Red Fescue 2.5 - 3.5
Redtop 2.5 - 3.5
Reed Canarygrass 3.0 - 4.0
Serecea Lespedeza 2.5 - 3.5
Sudangrass 2.5 - 3.5
Tall Fescue 3.0 - 6.0
Weeping Lovegrass 2.5 - 3.5
Bare Earth, Easily Eroded2
Fine Sand 1.5
Sand Loam 1.75
Silt Loam or Alluvial Silts, Loose 2.0
Firm Loam 2.50
Bare Earth, Erosion Resistant2
Fine Gravel 2.5
Stiff Clay or Alluvial Silts, Firm 3.75
Loam to Cobbles (Graded) 3.75
Silt to Cobbles (Graded or Course Gravel) 4.0
Cobbles and Stones or Shales and Hardpans 6.0
Rock Lined
6" Rip Rap 9.0
9" Rip Rap 11.5
12" Rip Rap 13.0
1 Maximum permissible velocities dependent on soil erodibility and slope.
2 Maximum permissible velocities in bare earth channels - for straight channels where slopes
<0.02 ft./ft.
Source: Department of Environmental Protection, Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual, April 15, 2000.
ARTICLE 925
69
APPENDIX D
D-1 Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs in Carbonate Rock
ARTICLE 925
70
APPENDIX D
Art 925-Appendix
D.pdf
ARTICLE 925
71
APPENDIX E
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this _______ day of _________________,
200__, by and between ____________________________________, (hereinafter the
“Landowner”), and ________________________________, ___________________________
County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter “municipality”);
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed in
the land records of ________________ County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book ___________ at Page
______, (hereinafter “Property”).
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
WHEREAS, the stormwater management BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan
approved by the municipality (hereinafter referred to as the “Plan”) for the property identified
herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as approved by the
municipality, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the Property
through the use of Best Management Practices (BMP’s); and
WHEREAS, the municipality, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree that
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the municipality and the protection and
maintenance of water quality require that on-site stormwater Best Management Practices be
constructed and maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, for the purposes of this agreement, the following definitions shall apply:
? BMP – “Best Management Practice;” activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land
development, to protect and maintain water quality and groundwater
recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of the Municipal Stormwater
Management Ordinance, including but not limited to infiltration trenches,
seepage pits, filter strips, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, rain
gardens, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
? Infiltration Trench – A BMP surface structure designed, constructed, and
maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of
stormwater into the soil and/or groundwater aquifer,
? Seepage Pit – An underground BMP structure designed, constructed, and
maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of
stormwater into the soil and/or groundwater aquifer,
ARTICLE 925
72
? Rain Garden – A BMP overlain with appropriate mulch and suitable
vegetation designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of
providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or
underground aquifer, and
WHEREAS, the municipality requires, through the implementation of the Plan, that
stormwater management BMPs as required by said Plan and the Municipal Stormwater
Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and maintained by the
Landowner, his successors and assigns. And
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual covenants
contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:
1. The BMPs shall be constructed by the Landowner in accordance with the plans and
specifications identified in the Plan.
2. The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in
good working order acceptable to the municipality and in accordance with the specific
maintenance requirements noted on the Plan.
3. The Landowner hereby grants permission to the municipality, its authorized agents
and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon presentation of proper
identification, to inspect the BMP(s) whenever it deems necessary. Whenever possible, the
municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the property.
4. In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on
the Plan in good working order acceptable to the municipality, the municipality or its
representatives may enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed necessary to
maintain said BMP(s). This provision shall not be construed to allow the municipality to erect
any permanent structure on the land of the Landowner. It is expressly understood and agreed that
the municipality is under no obligation to maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall
this Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the municipality.
5. In the event the municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any
nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies,
materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the municipality for all expenses (direct
and indirect) incurred within 10 days of receipt of invoice from the municipality and if not timely
paid, a municipal lien shall be placed upon the premises for 110% of the invoice amount, plus
statutorily allowed fees, expenses and costs.
6. The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of
the onsite BMP(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed
to create or effect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to result from or be
caused by stormwater runoff.
7. The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors in
ARTICLE 925
73
interests, hereby release and hold harmless the municipality’s employees and designated
representatives from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise
or be asserted against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence,
existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or municipality. In the event that a
claim is asserted against the municipality, its designated representatives or employees, the
municipality shall promptly notify the Landowner and the Landowner shall defend, at his own
expense, any suit based on the claim. If any judgment or claims against the municipality’s
employees or designated representatives shall be allowed, the Landowner shall pay all costs and
expenses regarding said judgment or claim.
8. The municipality shall inspect the BMP(s) as necessary to ensure their continued
functioning.
9. This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
______________ County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property
and/or equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his administrators, executors,
assigns, heirs and any other successors in interests, in perpetuity.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have duly executed this Agreement as of the
day and year first above written.
For the Landowner:
WITNESS/ATTEST: ___________________________________
______________________________ BY:________________________________
Secretary Title:
For the Municipality:
ATTEST: CITY OF BETHLEHEM
______________________________ BY:________________________________
City Controller Mayor
The within Agreement is certified to be
Needed, necessary and appropriate.
By:
City of Bethlehem Department Head
Print Name:
ARTICLE 925
74
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA )
: SS:
COUNTY OF )
On this ______ day of _____________________, _______, before me,
____________________________, a Notary Public, appeared ___________, who duly
acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be his/her/their act and deed to the end that the same
may be recorded as such.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
___________________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA )
: SS:
COUNTY OF NORTHAMPTON )
On this ______ day of _____________________, _______, before me,
_________________, a Notary Public, personally appeared ___________________, Mayor of
the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, known to me to be the person described in the foregoing
instrument, and acknowledged that he executed the same in his official capacity therein stated
and for the purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
___________________________________
ARTICLE 925
75
APPENDIX F
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES
ALTERNATIVE APPROACH FOR
MANAGING STORMWATER RUNOFF
Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered radically by poorly planned development practices,
such as introducing unneeded impervious surfaces, destroying existing drainage swales,
constructing unnecessary storm sewers, and changing local topography. A traditional drainage
approach of development has been to remove runoff from a site as quickly as possible and
capture it in a detention basin. This approach leads ultimately to the degradation of water quality
as well as expenditure of additional resources for detaining and managing concentrated runoff at
some downstream location.
The recommended alternative approach is to promote practices that will minimize postdevelopment
runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for artificial conveyance and
storage facilities. To simulate pre-development hydrologic conditions, forced infiltration is often
necessary to offset the loss of infiltration by creation of impervious surfaces. The ability of the
ground to infiltrate depends upon the soil types and its conditions.
Preserving natural hydrologic conditions requires careful alternative site design considerations.
Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features, minimizing impervious surface
area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces, and protecting natural
depression storage. A well-designed site will contain a mix of all those features. The following
describes various techniques to achieve the alternative approach:
• Preserving Natural Drainage Features. Protecting natural drainage features,
particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable because of their ability
to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter pollutants. However, this objective is often
not accomplished in land development. In fact, commonly held drainage philosophy
encourages just the opposite pattern -- streets and adjacent storm sewers typically are
located in the natural headwater valleys and swales, thereby replacing natural drainage
functions with a completely impervious system. As a result, runoff and pollutants
generated from impervious surfaces flow directly into storm sewers with no opportunity
for attenuation, infiltration, or filtration. Developments designed to fit site topography
also minimizes the amount of grading on site.
• Protecting Natural Depression Storage Areas. Depressional storage areas have no
surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a storm event. They can be commonly seen
as ponded areas in farm fields during the wet season or after large runoff events.
Traditional development practices eliminate these depressions by filling or draining,
thereby obliterating their ability to reduce surface runoff volumes and trap pollutants.
The volume and release-rate characteristics of depressions should be protected in the
design of the development site. The depressions can be protected by simply avoiding the
depression or by incorporating its storage as additional capacity in required detention
ARTICLE 925
76
facilities.
• Avoiding introduction of impervious areas. Careful site planning should consider
reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent possible. Building footprints,
sidewalks, driveways and other features producing impervious surfaces should be
evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.
• Reducing the Hydraulic Connectivity of Impervious Surfaces. Impervious surfaces
are significantly less of a problem if they are not directly connected to an impervious
conveyance system (such as storm sewer). Two basic ways to reduce hydraulic
connectivity are routing of roof runoff over lawns and reducing the use of storm sewers.
Site grading should promote increasing travel time of stormwater runoff, and should help
reduce concentration of runoff to a single point in the development.
• Routing Roof Runoff Over Lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed over lawns in
most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of downspouts to storm
sewers or parking lots. The practice also discourages sloping driveways and parking lots
to the street. By routing roof drains and crowning the driveway to run off to the lawn, the
lawn is essentially used as a filter strip.
• Reducing the Use of Storm Sewers. By reducing use of storm sewers for draining
streets, parking lots, and back yards, the potential for accelerating runoff from the
development can be greatly reduced. The practice requires greater use of swales and may
not be practical for some development sites, especially if there are concerns for areas that
do not drain in a “reasonable” time. The practice requires educating local citizens and
public works officials, who expect runoff to disappear shortly after a rainfall event.
• Reducing Street Widths. Street widths can be reduced by either eliminating on-street
parking or by reducing roadway widths. Municipal planners and traffic designers should
encourage narrower neighborhood streets which ultimately could lower maintenance.
• Limiting Sidewalks to One Side of the Street. A sidewalk on one side of the street may
suffice in low-traffic neighborhoods. The lost sidewalk could be replaced with
bicycle/recreational trails that follow back-of-lot lines. Where appropriate, backyard
trails should be constructed using pervious materials.
• Using Permeable Paving Materials. These materials include permeable interlocking
concrete paving blocks or porous bituminous concrete. Such materials should be
considered as alternatives to conventional pavement surfaces, especially for low use
surfaces such as driveways, overflow parking lots, and emergency access roads.
• Reducing Building Setbacks. Reducing building setbacks reduces driveway and entry
walks and is most readily accomplished along low-traffic streets where traffic noise is not
a problem.
• Constructing Cluster Developments. Cluster developments can also reduce the amount
of impervious area for a given number of lots. The biggest savings is in street length,
ARTICLE 925
77
which also will reduce costs of the development. Cluster development clusters the
construction activity onto less-sensitive areas without substantially affecting the gross
density of development.
.APPENDIX G
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION AND TESTING REQUIRMENTS
Required Data and Site Information: The following data shall be gathered as part of a
preliminary site investigation:
? Bedrock composition – Any apparent boundaries between carbonate and non-carbonate
bedrock must be verified by a qualified geotechnical professional.
? Bedrock structural geology – This includes the possible presence of faults and mapping of
conspicuous fracture traces or lineaments.
? Overburden and soil mantle composition and thickness
? Permeability of the soil
? Depth to the seasonal high water table
? Presence of special geologic features – This includes sinkholes, closed depressions, fracture
traces, lineaments and geologic contacts between carbonate and non-carbonate bedrock
Investigation Required for All Sites
Review of Available Data, Maps and Reports: Some of the required information, as listed
above, can be found in existing published data. Suggested resources include the following:
? Geologic maps and references for the development area
? The Little Lehigh Creek Basin Carbonate Prototype Area Closed Depression Map –
available at the LVPC
? USGS topographic maps
? Lehigh and Northampton County soil survey maps
? Aerial photographs from the LVPC or other sources
? Relevant Pennsylvania Geologic Survey Open File Reports that provide maps of sinkholes
and karst features for Lehigh County (OF 87-01) and Northampton County (OF 87-02)
? Kochanov and Reese (2003). Density of Mapped Karst Feature in South-Central and
Southeastern Pennsylvania (Map 68)
? DCNR Online Sinkhole Inventory –
(http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/topogeo/hazards/sinkhole/default.asp)
Field Inspections: In addition to gathering data from published sources, a field inspection of
the proposed site is required. A field inspection can provide additional information relating to
site features such as carbonate bedrock features, indicators of seasonal high stream-level or
water table levels, streams, springs, etc.
Soil Test Pit and Percolation Test Requirements: A minimum of one test pit and a minimum of
2 percolation tests are required for every site. A test pit is a 2-3 foot wide, 8 foot deep trench
excavated with a backhoe for observing subsurface conditions. The test pits will be used to
describe soil depth and quality, including soil horizons, and testing of permeability or
percolation rates and can be conducted by a certified Sewage Enforcement Officer.
ARTICLE 925
78
Percolation tests are to be conducted as follows (adapted from § 73.15. “Percolation Tests” of
the Pennsylvania Code)
1. The percolation tests shall be made in separate holes uniformly spaced over the
possible infiltration area.
2. An “Initial Presoak” should not be performed.
3. Percolation holes located within the possible infiltration area shall be used in the
calculation of the average percolation rate.
4. Holes having a uniform diameter of 6 to 10-inches shall be bored or dug as
follows:
a. To the depth of the bottom of the possible infiltration BMP
b. Alternate depths if the test pits/auger holes indicate that the soils are more
suitable at a different depth (i.e., if a clay horizon is identified and more
suitable soils are located beneath the horizon, and infiltration test should
be performed in the suitable horizon).
5. The bottom and sides of the hole shall be scarified with a knife blade or sharppointed
instrument to completely remove any smeared soil surfaces and to provide
a natural soil interface into which water may percolate. Loose material shall be
removed from the hole. Two inches of coarse sand or fine gravel shall be placed
in the bottom of the hole to protect the soil from scouring and clogging of the
pores.
6. Immediately before the percolation test, as a final presoak, water shall be placed
in the hole to a minimum depth of 6-inches over the gravel and readjusted every
30 minutes for 1 hour.
7. The drop in the water level during the last 30 minutes of the final presoaking
period shall be applied to the following standard to determine the time interval
between readings for each percolation hole:
a. If water remains in the hole, the interval for readings during the
percolation test shall be 30 minutes.
b. If no water remains in the hole, the interval for readings during the
percolation test may be reduced to 10 minutes.
8. After the final presoaking period, water in the hole shall again be adjusted to
approximately 6-inches over the gravel and readjusted when necessary after each
reading.
a. Measurement to the water level in the individual percolation holes shall
be made from a fixed reference point and shall continue at the interval
determined from step No. 7 (above) for each individual percolation hole
until a minimum of eight reading are completed or until a stabilized rate
of drop is obtained, whichever occurs first. A stabilized rate of drop
ARTICLE 925
79
means a difference of ¼-inch or less of drop between the highest and
lowest readings of four consecutive readings.
b. The drop that occurs in the final period in percolation test holes,
expressed as inches per hour, shall be used to calculate the average
percolation rate.
c. When the rate of drop in a percolation test is too slow to obtain a
measurable rate, the rate of 0.25 inches per hour shall be assigned to that
hole for use in calculating the average percolation rate. The infiltration
area may be placed over holes with no measurable rate when the average
percolation rate for the possible infiltration area is within the acceptable
range.
When a percolation test hole yields a percolation rate of greater than 12-inches per hour, the
proposed infiltration area may not be designed or installed within 25-feet of this hole unless the
municipality determines that a testing anomaly caused the fast percolation rate and a retest of
the area yields acceptable percolation rates. This percolation rate limit is established to protect
groundwater quality and to minimize the risk of subsidence.
Additional Site Investigation and Testing Required if Infiltration is Proposed
Soil Test Pit Requirements: The required number of test pits varies with Effective Soil
Thickness. As risk factors increase, the number of test pits increases. A minimum of 2 test pits,
uniformly spaced within the proposed infiltration area (e.g. the 2 pits should be centered on each
half of the proposed infiltration area), are required for any site proposing infiltration unless the
applicant can demonstrate that one test pit is adequately representative of the area proposed for
infiltration. For larger infiltration areas, multiple test pits shall be developed at the densities as
listed below:
Effective Soil
Thickness (ft.)
Test Pit Density (per
acre of proposed
infiltration area)*
Percolation Tests (per
acre of proposed
infiltration area)**
Auger Grid Spacing
(Feet On-Center)***
8 4 8 50
4 to 8 6 12 35
2 to 4 8 16 25
*No. of Test Pits required = Infiltration sq. ft./43,560 sq. ft. x test pit density from chart rounded up to the nearest
whole number
** No. of Percolation Tests required = Infiltration sq. ft./43,560 sq. ft. x percolation tests from chart rounded up to
the nearest whole number
***Auger testing is only required on Carbonate sites.
Soil Auger Testing Requirements for Carbonate Areas: Because soil depth is not uniform in
many carbonate areas, test pits will not be sufficient to accurately determine the depth to
bedrock. Augering provides this essential data as inexpensively as possible. Track-rig rotary
soil auger test drilling allows relatively inexpensive, qualitative determination of the presence of
overburden voids and will generally penetrate to the top-of-bedrock. Augers typically extend to
depths of 20 feet. Special augers extend to as much as 50 feet. Augers do not extend into the
bedrock. Auger testing should be performed in a grid pattern across the proposed infiltration
area, spaced as indicated in the above table.
ARTICLE 925
80
Percolation Testing Requirements: For each proposed infiltration area, a minimum of six
percolation tests shall be conducted with a vertical component permeability test unless the
applicant can demonstrate that fewer tests accurately represent the percolation rate of the
proposed infiltration area. Additional testing shall be required if the initial test results show
significant variability in the vertical component percolation rate. For larger infiltration areas,
percolation tests shall be conducted at the densities listed in the table above.
(Ordinance 4423. Passed April 17, 2007)
ARTICLE 927
Sewer Rental
927.01 Annual charge.
927.02 General rates of rental.
927.03 Properties using other than City water.
927.04 Water not discharged into City's sanitary sewers.
927.05 Measuring devices.
927.06 Time and method of payment.
927.07 Apportionment.
927.08 Administration.
927.09 Collection of delinquent rentals.
927.10 Properties not affected.
927.11 Unpolluted drainage excluded from sewer system.
927.12 Required control manhole.
927.13 Special arrangements for unusual industrial waste.
927.14 Right of inspection, testing, etc.
927.15 Required notice of change in industrial wastes.
927.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to charge rental - See 3rd Class §3211 (53 P.S. §38211)
Collection of sewer rentals - See 3rd Class §3214 (53 P.S. §38214)
Department of Public Works - See ADM. Art. 107
Water regulations - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 911
Water rates and charges - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 913
Sanitary sewers - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 921
Swimming pools - See BLDG. Art. 1711
927.01 ANNUAL CHARGE.
There is imposed an annual sewer rental or charge for the use of the sewers, sewage system
and sewage treatment works of the City upon the owners of properties served thereby, at the rates
hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 1087 §1. Passed 7/25/1950.)
927.02 GENERAL RATES OF RENTAL.
The City of Bethlehem hereby establishes the following rates governing the furnishing of
sewer service with respect to properties inside and outside the City:
ARTICLE 927
2
(a) The sewer charges for the City of Bethlehem shall be as listed below based on
whether the billing is quarterly or monthly:
CUSTOMER CHARGES MONTHLY QUARTERLY
METER SIZE
5/8" 9.57 28.71
3/4" 18.30 54.89
1" 35.58 106.73
1.5" 69.54 208.62
2" 111.57
3" 229.13
4" 359.02
6" 716.43
8" 1438.24
All gallons used shall be charged as listed below:
RESIDENTIAL/RESALE
Each 1000 gallons 3.255
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL/INSTITUTIONAL/PUBLIC
Each 1000 gallons 3.255
(Ord. 4234. Passed 12/16/2003; Ord. 4333. Passed 8/2/2005; Ord. 4372. Passed 2/21/2006; Ord.
2012-4. Passed 2/21/2012; Ord. 2014-3. Passed 2/18/2014; Ord. 2016-33. Passed 11/15/2016; Ord.
2019-37. Passed 11/19/2019.)
ARTICLE 927
3
(b) The sewer charges for those properties in Hanover Township, Northampton County,
who are direct service customer, i.e., charges to those customers who receive City of Bethlehem
water service and billing statements for said service predicated on water meter reading shall be the
same as those charged in 927.02 (a) above. Those properties not in the City of Bethlehem water
service area that have water meters and readings supplied by others shall be the same as those listed
in 927.02 (a) above. All properties not in the City of Bethlehem water service area and not having
water meters shall be based on 32,000 gallons per quarter in accordance with the agreement dated 1
June 1967. All rates shall be increased by five (5%) percent for system maintenance of mains by
agreement between the City of Bethlehem and the Township dated April 16, 2007. Therefore, the
rates shall be as noted below:
CUSTOMER CHARGES MONTHLY QUARTERLY
METER SIZE
5/8" 10.05 30.14
3/4" 9.21 57.63
1" 37.35 112.06
1.5" 73.02 219.05
2" 117.15
3" 240.59
4" 376.98
6" 752.25
8" 1510.15
All gallons shall be charged as listed below:
RESIDENTIAL/RESALE
Each 1000 gallons 3.418
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL/INSTITUTIONAL/PUBLIC
Each 1000 gallons 3.418
(Ord. 4333. Passed 8/5/2005; Ord. 4372. Passed 2/21/2006; Ord. 2012-4. Passed 2/21/2012. Ord.
2014-3. Passed 2/18/2014; Ord. 2016-33. Passed 11/15/2016; Ord. 2019-37. Passed 11/19/2019.)
ARTICLE 927
4
(c) A bulk service rate per 1000 gallons plus an annual capital payment where applicable
for Hanover Township (Lehigh County), Borough of Hellertown, Borough of Fountain Hill,
Bethlehem Township, Lower Saucon Township, Salisbury Township, Borough of Freemansburg,
and the City of Allentown and Lower Nazareth Township shall be calculated annually by the
Director of the Water and Sewer Resources Department based on the agreement between the City of
Bethlehem and the respective municipality. (Ord. 2015-14. Passed 3/17/2015; Ord. 2016-33. Passed
11/15/2016.)
(d) All sanitary sewer services bills shall be subject to a penalty of one and one-half
(1.50%) percent per month if not paid within twenty (20) calendar days from the date the bill is
mailed.
927.03 PROPERTIES USING OTHER THAN CITY WATER.
For a property which uses water, all or part of which is from a source other than the City's
water supply system, there shall be a sewer rental, separate from and in addition to any sewer rental
based on the consumption of water from the City's water supply system. Such separate or additional
sewer rental shall be measured by the quantity of water from the source other than the City's water
supply system which is discharged into the City's sewers from such property.
The owner of each such property shall install, without cost to the City, meters purchased
from the City to measure the quantity of water received from other than the City's water supply
system and discharged into the City's sewers. No meter shall be installed or be used for such
purpose without the approval of the Director of Water and Sewer Resources. The Director shall
certify to the City Treasurer the ferrule size through which each meter so used would customarily be
supplied with water in Bethlehem, and the sewer rental based upon the water received from other
than the City water supply system shall be the same in amount as is required to be paid by the owner
of a metered property receiving the same quantity of water from the City's water supply system and
having the certified size of meter.
If the owner of the property fails to install an approved meter, the property owner shall be
billed on a flat rate basis of 32,000 gallons per quarter. (Ord. 3030. Passed 10/15/1985.)
927.04 WATER NOT DISCHARGED INTO CITY'S SANITARY SEWERS.
Whenever a property upon which a sewer rental is imposed uses water from the City's water
supply system for an industrial or commercial purpose such that the water so used is not polluted to
an extent that its discharge into storm sewers is objectionable, and is not discharged into the sanitary
sewerage system of the City, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the City's
sanitary sewers shall be excluded in determining the sewer rental of such property, provided:
ARTICLE 927
5
(a) The quantity of water so used and not discharged into the City's sewers is measured
by a device approved by the Director of Water and Sewer Resources and installed without cost to
the City, and
(b) The water supply of such property is metered and the owner pays for the water at
meter rates.
The sewer rental based upon the consumption of City water to be paid by the owner of the
property shall be computed at the rates specified in Section 927.02 for a metered property having
the same size meter as such property and using a quantity of water equal to the total quantity of
water furnished the property by the City, less the quantity not discharged into the City's sanitary
sewers.
However, when, in the opinion of the Director of Water and Sewer Resources, it is not
practical to install a measuring device to continuously determine the quantity of water not
discharged into the City sanitary sewers, the Director shall determine periodically, in such manner
and by such method as he/she may prescribe, the percentage of metered water discharged into the
City sewers; the quantity of water used to determine the sewerage rental shall be the percentage so
determined of the quantity measured by the water meter. Any dispute as to the estimated amount
shall be submitted to Council after notice of the estimate and Council's decision on the matter shall
be final for the current year. (Ord 1087 §4. Passed 7/25/1950.)
927.05 MEASURING DEVICES.
All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used under the provisions
of this article shall be under the control of the Director of Water and Sewer Resources. The owner
of the property upon which any such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its
maintenance and safekeeping. All repairs thereto shall be made at the owner's cost, whether such
repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or by other causes. Bills for such repairs, if
made by the City, shall be due and payable at the same time, shall be collected in the same manner
and shall be subject to the same penalties as are the bills for repairs of water meters. (Ord. 1087 §5.
Passed 7/25/1950.)
927.06 TIME AND METHOD OF PAYMENT.
All sewer rentals shall be due and payable at the same time that water rentals are now due
and payable. They shall be included in the same bills and shall be collected at the same times and in
the same manner and be subject to the payment of sewer rents without regard to the source of the
water used by them. (Ord. 1087 §7. Passed 7/25/1950.)
ARTICLE 927
6
927.07 APPORTIONMENT.
Whenever sewer service to any property begins after the first day or terminates before the
last day of any year, the sewer rental for such property for such year shall be for that portion of the
year during which the property is served. However, in making such apportionment, a fraction of a
month amounting to one-half or more of a month shall be counted a full month and a fraction of a
month amounting to less than one-half of a month shall be disregarded. (Ord. 1087 §8. Passed
7/25/1950).
927.08 ADMINISTRATION.
The City Treasurer is charged with the duty of collecting all sewer rents and is authorized to
adopt such regulations with respect thereto as may in his/her discretion seem fit and proper, and the
Department of Water and Sewer Resources shall provide all information required to assist the
Treasurer in the prompt collection of rentals. (Ord. 3030. Passed 10/15/1985.)
927.09 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT RENTALS.
(a) In-City Customers - Delinquent accounts placed for collection shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Section 927.02 together with costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees.
(b) Out-of-City Customers - It shall be the duty of the Bureau of Law, when requested
by the Department of Water and Sewer Resources, to take such action as may be authorized by law
or ordinance for the collection of delinquent rentals, including any court costs deemed appropriate
by a court of jurisdiction. (Ord. 3489. Passed 8/18/1992.)
927.10 PROPERTIES NOT AFFECTED.
No sewer rental is imposed on properties outside the City from which sewage and other
liquid wastes are discharged into the sewers of the City under an agreement between the City of
Bethlehem and any other political subdivision of the Commonwealth, nor upon properties within
the City where sewer facilities are not available.
927.11 UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE EXCLUDED FROM SEWER SYSTEM.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage, including cooling water, shall be excluded
from the sanitary sewer system and discharged into such sewers or to a natural outlet or stream in
such a manner that will be noninjurious to the sewer or receiving body of water as approved by the
Director of Water and Sewer Resources. (Ord. 3030. Passed 10/15/1985.)
ARTICLE 927
7
927.12 REQUIRED CONTROL MANHOLE.
When required by the Director of Water and Sewer Resources, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his/her expense and
shall be maintained by him/her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 1087 §14. Passed
7/25/1950.)
927.13 SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR UNUSUAL INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special
arrangement or agreement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste
of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern. (Ord. 1087 §15. Passed 7/25/1950.)
927.14 RIGHT OF INSPECTION, TESTING, ETC.
The Director of Water and Sewer Resources and/or his/her duly authorized representatives
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 1087
§15. Passed 7/25/1950.)
927.15 REQUIRED NOTICE OF CHANGE IN INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
Any industry which is connected to the sewer system, and is discharging industrial wastes
thereto, and shall change its methods of operation so as to alter the type of wastes previously
discharged, shall notify the Director of Water and Sewer Resources ten days previous to such
change, so that the City's sewage treatment plant chemist, his/her qualified assistants, or other City
designees can sample the waste immediately after the change takes place and determine whether or
not the new waste is injurious to the sewer system. Such industrial discharges are regulated under
the industrial pretreatment regulations covered in Article 923. (Ord. 3030. Passed 10/15/1985.)
927.99 PENALTY.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
ARTICLE 927
8
(3) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
(b) This Article and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the
right of the City or any person to such equitable or other remedies as may otherwise be available
with or without process of law, including payment of damages to the City by any person causing
damage or injury to the sewer system. (Ord. 3030. Passed 10/15/1985; Ord. 3242. Passed
2/7/1989; Ord. 3940. Passed 3/2/1999.)
ARTICLE 931
Preparation of Waste, Waste Containers and Placement of Containers.
93l.01 Definitions.
93l.02 Responsibility for Solid Waste Services.
931.03 Director of Community and Economic Development to set standards for containers.
93l.04 Placement of containers.
93l.05 Preparation of municipal waste for collection.
931.99 Penalties.
NOTE: This Article was repealed in its entirety and replaced with Article 1162, Solid
Waste Collection and Enforcement by Ordinance 2016-14, adopted on June 7,
2016.
ARTICLE 933
Recycling
933.01 Definitions
933.02 Director of Community Development to Regulate Recycling
933.03 Collection Program
933.04 Residential Source Separation
933.05 Multi-Family Rental Dwelling Source Separation
933.06 Commercial, Municipal or Institutional Establishments
933.07 Hauler Requirements
933.08 Unlawful Activities
933.09 Effective Date
933.10 Fees Schedule
933.99 Penalties
CROSS REFERENCES
Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act (Act 101).
933.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this article:
"Aluminum Cans" - aluminum food and beverage containers that
contain aerosol or edible substances.
“Brown Paper Bags” - paper bags (eg: grocery bags) made of
brown craft paper.
"City" - the City of Bethlehem, Counties of Northampton and
Lehigh, Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania Municipal Corporation or
agency of the City of Bethlehem
"City Recycling Containers" - a receptacle owned by the City
which is provided for use of residents for storing designated
recyclables and which bears identifying information as designated
by the City. This includes both curbside containers and roll-off
containers owned by the City.
"Commercial Establishment" - an establishment engaged in
business, including, but not limited to, stores, markets, offices,
restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
"Composting" - the process by which organic solid waste is
ARTICLE 933 2
biologically decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic
conditions to yield a humus-like product.
"Container" - a portable device in which material is held for
storage or transportation
"Corrugated Cardboard" - cardboard with a wavy center between
two layers.
“Curbside Collection” – collection of designated recyclables
from provided containers that are placed at the curb or otherwise
immediately adjacent to the street or road that is the street
address of the residence and/or that runs along the front entrance
of the building.
“Flatboard” - brown or gray flat cardboard (eg: cereal
boxes).
"Formed Aluminum Containers" - any shaped aluminum food
container other than beverage cans (eg: pie pans). This includes
aluminum foil.
"Glass Containers" - glass food and beverage containers
commonly found in the home. Includes clear (flint), green and
brown (amber) colored containers. Excludes crystal, ceramics,
light bulbs, plate, window, laminated, wired or mirrored glass.
"Institutional Establishment" - an establishment engaged in
service, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
"Leaf Waste" – leaves.
“Magazines/Shiny Paper” – periodicals, catalogs and other
paper with a glossy finish.
"Mixed Office Paper" - A mixture of non-shiny papers commonly
found in the typical office or home. This mixture includes but is
not limited to high grade paper, envelopes, writing paper, fax
paper, manila folders, copier paper, non-shiny junk mail, etc.
“Multi-Family Rental Dwelling” – a dwelling place containing
four or more rental residential units.
"Municipal Establishment" - an establishment such as a city,
borough, incorporated town, township, county or an authority
created by any of the foregoing.
"Municipal Waste" - garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from operation
ARTICLE 933 3
of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities; and sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment
plant, waste water treatment plant or air pollution control
facility.
“Newsprint” – the paper commonly known as newsprint used for
printing of newspaper and any white or colored inserts made of
other paper, that are delivered along with the newspaper, but
excluding soiled newspaper. Magazines and periodicals, as well as
all other paper products, are not newspaper.
"Person" - any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal
authority, Federal Government or Department of General Services
and the State Public School Building Authority - or any other
legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In the provisions of this article pertaining to a
fine or a penalty, the term includes the officers and directors of
a corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
"Plastic Containers" – water and milk jugs, soda bottles,
cosmetics and laundry product containers, fruit and juice
containers. All containers with a 1-7 number except Styrofoam.
"Processing" – any manual and/or mechanical means used to
separate commingled recyclables into individual components that
can be more readily marketed. This includes either single or dual
stream processing.
"Recycling" - the collection, separation, recovery and sale
or reuse of metals, glass, paper, plastics and other items which
would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste.
“Residential Dwelling” – a structure containing less than
four dwelling units.
“Single Stream” – a recycling method whereby all designated
recyclables are collected together and separated at a Materials
Recovery Facility.
"Solid Waste" - waste including, but not limited to,
municipal, residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous materials.
“Source Separation” or “Separation” – the collection and
segregation by residents and businesses of designated recyclables
from municipal waste for the sole purpose of recycling these
items.
ARTICLE 933 4
"Steel Cans" – tin-plated steel cans commonly known as "tin
cans" and bi-metal (aluminum and steel) beverage cans and aerosol
containers for food and beverages and personal care products
consisting primarily of steel. Excludes cans which contain toxic
substances.
“Telephone Books” – books with listings of telephone numbers
and addresses.
“Yard Waste” – leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings, and similar materials, but not including grass
clippings.
933.02 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO
REGULATE RECYCLING
The Director of Community and Economic Development or his
designee shall be empowered to develop rules and regulations
necessary to implement the intent of this ordinance which shall be
published and made available at City Hall. Any violation of the
rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance. The Director of Community and Economic Development or
his individual designee shall be empowered to enforce this
ordinance and the rules and regulations developed hereunder.
933.03 COLLECTION PROGRAM
The City shall provide for the collection of designated
commingled recyclables from any and all residences, including, but
not limited to, single family dwellings, multi-family dwellings,
condominiums, and apartment complexes, at times set forth by the
City of Bethlehem. At no time will the collection of these
recyclables occur less frequently than once every two weeks,
unless a collection day falls on a holiday recognized by the City
of Bethlehem or in the case of inclement weather. Collection will
take place between the hours of 6:00 am and 6:00 pm. The City
will provide for collection of leaf waste at reasonable intervals.
The City will provide for the collection of yard waste twice a
year.
933.04 RESIDENTIAL SOURCE SEPARATION
(a) All residents of the City shall separate all residential
designated recyclables as set forth in this Ordinance
from municipal waste generated at their residence, and
shall store them until collection. These recyclables
will be placed together at the curbside or similar
location on the day of collection in a container
provided by the City or any other open, rigid,
waterproof container of not more than 30 gallons
capacity. A container, other than one provided by the
ARTICLE 933 5
City, must be clearly marked “recycling”. The City will
provide two containers, one for commingled, glass, cans
and plastic, and another container (with lid) for paper
products.
(b) Residential designated recyclables for this program
shall consist of the following items:
clear glass containers cardboard
colored glass containers flatboard
aluminum cans mixed office paper
steel cans magazines, catalogs, shiny paper
plastic containers
(#1-7 - except Styrofoam) newsprint
aerosol containers telephone books
formed aluminum containers wrapping paper
aluminum foil brown paper bags
leaf waste
(c) These designated recyclables must be prepared in the
following manner:
(1) The following items shall be empty, rinsed free of
contents, and placed in one container:
(i) Glass food and beverage containers;
(ii) Plastic containers;
(iii)Aluminum cans;
(iv) Formed Aluminum containers;
(v) Steel cans;
(vi) Aerosol cans;
(2) The following items shall be placed in a separate
container from those described in subsection (c)(1)
above and shall have a lid placed on the container:
(i) Corrugated cardboard (OCC);
(ii) Flat board;
(iii) Magazines (OMG);
(iv) Catalogs;
(v) Shiny paper;
(vi) Wrapping paper;
(vii) Mixed office paper;
(viii) Newsprint (ONP);
(ix) Telephone books;
(x) Brown Paper Bags;
OCC that will not fit in the container must be
flattened and bundled by string and placed on the
ground next to the containers.
(3) The commingled materials listed in Subsection
ARTICLE 933 6
(c)(1) shall not be placed in the same container as
the paper products listed in Subsection (c)(2).
(4) Materials not meeting the definition of residential
designated recyclables will not be collected.
(5) Containers shall be placed on the curb no earlier
than 6:00 pm the night before the designated
collection day and must be removed from the curb
no later than 8:00 pm the day of collection.
(6) Such other requirements developed from time to
time and adopted as Rules and Regulations.
(d) All residents shall separate leaf waste from other
municipal waste. Leaf waste shall be placed loose in
the street near the curb for municipal collection on
designated days. Leaf waste may also be placed near the
curb in open biodegradable bags available from the City.
Residents should contact the Department of Public Works
to arrange for the collection of leaf waste in open,
biodegradable bags. Leaf waste may also be taken to the
City’s yard waste facility.
(e) The City will provide for the collection of yard waste
twice per year. Yard waste may also be taken to the
City’s yard waste facility.
933.05 MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL DWELLING SOURCE SEPARATION
(a) All residents of Multi-Family Rental dwellings shall
separate all residential designated recyclables as set
forth in this Ordinance from municipal waste generated
at their residence and shall store such recyclables
separate from municipal waste until collection as
discussed in Section 933.05(b).
(b) These residential designated recyclables must be
prepared in the following manner:
(1) Glass food and beverage containers, plastic
containers, aluminum cans, formed aluminum
containers and steel cans shall be rinsed free of
contents. Aerosol containers must be empty. These
recyclables will be taken to the designated
recycling area(s) in the complex.
(2) Corrugated cardboard (OCC), flatboard, magazines
(OMG), catalogs, shiny paper, wrapping paper, mixed
office paper (MOP), newsprint (ONP), telephone
books, and brown paper bags. These recyclables will
be taken to the designated recycling area(s) in the
ARTICLE 933 7
complex.
(3) Materials not meeting the definition of residential
designated recyclables will not be picked up for
collection.
(4) Such other requirements as developed from time to
time and adopted as Rules and Regulations.
(c) Owners or landlords of any multi-family rental housing
property must provide larger containers for the storage
of paper products listed in Section 933.04(c)(2) and
larger containers for the storage of commingled items
listed in Section 933.04(c)(1) at one or more central
locations within the residential development. These
containers will be at the landlord’s cost and will have
attached to them tags, stickers or other devices to
identify the containers for collection by the
Contractor. It is the landlord’s or owner’s
responsibility to insure the collection system includes
proper and adequate containers for collecting, sorting,
and storing recyclables in easily accessible locations,
and written instructions to each occupant concerning the
use and availability of the collection system.
(d) Multi-Family Rental Dwellings shall separate leaf waste
from other municipal waste. Leaf Waste from multi-family
complexes will not be placed in the street. The owner,
landlord must make arrangements to transport the leaf
waste to the City’s yard waste facility.
(e) When an owner or landlord contracts with a private
hauler to recycle source- separated recyclables, said
person must annually provide proper written
documentation of this recycling to the City of
Bethlehem Recycling Bureau. These reports are due to
the Recycling Bureau by January 30 of each year.
Such written documentation will be on a form provided by
the City or on Company letterhead and will include the
hauler’s name and the types (commingled/paper products)
and weights of the items recycled.
933.06 COMMERCIAL, MUNICIPAL OR INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
(a) All persons shall separate the designated recyclables
generated at commercial, municipal or institutional
establishments and from community activities held on
public property. Such persons are responsible to
arrange for collection of the designated recyclables and
delivery to facilities that recycle these items.
ARTICLE 933 8
(b) Designated recyclables for commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments,and community activities
held on public property consist of the following items:
Newsprint
Flatboard
Magazines/Shiny paper
Mixed office paper
Corrugated cardboard
Aluminum cans
Leaf waste
In addition, all licensed retail food establishments and
eating and drinking establishments are required to separate the
following designated recyclables as set forth in this ordinance
from municipal waste generated at their establishments and shall
store such items until collection. Designated recyclables for
licensed food establishments and eating and drinking
establishments shall consist of the following items:
Clear Glass Containers
Colored Glass Containers
Aluminum Cans
Steel Cans
Plastics #1-7 (except for Styrofoam)
Newsprint
Flatboard
Corrugated cardboard
Leaf waste
These designated recyclables listed in this Subsection must
be prepared in the following manner:
(1) Glass food and beverage containers, plastic
containers, aluminum cans, and steel cans shall be
rinsed free of contents and placed in one
container.
(2) Corrugated cardboard, flatboard, newsprint, mixed
office paper, and magazines/shiny paper, must be
stored so as to keep the material clean and dry and
will be placed in a separate container.
(3) Such other requirements as developed from time to
time and adopted as Rules and Regulations.
(c) An owner or landlord of commercial, municipal,
institutional properties will comply with these
requirements by establishing a collection system for
recyclables at each property. It is the landlord’s or
owner’s responsibility to insure the collection system
includes proper and adequate containers for collecting,
ARTICLE 933 9
sorting, and storing recyclables, easily accessible
locations for the containers, and written instructions
to each occupant concerning the use and availability of
the collection system. In doing such, the management
will observe rules and regulations developed by the
Director of Community and Economic Development or his
designee which define minimum standards for such
systems.
(d) All commercial, municipal, and institutional
establishments shall separate leaf waste from other
municipal waste. Leaf waste from these establishments
will not be placed in the street. The owner or landlord
must make arrangements to transport leaf waste to the
City yard waste facility.
(e) When a person contracts with a private hauler to recycle
source separated recyclables, said person must provide
proper written documentation of this recycling to the
City of Bethlehem Recycling Bureau. Such written
documentation will be on a form provided by the City or
on company letterhead, and will include the hauler’s
name, and the types (commingled/paper products) and
weights of the items recycled. These reports are due to
the City Recycling Bureau on an annual basis. These
reports are due to the Recycling Bureau by January 30 of
each year.
933.07 HAULER, VENDOR/BROKER/PACKER/PROCESSOR
REQUIREMENTS
Any hauler, vendor/broker/packer/processor referenced in this
Article shall on an annual basis provide the City an accurate list
of the customers serviced (or have a copy on file for review by
the City and State), and will also provide an annual report
detailing the total number of tons recycled for their customers by
commodity. Weight slips and names of brokers may be required to
substantiate this documentation. These reports are due to the City
Recycling Bureau by January 30 of each year.
It is the hauler’s responsibility to deliver source separated
recyclables to a facility where they will be recycled.
933.08 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
It shall be unlawful for:
(a) any persons, other than those persons specifically
authorized by the City, to take or collect any
designated recyclable which has been placed in City
recycling containers at the curbside or drop-off
location for collection;
ARTICLE 933 10
(b) any person to place or cause to be placed, any material
other than a designated recyclable in recycling
containers;
(c) any person to use containers provided by the City for
storing recyclables for other purposes or to sell,
intentionally damage or otherwise misuse containers
(d) any person to place designated recyclables in container
with trash or garbage intended for waste disposal.
(e) any person to hinder, to obstruct, to prevent or to
interfere with the City or any other authorized persons
in the performance of any duty under this Ordinance.
(f) any person to knowingly or intentionally deposit, to
cause to be deposited, or to assist in depositing in a
landfill, incinerator, or other waste facility any
designated recyclables generated in the City.
(g) any hauler to provide service wherein designated
recyclables mixed with trash.
(h) any person to violate or to assist in the violation of
any provision of this Ordinance.
933.09 EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Article shall be January 7, 2009.
933.10 FEES SCHEDULE
(a) Fees for collection of recyclables as mandated in this
Article shall be in accordance with Annex A which is
incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
(b) Failure to pay the fees established by this Article by
the due date shall result in the assessment of a penalty
of ten (10%) percent of the fee owed by the obligated
party.
ANNEX A - Recycling Fees
Single Family Residential Units $70.00/yr.
Multi-Family Residential Units $70.00/unit/yr.
Condominium Associations $70.00/unit/yr.
(Ord. 3863. Passed 1/20/98; Ord. 4235. Passed 12/16/03; Ord.
ARTICLE 933 11
4466. Passed 12/18/07; Ord. 2008-43. Passed 12/16/08; Ord. 2010-
36. Passed 12/21/10. Ord. 2016-01. Passed 1/4/2016)
933.99 PENALTIES
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First Violation - a fine of $100.00 or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second Violation - A fine of $250.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(3) Third Violation - A fine of $500.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both;
(4) Fourth and Each Subsequent Violation - A fine of $1,000,
or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3821. Passed 6/3/97.)
ARTICLE 935
Municipal Waste Collection and Disposal
935.01 Definitions
935.02 Director of Community and Economic Development to
Regulate Collection Disposal
935.03 Licensing of Haulers
935.04 Time and Frequency of Collection
935.05 Rolloff Containers and Portable Boxes
935.06 Severability
935.07 Penalties and Enforcement
CROSS REFERENCES
Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act (Act 101) (53 P.S. § 4000.101)
Power to Regulate Municipal Solid Waste Collection, Removal and Disposal
See Third Class City Code § 2403(6) (53 P.S.§ 37403 (6)
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97-1980
(53 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq
Optional Third Class City Charter Law, 901-1957 (53 P.S. § 41101 et seq)
Removal of rubbish from street - GEN OFF Art 721
935.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this article:
(a) "City" - The City of Bethlehem, located in the Counties
of Northampton and Lehigh, Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania
Municipal Corporation.
(b) "Commercial" - Means any group of more than four (4)
dwelling units, and establishments engaged in nonmanufacturing
or non-processing business, including, but not
limited to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants,
shopping centers and theaters.
ARTICLE 935 2
(c) "Demolition Materials" - Solid waste resulting from the
construction or demolition of buildings and other
structures, including but not limited to, wood,
plaster, metals, asphaltic substances, bricks, block
and unsegregated. The term also includes dredging
waste. The term does not include the following if they
are separate from other waste and are used as clean
fill:
(1) Uncontaminated soil, rock, stone, gravel, unused brick and
block and concrete.
(2) Waste from land cleaning, grubbing and excavation,
including trees, brush, stumps and vegetative
material.
(d) "Municipal Waste" - Garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including
solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material
resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial, or institutional establishments and from
community activities; and sludge not meeting the
definition of residual or hazardous waste under the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plan or air
pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
(e) "Municipal Waste System" - The municipal waste
management and collection system created by the City
and every aspect thereof including, but not limited to,
equipment, transfer stations contractual arrangements
or other rights, owned, acquired, leased, placed under
contract, contracted, operated, or assumed by the City
or any agent, designee or contractor in connection with
the Plan.
ARTICLE 935 3
(f) "PaDEP" - Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
(g) "Person" - An individual, partnership, corporation,
association, institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal
authority, Federal Government or agency, State institution
and agency including, but not limited to, the Department of
General Services and the State Public School Building
Authority or an other legal entity which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties. In the provisions of this article
pertaining to a fine or a penalty, the term includes the officers
and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
(h) "Plan" - The municipal waste management plan for the City
submitted by the City for approval by PaDEP.
(i) "Portable Boxes" - are containers which are placed by a
hauler for the purpose of accumulating waste so as to be
bulk transferred to a packer truck and where the box is
returned to the original position before transporting the
waste to a disposal site.
(j) "Recycling" - The collection, separation, recovery and
sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, plastics and
other materials which would otherwise be disposed or
processed as municipal waste.
(k) "Residential" - Shall be any dwelling in a group of four (4)
dwelling units or less.
(1) "Residual Waste" - Any garbage, refuse, other discarded
material or other waste including solid, liquid,
semisolid, or contained gaseous materials resulting
from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural
water supply treatment facility, wastewater treatment
facility or air pollution control facility, provided
that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the "Coal
ARTICLE 935 4
Refuse Disposal control Act" "Residual Waste" shall
not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage
treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on
pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit
issued pursuant the "Clean Streams Law".
(m) "Rolloff Containers" - are large containers which are placed by
a hauler for the purpose of accumulating waste which is then
picked up and rolled on a specially framed truck rack in its
entirety and transported to and emptied at a disposal site.
(n) "Source Separation" - The segregation and collection,
prior to delivery to a point on entry into the
municipal waste system, of materials for the sole
purpose of recycling.
935.02 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT TO REGULATE COLLECTION DISPOSAL.
The Director of Community and Economic Development or his
designee shall formulate and regulate all aspects of the municipal waste
collection, transportation and disposal from the point of origin to place of
disposal. The Director shall formulate and promulgate all aspects for the
minimum standards to be observed for the collection vehicles, transportation
and disposal. Such standards shall be observed and in force by all collectors
and haulers and shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and the
Department of Community and Economic Development. Any violation of
these ordinances shall be deemed a violation of this Article.
935.03 LICENSING OF HAULERS.
(a) Any hauler of municipal waste and/or residual waste who
collects such waste whether residential, industrial
and/or commercial within the City limits shall have a
license to conduct such business. The license shall be
obtained from and issued by the Department of Community
and Economic Development. Any hauler of residential or
commercial recyclable commingled materials who collects
such materials within the City limits shall have a
license to conduct such business.
ARTICLE 935 5
(b) The license fee shall be issued and renewed annually. The fee
for the license shall be $500 each year.
(c) The license application shall include a list of all
vehicles the hauler intends to use to collect and
transport waste within the City limits. Each listed
vehicle must receive and exhibit in plain sight on the
vehicle an inspection sticker issued by the City. The
purpose of such inspection is to assure the City and
its residents that the vehicle and its waste containers
are environmentally safe. The fee for such inspection
shall be $25.00 per vehicle. The City shall be
permitted to reinspect any licensed vehicle at any
time.
(1) The inspection shall not infringe on or supersede the
vehicle inspection performed as a requirement of the
Motor Vehicle Codes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; however, the inspection shall be primarily
involved with environmental issues related to the
municipal waste carrying containers and those
mechanisms necessary to make the containers function.
(2) The inspection shall be performed at a site designated by
the City.
(3) Should a vehicle fail the inspection, the hauler shall have
not more than ten (10) days to repair the vehicle and pass
a reinspection. Should such vehicle not pass reinspection
within the ten (10) day period, the vehicle shall not be
permitted to operate in the City until such vehicle passes
reinspection.
(4) Should a hauler request inspection after the ten
(10) day period and provide the city with
sufficient evidence that the necessary repairs
have been completed, the vehicle shall be
permitted to be reinspected. Should the vehicle
fail the reinspection, it shall not be permitted
ARTICLE 935 6
to operate in the City until such vehicle passes
reinspection. Each reinspection under this
Article shall be subject to a $25.00 fee.
(d) Each hauler shall be required to provide the pricing
structure charged the residents of the City at the time
of annual licensing. Should any pricing change be made
during the year by a hauler, it shall be reported
within thirty (30) days to the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
(e) Any hauler having a license to collect municipal waste
in the City or any vehicle of a licensed hauler shall
be subject to having the license and/or vehicle permit
revoked for violation of any of the rules, regulations
or ordinances related to the collection, transportation
and disposal of municipal solid waste.
(f) Any hauler of municipal waste or any other kind of waste
including residual and hazardous waste who transports such
waste within the City limits in an environmentally unsafe
manner shall be subject to the penalties of this Article.
(g) Any industry or commercial business located in the City
of Bethlehem using its own or leased vehicle(s) to haul
or transport municipal waste or any other kind of waste
from its facility to a landfill or any other disposal
location shall be required to obtain a license in
accordance with Article 935.03 (b) however the fee for
the license shall be waived. The inspection and
payment of the $25.00 per vehicle fee shall be required
in accordance to Article 935.03(c). All open vehicles,
containers transported in open vehicles and/or all
roll-off containers used in the transportation of
municipal or residual waste or recyclable materials
will be tightly tarped or covered at all times during
said transportation.
ARTICLE 935 7
935.04 TIME AND FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
(a) Residential collection shall be on a six (6) day week basis
(Monday through Saturday) and shall take place between the
hours of 6:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. Collection shall be made at
least once a week, but not more than twice per week.
(b) Commercial collection may be on a seven (7) day a week
basis and shall take place between the hours of 6:00
A.M. and 4:00 P.M., except that Sunday collection shall
only take place between the hours of 8:00 A.M.and
12:00 Noon.
935.05 ROLLOFF CONTAINERS AND PORTABLE BOXES
(a) All rolloff containers that are placed within the corporate
limits of the City of Bethlehem for the purpose of collecting
waste to be transported to a disposal site shall require a permit
issued by the Department of Community and Economic
Development. All such permits shall be issued annually on or
before January 1st of each year by application. If a new
container is acquired by a vendor, it shall have a permit before
placement in the City. A temporary permit may be issued for
short term placement not exceeding 15 days. No inspection is
required for roll-off containers, however, the container may be
subject to an inspection. Should it be observed that the
container if found to be in poor condition, it shall have its
permit revoked and it must be removed within 24 hours. The
fee of annual rolloff permits shall be one dollar ($1.00) per
container and there shall be no fee for the temporary permit.
(b) All portable boxes that are placed within the corporate limits of
the City of Bethlehem for the purpose of collecting waste to be
transferred to a packer truck for disposal at a disposal site shall
require a permit issued by the Department of Community and
Economic Development. All such permits shall be issued
annually on or before January 1st each of each year by
application. If a new container is 'places at any location within
the City, it shall have a permit before placement. A temporary
permit may be issued for short term placement not exceeding
ARTICLE 935 8
fifteen (15) days. No inspection is required for portable boxes
however the box may be subject to inspection should it be
observed that the box not be in good repair or be emitting
liquids. If the box is found to be in poor condition, it shall have
its permit revoked and the box be removed within 24 hours.
The fee of all annual portable box permits shall be fifty cents
($0.50) per box and there shall be no fee for the temporary
permits.
(c) All Rolloff containers and portable boxes shall be
clearly marked with the vendor's name, who owns and/or
provides the hauling service.
935.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
935.07 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article
shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First Violation - A fine of $200, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second Violation - A fine of $500, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(3) Third and Subsequent Violations - A fine of
$1,000, or ninety days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Each continuing day of violation of this Ordinance
shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Loss of license may also occur as described in this Article
935.04(e).
ARTICLE 935 9
(d) The Director of Community and Economic Development is
hereby granted the power to designate those having the
power to enforce this Article and issue citations.
(Ord. 3302. Passed 12/5/89.)
(Ord. 3628. Passed 8/23/94.)
(Ord. 3986. Passed 12/21/99.)
ARTICLE 941
Parks
941.01 Definitions
941.02 Park Property
941.03 Sanitation
941.04 Traffic
941.05 Recreational Activities
941.06 Behavior
941.07 Merchandising, Advertising, And Signs
941.08 Operating Policy
941.09 Enforcement
941.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Public bathing places - See 35 P.S. §672 et seq
Disorderly conduct in parks - See GEN. OFF. Art. 705
Fighting; intoxication in parks - See GEN. OFF. Art. 705
Recreation fees and charges - See GEN. OFF. Art. 729
941.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
"Alcoholic beverages" means any beverage with an alcoholic content of more
than two percent (2%).
“Bathing”, “Bathe”, “Swimming” or “Swim” mean the sport or activity of
entering and/or moving through water by moving your arms and legs for
recreational, religious or other purposes, including, but not be limited to, exercise,
therapy, or refreshment.
"City" means the City of Bethlehem.
“Community Gardens” means a parcel of City-owned land designated specifically
to grow fruits, vegetables, ornamentals, and native plants that are planted and
maintained by the community.
ARTICLE 941 2
"Director" means the Director of Public Works or his/her designee..
“Dog Park” means an area designated by the City for allowing City residents to
exercise their dog off leash.
“Fishing” means the activity of catching fish, either for food or as a sport as
regulated and licensed by the Pennsylvania Fish & Boat Commission.
“Generator” A gasoline or diesel powered device that converts mechanical energy
into electrical energy.
“Greenway” means South Bethlehem Greenway.
“Loiter” or “Loitering” means protractedly lingering, staying, remaining or
waiting at one location or repetitively wandering around in the same vicinity,
either alone or in consort with others.
“Malicious” or “maliciously” means a vexatious, threatening, intimidating or
injurious manner toward people or property; or with intent to engage in any
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace; or acting
with the effect of causing interference with or precluding peaceful use and
enjoyment of the park by others.
“Metal Detectors” means a hand-held unit used in searching an area for coins or
other metal objects.
“Motorized Vehicles” means any device propelled by an engine, including but not
limited to automobiles, mopeds, motorcycles, go carts, scooters, All Terrain
Vehicles (ATV), and segways. The term specifically excludes any electric
personal assistive mobility device, any self-propelled wheel chair, any electrical
mobility device operated by and designed for the exclusive use of a person with a
mobility related disability, and any FDA approved devices for use by the disabled
on pedestrian facilities. (Ord. 4424. Passed 4/17/2007.)
“Mounted Police” means police who do patrols on horseback.
(Ord. 2009-23. Passed 9/1/2009.)
“Park” means any land or facility owned or leased by the City of Bethlehem and
designated or used for park, recreation, gardening, or open space purposes.
“Pavilion” means any open park structure used for picnics, parties, and social
occasions.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
ARTICLE 941 3
“Special facility” means (i) the Illick’s Mill building; (ii) the Earl E. Schaffer Ice
Rink; or (iii) the Charles Brown Ice House.
“Tents” or “Temporary Shelters” mean any portable shelter usually of fabric or
canvas stretched over a frame or supporting pole structure.
“Vehicle” means any wheeled device, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or
self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. An exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service
of the City parks.
(Ord. 4424. Passed 4/17/2007; Ord. 2016-011. Passed 4/19/2016.)
941.02 PARK PROPERTY.
(a) Buildings and Other Property.
(1) Disfiguration and removal. No person shall willfully mark,
deface, disfigure, damage, tamper with or displace or
remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other
public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or
other structures or equipment, facilities or park property
or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Restrooms and washrooms. No person who accesses or uses public
restrooms and washrooms on City property shall fail to cooperate in
maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a park in a neat and sanitary
condition. Every user shall clean up and properly dispose of trash and
waste they create.
(3) Removal of natural resources. No person shall dig or remove any
beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees,
shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make
any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency
within a park, unless expressly designated as a community garden or
issued a permit by the Director.
(4) Erection of structures. No person shall construct or erect
any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent
or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across park lands, except on special
written permit issued as set forth in Section 941.08(c).
ARTICLE 941 4
(b) Trees, Shrubbery and Lawns.
(1) Injury and removal. No person shall damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark,
or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant within a
park, nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in
or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure
or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area, unless
authorized by the Director for specific purposes.
(2) Climbing Trees, Structures and Fixtures. No person shall climb any
tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railing,
fences, walls or upon any other park property not designated or
customarily and safely usable for such purposes.
(3) Hitching of animals. No person shall tie or hitch an animal
to any tree or plant in a park.
(c) Wild Animals, Birds, Protective Species, Etc.
(1) Hunting. No person in a park shall hunt, molest, harm,
frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw projectiles
at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person remove
or have in his possession the young of any wild animal,
or the eggs, nest, or young of any reptile or bird. Exception: Authorized
USDA animal control representatives or City of Bethlehem employees.
(2) Feeding. No person shall give or offer, or attempt to feed any animal or
bird in a park. (Ord. 2211 §3. Passed 9/22/1970.)
941.03 SANITATION.
(a) Pollution of Waters. No person in a park shall throw, discharge or otherwise
place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body
of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing
into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result
in the pollution or altering the flow of such waters.
(b) Refuse, Trash, and Recycling. No person in a park shall have brought in or
dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish
or other trash. No aforementional items shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to
any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all rubbish
or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence,
and properly disposed of elsewhere. (Ord. 2211 §4. Passed 9/22/1970.)
ARTICLE 941 5
941.04 TRAFFIC.
(a) State Motor Vehicle Laws Apply. No person in a park shall fail to comply
with all applicable provisions of the State motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to
equipment and operation of motorized vehicles together with such regulations as are
contained in this article and other ordinances.
(Ord. 4424. Passed 4/1720/07.)
(b) Enforcement of Traffic Regulations. No person shall fail to obey all traffic
officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to
direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or
roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations
and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director.
(c) Obey Traffic Signs. No person shall fail to observe carefully all traffic and
parking signs in parks.
(d) Speed of Vehicles. No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of
speed exceeding fifteen miles an hour, except upon such roads as the Director may
designate, by posted signs.
(e) Operation Confined to Roads. No person shall drive any motorized vehicle on
any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on
occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Director. (Ord.
4424. Passed 4/17/2007.)
(f) Parking.
(1) Designated areas. No person shall park a vehicle in other
than an established or designated parking area in a park,
and such use shall be in accordance with the posted
directions and/or with the instructions of any attendant who
may be present.
(2) Night Parking. Except in an emergency, no person shall leave a
vehicle in a park standing or parked at night on any
driveway or road area except legally established parking areas, or by
special permit issued by the Director. If a vehicle is disabled and left
in an unauthorized area after a park is closed, the owner or operator
shall follow the Vehicle Breakdown Notification Procedure.
(3) Vehicle Breakdown Notification Procedure. No person in a park
shall fail to immediately notify, within one hour, an attendant or the
police of an emergency in the nature of a vehicle breakdown
requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other person.
ARTICLE 941 6
(4) Double parking. No person shall double park any vehicle
on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official.
(Ord. 2016-011. Passed 4/19/2016.)
(g) Bicycles, skateboards, non-motorized scooters.
(1) Confined to roads. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle,
skateboard, or non-motorized scooter anywhere other than a paved
vehicular road or path designated for that purpose or multiuse trail –
mountain bike trail. A bicyclist shall be permitted to push a bicycle by
hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area
reserved for pedestrian use.
(2) Racks. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle in a place other than a
bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available.
(3) Immobile. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle lying on the
ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position so as
to present any obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2211
§5. Passed 9/22/1970.)
(h) Motorized Vehicles. Motorized vehicles are prohibited on the
multipurpose pathways in the parks and along the rivers, creeks, canals,
(except along and upon designated areas). These paths are to be used for
walking, running, biking, and other non-motorized means of transportation.
The prohibition against motorized vehicles shall not include segways, vehicles
engaged in maintenance or emergency activities or vehicles approved by the
Director. (Ord 4424. Passed 4/17/2007.)
941.05 RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
(a) Bathing and Swimming.
(1) Designated areas. No person shall bathe or swim in any natural waters
and/or streams in or adjacent to any park, except where designated by
the Director for the conduct of such activity.
(2) Certain hours. No person shall frequent or enter any park waters or
places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or
congregate there, except between such hours of the day as shall be
designated by the Director for such purposes for each individual area.
(3) Bathhouses. No person shall dress or undress in any vehicle,
toilet or other place in a park, except in such bathing houses or structures as
may be provided for that purpose.
ARTICLE 941 7
(b) Boating and Motorized Watercraft.
(1) Designated areas. No person shall bring into a park or operate any
motorized boat, raft, or other motorized watercraft, whether motorpowered
or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for
boating by the Director. Such activity shall be in accordance with
applicable regulations by the Fish & Boat Commission as are now or
may hereafter be adopted.
(2) Operation of boats. No person in a park shall navigate,
direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to annoy or
frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat or
wildlife.
(3) Prohibition during closing hours. No person shall launch,
dock or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between
the closing hour of the park at night and opening hour the
following morning, nor shall any person be on, or remain
on or in, any boat during the closed hours of the park.
(c) Hunting Devices. No person shall discharge, shoot, aim or threaten the use of
air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows or slings that propel projectiles potentially
harmful to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any kind of animal trapping
device including all such activity conducted within a park or directed into park
areas from beyond park boundaries. Exception: Authorized USDA animal
control representatives or City of Bethlehem. [See Article 725 regarding
Discharging Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions] (Ord. 2015-12. Passed 3/17/2015.)
(d) Picnic Areas and Use.
(1) Pavilions. Permits must be obtained from the Director for the use of
pavilions in designated areas at South Mountain, Monocacy and Saucon
Parks.
(2) Open Fires. Open fires, portable fire pits, and ground fires are
prohibited.
(3) Cooking Fires. Cooking fires are allowed only in permanent mounted grills
located at Saucon Park, South Mountain Park, and Monocacy Park
pavilions. Charcoal shall be the only allowed fuel source for such grills.
Cooking fires shall be completely extinguished at the conclusion of use.
Spent charcoal and charcoal ash shall not be disposed of in dumpsters,
placed on the ground, or thrown into any natural waters.
(4) Duty of Picnickers and Permittees. No person who has started, re-started or
used a cooking fire shall leave the picnic area abandoned before the cooking
ARTICLE 941 8
fire is completely extinguished. Such persons and a Permittee using a picnic
area are required to, and are responsible for, extinguishing cooking fires
started in a grill. Picnic area users and a Permittee using the area are
required to clean up and dispose of garbage, trash, and recyclables in the
disposal receptacles provided. If no trash receptacles are available, then
refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by such persons
who shall lawfully dispose of the trash elsewhere.
(e) Camping. No person shall camp in any park without written permission from
the Director.
(f) Safety. No person in a park shall participate in any activity that involves
throwing or otherwise propelling objects such as stones, arrows, javelins, or golf balls,
except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
(g) Horseback Riding. No person shall ride a horse in any City park. This
subsection shall not apply to City of Bethlehem Mounted Police.
(h) Fishing. Fishing in parks is only permitted as regulated and licensed by the
Pennsylvania Fish & Boat Commission.
(Ord. 2211 §6. Passed 9/22/1970; Ord. 2009-23. Passed 9/1/2009; Ord. 2016-011. Passed
4/19/2016; Ord. 2019-27. Passed 9/3/2019.)
941.06 BEHAVIOR.
(a) Alcoholic Beverages. No alcoholic beverages shall be brought into
or consumed in any City park except designated pavilions at Monocacy Park, Saucon Park and
South Mountain Park.
(1) Restrictions. Where alcoholic beverages are permitted the
following restrictions shall apply:
(A) Consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted to those
persons affiliated with pavilion permittee.
(B) Alcoholic beverage use is limited to malt or brewed
beverages (beer, ale, malt liquor) and wine. Distilled spirits
such as whiskey, scotch, gin or any alcoholic beverage
with an alcoholic content of more than twelve percent (12%) are
prohibited.
(C) Permitted containers are metallic, with maximum content of
sixteen ounces, and wine boxes. Bottles are prohibited.
(D) No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed in any
parking lot, parking area, sidewalk, pedestrian path or roadway
ARTICLE 941 9
in any park unless permitted as part of a Private Events
Exception under (a)(3)(B) below or a Special Occasion
Exception under (a)(4)(E) below.
(Ord. 2573 §2. Passed 9/6/1977; Ord. 2016-011. Passed 4/19/2016;
Ord. 2019-27. Passed 9/3/2019.)
(2) Drunkenness. No person in a park shall be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor in violation of Pennsylvania Crimes Code Section
5505, as amended, regarding public drunkenness.
(3) Private Events Exception. The restrictions in (a)(1)(A) and (B) shall
not apply to private events conducted inside the Illick’s Mill building,
the Earl E. Schaffer Ice Rink and the Charles Brown Ice House (said
buildings hereafter “the park facility”) when all of the following are
satisfied:
(A) The event is authorized by (i) a permit agreement between the
City and either a third party or a tenant of the park facility
sponsoring the private event or (ii) a license agreement
between the tenant of the park facility and a third party
sponsoring the private event. All private events are subject to
approval of the Director under paragraph (C) below.
(B) A private event under this Article means that (i) attendance is
by either by private invitation or direct ticket sales; (ii) the
event shall not be open to the general public; (iii) attendance
at the event shall not exceed any applicable building
occupancy limits set by City ordinance and Code regulations
and directives by the Fire Commissioner and Bethlehem Fire
Inspection Department; (iv) revenues from the event, if any
are received by a tenant, permittee or licensee, shall benefit
only non-profit and registered charitable organizations; (v) for
events at the Illick’s Mill building, the Earl E. Schaffer Ice
Rink and the Charles Brown Ice House alcohol shall be served
and consumed exclusively inside the building unless City
Council approves issuance of a use permit for grounds
surrounding a facility permitting service and consumption in
the facility and on the grounds. (Ord. 2019-27. Passed
9/3/2019.)
(C) An application for a permit or license agreement for an event
subject to this Article shall be submitted to and is subject to
review and approval by the Director. The application shall be
submitted no less than sixty (60) days prior to the event. A
permit or license agreement approved by the Director must be
executed by the permittee or licensee, as the case may be, and
ARTICLE 941 10
executed copies delivered to the Director and the City’s Law
Bureau no later than the date determined by the Director and
set forth in the approved agreement. A permit or license
agreement approved by the Director may be amended by
written agreement executed by all parties. Execution of a
permit or license agreement or amendment on behalf of the
City shall be by the Mayor and Controller with signed
approval and certification by the Director. (Ord. 2019-27.
Passed 9/3/2019.)
(D) Alcohol shall be served free of charge at the private event.
Attendees may bring their own alcohol for personal
consumption (“BYOB”) to private events. The provision of
alcohol shall not be conditioned upon (i) the purchase of a
ticket for admission to the event; (ii) in exchange for a
donation or other fee; (iii) a required purchase or payment that
would constitute a sale of alcohol under the Pennsylvania
Liquor Code. An allowable BYOB private event under this
Article 941 is restricted to a private event inside the Illick’s
Mill building, the Earl E. Schaffer Ice Rink and the Charles
Brown Ice House which is permitted or licensed for a limited
period of time, but in no event to exceed six (6) hours in
length, nor to exceed one (1) rental in a twenty-four (24) hour
period, nor to occur between the hours of 12:00 p.m. midnight
and 11:00 a.m. (See City of Bethlehem ordinances, Article
736).
(E) A permittee of the City, a tenant of the park facility or a
licensee hosting a private event when alcohol will be served
exceeding the restrictions in (a)(1)(A) and (B):
(i) shall obtain either a liquor liability insurance policy, or a
special event liability insurance policy including host liquor
liability coverage, or a general liability insurance policy
including host liquor liability insurance coverage, satisfying
coverage limits specified by the Director, naming the “City of
Bethlehem, its officials and employees” as additional
insureds, and scheduled in force for the duration of the event;
(ii) shall provide a certificate of insurance from a licensed
insurance agent or the insurer, evidencing issuance of the
required coverage, to the Director and the City’s Law Bureau
no later than the date determined by the Director and set forth
in the approved City permit or license;
ARTICLE 941 11
(F) The lease of a tenant hosting or licensing a private event shall
not be in default status as determined in the sole judgment of
the Director. (Ord. 2019-27. Passed 9/3/2019.)
(4) Special Occasion Exception. A qualified entity under the
Pennsylvania Liquor Code and applicable Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board (“PA LCB”) regulations may host and conduct an event in a City of
Bethlehem park or park facility approved by the Director if the event
qualifies for a Special Occasion Permit (“SOP”) under Pennsylvania
Liquor Code and if all additional conditions stated hereafter are satisfied:
(A) The entity must apply for and receive approval by the
Director of a permit for the event in compliance with
(a)(3)(C) preceding.
(B) The entity must secure an SOP from the PA LCB. A copy of
the required SOP issued by the PA LCB shall be provided to
the Director and the City’s Law Bureau no later than the date
determined by the Director and set forth in the approved City
permit.
(C) The entity must comply with insurance requirements under
(a)(3)(E) preceding.
(D) The permit for an event for which the applicant must obtain
an SOP also must be approved by resolution of City Council
which, in its discretion, may refuse approval of a permit if the
event is deemed unsuitable to the facility, potentially harmful
to the facility, if it conflicts with other events, if it conflicts
with the City’s use of or access to the park, or if it causes
unreasonable burden on City resources needed to support the
event.
(E) Events authorized and conducted pursuant to an SOP and
City Council approved permit may be open to the general
public but the limitations of (a)(3)(B)(iii) and (iv) preceding
shall apply to the event; additionally, the limitations of
(a)(3)(B)(v) preceding shall apply to the event unless City
Council approves issuance of a use permit for grounds
surrounding a facility permitting sales, service and
consumption in the facility and on the grounds. (Ord. 2019-
27. Passed 9/3/2019.)
(5) Bethlehem Golf Club Exception.
(A) A permittee, tenant or licensee operating the restaurant at the
Bethlehem Golf Club on Illick’s Mill Road shall not be
ARTICLE 941 12
subject to restrictions on the provision, sale and service of
alcohol under Article 941 but shall:
(i) operate in compliance with the Pennsylvania Liquor Code
and PA LCB regulations regarding provision, sale and
service of alcohol, also including the terms and conditions of
issuance and use of the required golf course liquor license;
(ii) operate in compliance with the applicable lease, permit or
license granted by the City;
(iii) comply with the greater of the insurance requirements
under (a)(3)(E) preceding or in the lease, if applicable;
(iv) not pledge or encumber as collateral, sell, assign or
transfer the liquor license without express written consent
from the City signed by the Mayor and the Controller; a
violation of the preceding entitling the City to terminate a
permit, lease or license.
(B) The sale of beer on the golf course by the restaurant operator,
and its consumption, if lawful under the applicable golf
course liquor license, is permitted.
(6) Denial of Applications and Revocation of Permits. The Director
may deny a permit application and City Council may refuse to approve a
permit if the event is deemed, in their discretion, unsuitable to the facility,
potentially harmful to the facility, if it conflicts with other events, if it
conflicts with the City’s use of or access to the park, or if it causes
unreasonable burden on City resources needed to support the event. The
Director may deny, suspend or revoke the permission granted an event
host under a permit, lease or license who fails to comply with the
requirements of this ordinance or other applicable laws, the PA Liquor
Code, PA LCB regulations and City ordinances.
(b) Fireworks and Explosives. No person in a park shall bring, or have in his
possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any
firecrackers, torpedo, rockets, fireworks, explosives or flammable or incendiary material,
or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in
conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the
foregoing standpoints. Exceptions – Permit authorization by the Director and the
Bethlehem Fire Department; matches and lighter fluid used solely to ignite a cooking fire
in a grill. Also, City employees for animal control.
(c) Domestic Animals. Domestic animals are allowed but must be leashed and
under owner’s control. The leash shall not be longer than 6 feet, and owner must pick up
ARTICLE 941 13
all animal waste and either dispose of it in receptacles provided or remove it from the
park. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the unleashed running of domestic
animals except in the City Dog Park. Dogs must be licensed and up to date on all
vaccinations.
(d) Closed Areas. No person shall enter a park area posted as "Closed to the
Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of posted
notices.
(e) Gambling. No person shall gamble or participate in or initiate any game of
chance in a park.
(f) Going Onto Ice. No person shall go onto the ice on any park waters except
such areas as are designated as skating rinks, i.e. Earl E. Schaffer Municipal Rink.
(g) Malicious Loitering Prohibited. No person shall maliciously loiter in a City of
Bethlehem park.
(1) Enforcement and Conviction.
(A) No person shall be convicted of malicious loitering in a
City of Bethlehem park unless a police officer, at the time
and upon observation of the alleged malicious loitering,
determines that such person was causing the conditions of
malicious loitering;
(B) Unless flight by a suspected offender or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer shall,
prior to making an arrest or issuing a citation for an offense
under this Article, afford the person an opportunity to
dispel suspicion, which otherwise would be reasonably
warranted, by requesting the person’s identity, and proof
thereof, and an explanation of his or her presence and
conduct; and
(C) No person shall be convicted of malicious loitering in
violation of this Article if the police officer did not comply
with Subsection (B) preceding or if it appears to the fact
finder at trial that the explanation given by the person was
true and, if believed by the police officer at the time, should
have dispelled the officer’s determination that the person
engaged in malicious loitering.
(Ord. 2016-011. Passed 4/19/2016.)
(h) Exhibit Permits. No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any
permit from the Director he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who
desires to inspect the permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance
ARTICLE 941 14
or rule. Users must have a permit to exclusively occupy designated pavilions.
(i) Noise. Amplification Sound Systems, PA systems, amplified music are
prohibited except with Director’s approval. Revving the engine of a parked vehicle and
playing music from a vehicle sound system to project into park areas is prohibited.
(j) Generators. Generators powered by gasoline or diesel are not permitted in any
park unless authorized under 941.08 (c). (Ord. 2016-011. Passed 4/19/2016.)
941.07 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.
(a) Vending and Peddling. No person shall, in a park, expose or offer for sale any
article or thing, nor station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale
or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the Director.
(Ord. 2211 §8. Passed 9/22/1976.)
(b) Advertising. No person in a park shall announce, advertise or call the public
attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, except as provided for in
subsection (d) hereof.
(c) Signs. No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever within a park, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or
roads adjacent to a park, except as provided for in subsection (d) hereof.
(d) Exceptions. An organization may, upon application and written approval by
the Director and in accordance with the following provisions and restrictions,
erect, or cause to be erected, signs promoting the interests, services, or events of
their sponsors:
(1) Should any athletic or playing field be used by more than one
organization, either concurrently or consecutively, then the Director
shall be authorized to equally apportion areas for signs or may require
an organization to remove all signs at the completion of the normal
playing season.
(2) Remuneration such as rental fees, if any, shall be a matter of private
concern between the sponsor and the organization with no involvement
whatsoever by the City or any of its officials thereof.
(3) Council may, in any event, at any time, without regard to,
and without incurring any liability whatsoever, direct that
all signs erected be removed. The responsibility for
removing signs shall be upon the organization erecting
them. (Ord. 2462. Passed 3/18/1975.)
ARTICLE 941 15
941.08 OPERATING POLICY
(a) Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year from dawn to dusk. Exception - The following will close
at 11:00 P.M.: lighted baseball fields at Monocacy, lighted tennis and basketball courts
at Sand Island, lighted athletic fields at Saucon, Golf Course Driving-Range. This does
not pertain to the South Bethlehem Greenway. The Director is authorized to extend the
hours for special events upon the request of any group or organization, provided such
request is made at least forty-eight hours prior to the date of the special event. No
individual shall enter any park area before dawn or after dusk, unless such individual has
written permission of the Director. (Ord. 3010-Passed 9/3/1985; Ord. 3426-Passed
8/6/1991.)
(b) Closed Areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the
public by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at
regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain
uses, as the Director shall find reasonably necessary.
(c) Permit. An Event Permit shall be obtained from the Director before
establishing an organized park activity/event.
(1) Standards for issuance. The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when
he finds that:
(A) The proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public enjoyment of the park;
(B) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation;
(C) The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly
conduct;
(D) The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City;
(E) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
(2) Appeal. Within ten days after receipt of an application the
Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons
for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have
ARTICLE 941 16
the right to appeal in writing within ten days to Council,
which shall consider the application under the standards set
forth in subsection (c) (1) hereof and sustain or overrule
the Director's decision within twenty-one days. The
decision of Council shall be final.
(3) Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park
rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as
though the same were inserted in permits.
(4) Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any
person or the City whatever by reason of the negligence of the person
or persons to whom such permit has been issued.
(5) Revocation. The Director shall have the authority to revoke
a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance,
or upon cause shown. (Ord. 2211 §9. Passed 9/22/1970.)
941.09 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Officials. The Director, the Police, and City park employees shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
article.
(b) Ejectment. The Director, the Police and any City park employee shall have the
authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this article.
941.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article commits a Summary
Offense and upon conviction shall be sentenced to pay a fine or to imprisonment, or both,
at the discretion of the court, according to the following schedule:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/1985; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/1989.)
(Ord. 2014-33. Passed 11/18/2014.)
ARTICLE 951
Pedestrian Malls
951.01 Definitions and boundaries.
951.02 Rules and regulations.
951.03 Activities
951.04 Alcoholic beverages.
951.05 Animals.
951.06 Pedacycles.
951.07 Conduct.
951.08 Fountains.
951.09 Furniture.
951.10 Littering.
951.11 Mall structure protection.
951.12 Posting.
951.13 Roller skates.
951.14 Sound amplification or musical instruments.
951.15 Storage.
951.16 Sweeping.
951.17 Snow removal.
951.18 Vehicles.
951.19 Vandalism.
951.20 Vending machines.
951.21 Existing ordinances.
951.22 Police powers.
951.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Disorderly conduct - See GEN. OFF. Art. 705
951.01 DEFINITIONS AND BOUNDARIES.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as
follows:
(a) "Pedestrian Malls" shall mean:
(1) The Hinge Block which shall be defined and apply
to all the properties to the rear of the structure having
frontage upon the south side of Broad Street between Guetter
Street and Main Street, the east side of Main Street between
Broad Street and Walnut Street, the north side of Walnut Street
between Main Street and Guetter Street and the west side of
Guetter Street between Walnut Street and Broad Street, as
indicated on a map entitled "Layout Plan, Sun Inn Courtyard."
(Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
ARTICLE 951 2
(2) The City Center Plaza which shall be defined and
apply to all the properties contained within the block area
bounded on the north side by Church Street and on the south, west
and east sides by the perimeter street of New Street.
(Ord. 3129 - Passed 7/21/87; Ord. 4222 – Passed 12/2/03.)
951.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
All persons using the Pedestrian Malls shall be subject to
all rules and regulations established by the Director of Parks
and Public Property in addition to those herein set forth. (Ord.
2910 - Passed 11/15/83; Ord. 3569 - Passed 9/7/93.)
951.03 ACTIVITIES
(a) The Director of Parks and Public Property shall review,
and if approved, schedule and grant Activity Permits for all
activities on the Pedestrian Malls. (Ord. 4222 – Passed 12/2/03)
(b) Activities which may be conducted upon the Pedestrian
Malls are those which would: enhance its appearance; generate
citizen interest and participation, stimulate commerce, directly
or indirectly; and promote community spirit. Subject activities
will in no way interfere with the health, safety or welfare of
the community, and may include peaceful, orderly exercise of
freedom of speech as granted by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution.
(c) All users involved with activities on the Pedestrian
Malls shall make application for Activity Permits to the Director
of Parks and Public Property and shall be responsible for the
cleaning and repair of the Pedestrian Malls to assure that the
Malls will be returned to their prior condition. A minimum
deposit of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) shall be required as
security for compliance with this provision. Failure to comply
with this provision shall result in the City taking such action
as is necessary to clean and repair the Malls and restore them to
their prior condition. In such case, the City shall charge its
costs against the deposit. The balance, if any, will be returned
to the user. If the cost exceeds the deposit, the user shall be
billed the excess over the deposit. In addition, persons
sponsoring activities on the Pedestrian Malls where the sponsor
reasonably anticipates more than fifty (50) participants shall be
required to provide for a certificate of insurance, from a
company acceptable to the Law Bureau, providing liability
coverage to the applicant and naming the City as an Additional
ARTICLE 951 3
Insured. This insurance requirement may be waived or the amount
required may be established in the reasonable discretion of the
Law Bureau taking into consideration the number of participants
and the nature of the activity.
(d) In addition to the foregoing requirement for an
Activity Permit, all persons wishing to place temporary
structures upon the Pedestrian Malls shall make application to
the Director of Parks and Public Property for a Structures Permit
for such activity which, if approved, shall be issued upon the
payment of a One Hundred Dollar ($100.00) fee ($200.00 fee if the
activity is food sales) except where the fee is waived as set
forth in Subparagraph (g) below, and compliance with the
regulations established by the Director of Parks and Public
Property. Noncommercial activities employing no more than two
(2) tables may take place without the necessity of obtaining the
Structures Permit required by this section.
(e) The application for a Structures Permit shall:
(1) describe the activity which is contemplated;
(2) describe in detail the location, dimensions, and
type of construction of any structure to be used;
(3) provide for a Certificate of Insurance, from a
company acceptable to the Law Bureau, providing
liability coverage to the applicant and naming the
City as an additional insured. The insurance
shall be in an amount acceptable to the Law
Bureau;
(4) be filed with the Director of Parks and Public
Property no later than fifteen (15) days prior to
the commencement of the activity;
(5) with regard to the placement of temporary
structures in the area extending ten (10) feet
beyond the faces of the buildings on the
Pedestrian Malls, be granted only to those persons
who have legal title to or are lessees, under a
Lease entered into at least sixty (60) days prior
to the date of the application, of said buildings.
The issuance of a Structures Permit by the Director of Parks
and Public Property to occupy a location on the Pedestrian Malls
shall not supersede other applicable City Ordinances, including
those dealing with zoning, health, safety, and fire prevention.
ARTICLE 951 4
(f) Prohibited Acts
(1) No person shall conduct any covered activity
without first having obtained an Activity Permit
and, if applicable, a Structures Permit.
(2) Each day that a person continues to conduct a
covered activity without the required permit(s)
shall be a separate violation punishable in
accordance with Section 951.99.
(3) No person shall dispense alcoholic beverages
without the express permission of the Director of
Parks and Public Property and unless he/she has
been issued an appropriate License or Permit by
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(4) There shall be no sale or display of nonfood items
on the Pedestrian Malls except:
(a) outdoor sales conducted by merchants whose
business establishments directly abut a
Pedestrian Mall as is set forth in
subparagraph (g) below.
(b) special events conducted under the auspices
of the City or one of its departments,
commissions, or boards after notice to the
Department of Parks and Public Property.
(c) the noncommercial display or sale for a
nominal charge of informational material such
as leaflets, buttons, and bumper stickers.
(g) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit retail
merchants from conducting outdoor sales or erecting signs which
are extensions of the businesses of the properties on the Mall.
Activity and Structures Permits for such sales or signs must be
secured. However, no fee will be charged. All such outdoor
sales shall be conducted and signs erected within ten (10) feet
of the face of the building on the Mall and adjacent to the
business. Further, this Article shall not prohibit municipal
events sponsored by the City, or any of its departments,
commissions, or boards.
(h) Vehicular operation, parking, standing, loading,
unloading, or delivery shall be prohibited. The Director of
Parks and Public Property, or his designee, shall review special
requests, and, if appropriate, schedule and grant final approval
authorizing the operation of motor vehicles or trailers on the
Pedestrian Malls.
ARTICLE 951 5
(i) The City shall not be responsible for damages,
accidents or incidents which occur as a result of activities
conducted on the Pedestrian Malls. (Ord. 3129 §2 - Passed
7/21/87; Ord. 3569 - Passed 9/7/93.)
951.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on the Pedestrian
Malls except by express permission of City Council. (Ord. 3569 -
Passed 9/7/93.)
951.05 ANIMALS.
No animals are allowed on the Pedestrian Malls unless
specifically authorized. (Ord. 2910 §6 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.06 PEDACYCLES.
(a) Pedacycles may not be ridden on the Pedestrian Malls at
any time. They may, however, be walked on the sidewalk area.
"Pedacycles" are defined as any vehicle propelled solely by
human-powered pedals.
(b) Bicycles shall be parked in the bicycle racks, if
provided. (Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.07 CONDUCT.
Intoxication, indecent language and/or disorderly conduct
are prohibited. (Ord. 2564 §8 - Passed 5/24/77.)
951.08 FOUNTAINS.
No person shall wade, swim or place any liquids or solid
objects in any fountain located on the Pedestrian Malls. (Ord.
2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.09 FURNITURE.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no permanent or
temporary installation of any type of tables, chairs or other
furniture shall be permitted on the Pedestrian Malls except upon
the issuance of Activity and Structures Permits. Any permits, if
issued, shall provide times and conditions for such use. (Ord.
3569 - Passed 9/7/93.)
951.10 LITTERING.
All refuse, rubbish and litter shall be placed in
receptacles provided for that purpose. (Ord. 2564 §11 - Passed
5/24/77.)
ARTICLE 951 6
951.11 MALL STRUCTURE PROTECTION.
Any exterior repair, rehabilitation, preventative
maintenance and/or renovations that will take place on any
building abutting the Pedestrian Malls shall be reviewed by the
Director of Parks and Public Property to assure adequate
protection to the Pedestrian Malls. (Ord. 2910 - Passed
11/15/83; Ord. 3569 - Passed 9/7/93.)
951.12 POSTING.
No posting of bills, advertisements, signs, etc. is allowed
except by permission, except that a temporary sign no larger than
ten (10) square feet may be placed on the tables as an adjunct to
the noncommercial activities contemplated by Article 951.03(d) in
such a manner as not to impede pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 2564 §13
- Passed 5/24/77; Ord. 3569 - Passed 9/7/93.)
951.13 ROLLER SKATES.
No person shall roller skate, ride on a skate board or
operate any recreational type device on the Pedestrian Malls nor
shall any person permit same to be operated. (Ord. 2910 - Passed
11/15/83.)
951.14 SOUND AMPLIFICATION OR MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.
No person shall use any sound amplification unless
specifically authorized. (Ord. 2564 §17 - Passed 5/24/77.)
951.15 STORAGE.
No storage of items, material, stock, etc., will be allowed
anywhere on or in the Pedestrian Malls except on approval. (Ord.
2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.16 SWEEPING.
(a) The sweeping of the Pedestrian Malls will be done by
the City. (Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
(b) Recessed store entrances, foyers or other areas within
the building lines shall at all times remain the responsibility
of the tenants or owners who shall maintain them.
(c) The sweeping of refuse or other litter on to the
Pedestrian Malls, dumping of refuse, littering on the Pedestrian
Malls, or in any way impeding the maintenance of the Pedestrian
Malls is prohibited. (Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
ARTICLE 951 7
951.17 SNOW REMOVAL.
(a) Normal snow removal sufficient to provide for and
accommodate pedestrian traffic shall be the responsibility of the
City. However, access to individual properties from the area
cleared by the City shall be the responsibility of each property
owner and tenant.
(b) If applicable, de-icing methods and materials shall
follow procedures as outlined in the Bethlehem Plaza Manual dated
November 23, 1976. (Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.18 VEHICLES.
(a) No vehicle except those mentioned in subsection (b)
hereof shall be permitted on the Pedestrian Malls.
(b) Permitted vehicles are Mall maintenance vehicles,
emergency vehicles and delivery trucks.
(c) Delivery trucks shall be limited to two-axle single
vehicles.
(d) Deliveries shall be made between the hours of 7:00 A.M.
and 10:00 A.M.
(e) The maximum speed of vehicles permitted under this
section to operate on the Pedestrian Malls shall be limited to
five miles per hour. (Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.19 VANDALISM.
Cutting, mutilating, removing or the taking away of trees,
shrubs and flowers or the removal, defacing or damaging of
property is prohibited. (Ord 2564 §22 - Passed 5/24/77.)
951.20 VENDING MACHINES.
No vending machines or coin operated amusement devices shall
be placed upon the Pedestrian Malls without special permission.
(Ord. 2910 - Passed 11/15/83.)
951.21 EXISTING ORDINANCES.
All applicable City ordinances now in effect apply to the
Pedestrian Malls unless such ordinances are superseded by one of
the aforementioned rules and regulations. (Ord. 2910 - Passed
11/15/83.)
ARTICLE 951 8
951.22 POLICE POWERS.
The Department of Parks and Public Property and the
Department of Police have the authority to police and issue
citations for violations of all sections of this Article 951 in
accordance with Article 951.99 PENALTY. (Ord. 3569 - Passed
9/7/93.)
951.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both;
(d) Any person who violates Section 951.03 (h) is guilty of
a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $15.00. (Ord. 3569 - Passed 9/7/93.)
ARTICLE 971
Enhanced 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System
971.01 Contribution Rate
971.02 Coin Operated Telephones
971.03 City of Bethlehem 9-1-1 Plan
971.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Act 78 of 1990 - Public Safety Emergency Telephone Act
971.01 CONTRIBUTION RATE.
A contribution rate of $1.25 per month shall be
billed and collected by Bell of Pennsylvania and
any other telephone company or companies which
provide, or may hereafter provide, telephone
service within the City of Bethlehem, for all
telephone access lines within the City of
Bethlehem. The revenues derived from this
contribution shall be forwarded to the Treasurer
of the City of Bethlehem monthly for the sole
purpose of payment for recurring and nonrecurring
costs associated with the implementing, expanding,
upgrading and operating of the Enhanced 9-1-1
Emergency Telephone System. This contribution
rate shall commence on the date of the Department
of Community Affairs approval of the 9-1-1 plan
for the City of Bethlehem and shall remain in
effect until the contribution rate is changed in
accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 3987 -
Passed 12/21/99.)
ARTICLE 971 2
971.02 COIN OPERATED TELEPHONES.
Public pay stations, semi-public pay stations and
customer owned coin operated telephones (COCOT's)
shall have access to 9-1-1 without coin insertion
or other charge.
971.03 CITY OF BETHLEHEM 9-1-1 PLAN.
(a) The City of Bethlehem elects to maintain its own
current Enhanced 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone
System and elects not to become a part of the
Northampton County 9-1-1 Plan authorized by the
Resolution of Northampton County Council adopted
on October 19, 1995.
(b) In accordance with the applicable Home Rule Charter
provisions and State Law, the Mayor is authorized to
take any appropriate actions to insure that the citizens
of Bethlehem are not subjected to any assessment,
tax, fee or levy in the nature thereof made by
Northampton County for the cost or maintenance of
Northampton County's 9-1-1 System.
(Ord. 3714 - Passed 12/5/95.)
971.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article
shall be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First Violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second Violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
of $1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3480 - Passed 5/5/92.)
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF BETHLEHEM
PART ELEVEN - PUBLIC HEALTH CODE
TITLE ONE - Food
Article 1113. Food Code Regulation.
ARTICLE 1113
FOOD CODE REGULATION
1113.01 Adoption of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture “PA Food Code”, Title 7,
Chapter 46
1113.02 Additions
1113.03 Inspection Charges
1113.04 Temporary Food Establishment Administrative Fee
1113.05 License Fees
1113.06 Late Fees
1113.07 Repealer
1113.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Local Health Administration Law (Act 315 of 1951)
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture – Retail Food Facility Safety Act –
3 Pa.C.S. §§ 5701-5741
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture – Food Code; Food Employee Certification Act –
Title 7, Chapter 46
Current Edition of FDA Model Food Code
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture – Food Employee Certification Act –
3 Pa.C.S. §§ 6501-6510
1113.01 ADOPTION OF PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE “FOODCODE; FOOD EMPLOYEE
CERTIFICATION”, TITLE 7, CHAPTER 46
The definitions, the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension
and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments, the prohibiting of the sale of
unsound or mislabeled food or drink, and the enforcement of this Article shall be regulated in
ARTICLE 1113 2
accordance with the current version of Title 7, Chapter 46, known as “Food Code; Food
Employee Certification, three certified copies of which shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14.)
1113.02 ADDITIONS.
The following articles, representing revisions or additions to Chapter 46 – Food Code:
Food Employee Certification shall be applicable for the purpose of the Ordinance.
(a) The City of Bethlehem Health Department may require establishments previously
exempted under the Food Employee Certification Act to meet all requirements
under the Act. This may be required of any agency under constant violation of
PA FOOD CODE and is left to the discretion of the City of Bethlehem
Environmental Director. The agency must meet all requirements under the Act
prior to operating a food establishment within the City of Bethlehem.
(b) The City of Bethlehem Health Department shall not issue a Health License to any
business or organization that is delinquent in taxes, assessments, or any other
municipal fee or charge that is due to the City or any agency created by the City.
(Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14)
1113.03 INSPECTION CHARGES.
(a) Prior to licensure, all Food Establishments must have received, at a minimum, one
(1) health inspection in the previous twelve (12) months.
(b) There shall be a fee imposed for all Food Establishments that are New or that
have a Change of Owner of the establishment. This fee is to satisfy all plan
review and interim inspections necessary under the Pennsylvania Food Code and
this Article.
(1) For plan review services as a result of a change of ownership where no
alterations other than cosmetic changes to the existing facility are taking place
- One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($125.00)
(2) For plan review services as a result of new construction, conversion,
remodeling or alterations other than cosmetic changes - Two Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($250.00)
ARTICLE 1113 3
(c) There shall be an inspection fee for food service establishments as follows:
(1) Permanent Health License – Establishment with Food Consumed by Patrons
on Premises.
Establishment with 75 seats or less - $225.00
Establishment with more than 75 seats - $325.00
(2) Permanent Health License – Establishment with No Food Consumed by
Patrons on Premises:
Establishment with 5,000 square feet or less - $225.00
Establishment with 5,000 square feet or more - $325.00
Milk Sales Only - $25.00
(3) Mobile Food Units - $200.00 per unit.
(4) Vending Machines - $4.00 per unit
(5) Vending Machine/Temporary Event Commissary - $200.00
(6) Care Facilities (Daycares/Nursing Homes) and Educational Institutions
(Schools):
Establishment Approved by State of Pennsylvania
for 75 or less students - $200.00
Establishment Approved by State of Pennsylvania
for more than 75 students - $300.00
(d) Food Establishments shall be charged a re-inspection fee for each re-inspection
that is required to verify the facility is in compliance with “Food Code; Food
Employee Certification”. The re-inspection fee will be $100.00 for each reinspection
necessary to bring the food establishment into compliance.
(Ord. 4350. Passed 12/6/05; Ord. 2010-28. Passed 12/21/10; Ord. 2014-47-Passed
12/16/14.)
1113.04 TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
(a) Temporary Food Establishment shall be consistent with that defined in the FDA
Model Food Code and shall mean a food establishment that operates for a period
of no more than 14 consecutive dates in conjunction with a single event or
celebration. Those facilities not meeting this definition shall be deemed a
permanent facility for the purposes of this Article.
ARTICLE 1113 4
(b) There shall be an administrative fee for all vendors participating in a temporary
event where said vendor is offering Time/Temperature Control for Safety (TCS)
Food for public consumption.
(c) The Administrative Fee for the offering of TCS food at events lasting all or part
of:
a. One day or less: $25.00
b. Two or Three days: $40.00
c. Four or More days: $75.00
d. Vendors operating in more than three events or celebrations in a
particular calendar year: $175.00
(Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14)
1113.05 LICENSE FEES.
All of the food service establishments as listed in Section 1113.03(c) and 1113.04(c)
shall pay, in addition to the Inspection Charges, an Annual License Fee of $1.00.
(Ord. 4350. Passed 12/6/05; Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14.)
1113.06 LATE FEES.
(a) A late fee of Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars per month shall be charged for an overdue
license, as determined by the Bureau of Health. A maximum of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars
may be charged to the establishment. After the maximum amount is charged the
establishment is considered to be in violation of Article 1113 and is no longer
permitted to operate within the City of Bethlehem. In order to reopen the
establishment must undergo the application/plan review process for reopening and
pay all associated fees as listed in 1113.03 (b)-(c). This late fee does not replace any
and all penalties that may be issued for being in violation of Article 1113 of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
(b) A late fee of Ten ($10.00) Dollars shall be charged to temporary food stand vendor
who makes application for a Health License less than five (5) business days prior to
the proposed event. For those vendors who are required to obtain the Year Long
Temporary Food Stand License (operating in more than 3 events/calendar year), the
proper written notification of operation must be submitted within five (5) business
days prior to the proposed event. The Director of Health reserves the right to refuse,
or revoke a Health License application made after the five business day requirement.
(Ord. 4350. Passed 12/6/05; Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14.)
ARTICLE 1113 5
1113.07 REPEALER.
This Article shall be in full force and effect after its adoption and publication as provided
by law and, at that time, all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this Article are
hereby repealed.
(Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14)
1113.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.”
(Ord. 3131. Passed 7/21/87; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89; Ord. 4300. Passed 12/21/04;
Ord. 2014-47-Passed 12/16/14.)
ARTICLE 1114
Retail Food Store Sanitation Code
1114.01 Adoption of the Retail Food Store Sanitation Code.
1114.02 Additions, Deletions, and Modifications.
1114.03 Inspection Charges.
1114.04 License Fees.
1114.05 Repealer.
1114.06 Severability.
1114.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Retail Food Store Sanitation Code (1982 Edition)
Local Health Administration Law (Act 315 of 1951)
DER Rules and Regulations - Chapter 151
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and
incorporated in new Article 1113, Food Code Regulation
(Ord. 4300 – Passed 12/21/04)
ARTICLE 1115
Food Handlers
1115.01 Freedom From Communicable Disease
1115.02 Examination If Requested By Health Officer
1115.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
Food vending machine employees - See HLTH. Art. 1117
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in
new Article 1113, Food Code Regulation (Ord. 4300 – Passed
12/21/04)
ARTICLE 1117
Food Vending Machines
1117.01 Definitions.
1117.02 Operator's License Required.
1117.03 Application.
1117.04 Inspection; Issuance Of License.
1117.05 Display Of License Number.
1117.06 Location Of Machines.
1117.07 Suspension Or Revocation Of License.
1117.08 Reinstatement Of License.
1117.09 Fees.
1117.10 Spoiled, Adulterated Or Misbranded Food.
1117.11 Inspection Of Vending Machines And Commissaries.
1117.12 Violations.
1117.13 Sanitation Requirements For Vending Machine Operations.
1117.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCE
Food handlers - See HLTH. Art. 1115
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in
new Article 1113, Food Code Regulation (Ord. 4300 – Passed
12/21/04)
ARTICLE 1119
Licensing and Regulation of Cigarette Vending Machines
1119.01 Definition of Terms.
1119.02 License Required.
1119.03 Licensing Procedures.
1119.04 License Fees.
1119.05 Display of License.
1119.06 Prohibition and Restrictions.
1119.07 Revocation of License.
1119.99 Penalty.
1119.01 DEFINITION OF TERMS.
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise
indicates:
(a) The term "cigarette vending machine" shall mean any
automatic vending machine accessible to the public used for the
sale of cigarettes and controlled by the insertion of coins or
currency. It shall not include machines or devices used solely
for the vending of service, food or confections.
(b) The terms "person, firm, corporation or association" as
used herein shall include the following: any person, firm,
corporation or association which owns a cigarette vending
machine; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose
place of business any such machine is placed for use by the
public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having
control over such machine.
1119.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for
public patronage or keeping for operation any cigarette vending
machine shall be required to obtain a license from the City of
Bethlehem upon payment of a license fee. Application for such
license shall be made to the Bureau of Health upon a form to be
supplied by the Bureau for that purpose. Only one cigarette
vending machine shall be operated under one license. The
applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for
ARTICLE 1119 2
vending machine shall be operated under one license. The
applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for
each and every cigarette vending machine displayed or operated.
1119.03 LICENSING PROCEDURES.
The application for such license shall contain the following
information:
(a) Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place
of birth.
(b) Place where the cigarette vending machine or device is
to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that
place.
(c) Description of the cigarette vending machine to be
covered by the license including mechanical features, name of
manufacturer, and serial number.
No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the
applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
1119.04 LICENSE FEES.
Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay
an annual license fee of $25.00 for the privilege of operating or
maintaining for operation each cigarette vending machine. The
fee will be pro rated for periods of less than one year.
Each license shall expire December 31 of each year.
1119.05 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
(a) The license or licenses herein provided for shall be
posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the
cigarette vending machine in the premises wherein the device is
to be operated or maintained.
(b) Such license may be transferred from one cigarette
vending machine to another similar cigarette vending machine only
upon application to the Bureau of Health by giving a description
and serial number of the new cigarette vending machine to the
Bureau.
(c) If the licensee shall move his place of business to
another location within the City of Bethlehem, the license may be
transferred to such new location upon application to the Bureau
ARTICLE 1119 3
of Health, giving the street and number of the new location. The
new location shall be approved by the Bureau of Health in the
same manner as provided in Sections 1119.02 and 1119.03 of this
ordinance.
(d) A license shall not be transferrable from person to
person, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person
designated in the license.
1119.06 PROHIBITION AND RESTRICTIONS.
(a) No person, firm, corporation or association holding a
license under this ordinance shall permit persons under eighteen
(18) years of age to operate any cigarette vending machine.
(b) Cigarette vending machines shall be permitted to be
placed only at:
1. Locations such as bars, clubs or other
establishments which normally prohibit the entry
of minors or of minors not accompanied by an
adult. Restaurants which have separate bar areas
may only place cigarette vending machines in the
bar area.
2. Business premises where the unescorted entry of
the public is prohibited.
(c) Where permitted under Subsection 1119.06(b), cigarette
vending machines shall only be placed in locations wherein the
licensee or designee of licensee can, in the normal course of
their employment, view at all times any person using said
cigarette vending machine. Cigarette vending machines shall not
be placed in patron restroom areas, foyers or vestibules, pantry
or waiting rooms, or any other inconspicuous areas. Business
locations noted in Section (b) 2 are exempted from this
restriction.
1119.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Every license issued under this ordinance is subject to the
right of the Bureau of Health, which is hereby expressly
reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any cigarette vending machine
contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, the ordinances of
the City of Bethlehem, or the law of the State of Pennsylvania.
Said license may be revoked by the Bureau of Health after written
notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance
or law violation with which the licensee is charged. Cigarette
ARTICLE 1119 4
vending machines in unpermitted locations and cigarette vending
machines which are unlicensed or whose license has been revoked
may be removed by the Bureau and held until claimed by the
cigarette vending machine's owner.
1119.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First Violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3384. Passed 12/18/90.)
1
ARTICLE 1120
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
1120.01 Designation as primary provider.
1120.02 Definitions.
1120.03 Policy – Advanced Life Support Services Required.
1120.04 Policy for EMS billing.
1120.05 Procedure for EMS billing.
CROSS REFERENCES
Emergency Medical Services Act 45 - 1985 (35 P.S. Sec. 6921)
1120.01 DESIGNATION AS PRIMARY PROVIDER
The City of Bethlehem hereby recognizes the City’s Emergency
Medical Services (“EMS”) Bureau as the primary provider of prehospital
emergency medical services within the corporate limits
of the City. All persons in need of such services are entitled to
receive them without prior determination of the ability to pay.
1120.02 DEFINITIONS
A. ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT, LEVEL 1 (ALS-1): providing
transportation by ground ambulance vehicle, medically necessary
supplies and services and either an ALS assessment by ALS
personnel or the provision of at least one ALS intervention.
B. ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT, LEVEL 2 (ALS-2): providing
either transportation by ground ambulance vehicle, medically
necessary supplies and services, and the administration of at
least three medications by intravenous push/bolus or by
continuous infusion excluding crystalloid, hypotonic, isotonic,
and hypertonic solutions (Dextrose, Normal Saline, Ringer’s
Lactate); or providing transportation, medically necessary
supplies, and services, and the provision of at least one of the
following ALS procedures:
(1) Manual defibrillation/cardioversion; or –
(2) Endotracheal intubation; or –
(3) Central venous line; or –
(4) Cardiac pacing; or –
(5) Chest decompression; or –
(6) Surgical airway; or –
(7) Intraosseous line.
ARTICLE 1120
2
C. ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT TREATMENT NO TRANSPORT:
providing treatment at the scene of a 911 call at the ALS level
of care and no transport to a hospital is required (such as a
hypoglycemic patient).
D. BALANCE BILLING: the practice of charging a
beneficiary more than the difference between the provider’s
actual charge and the amount provided by the insurance carrier
according to any contractual agreements.
E. BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS-E): providing transportation
by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of medically
necessary supplies and services, including BLS ambulance services
as defined by the State.
F. EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN (“EMT”)-PARAMEDIC: an
individual having special, well-defined skills and knowledge in
emergency medicine, who has training to provide pre-hospital
emergency medical treatment at an advanced level and is certified
by the Pennsylvania Department of Health in accordance with the
current EMT-paramedic National standards curriculum.
G. EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (“EMS”): services utilized
in responding to needs of those persons in need of immediate
medical care within the jurisdiction and adjacent to the City of
Bethlehem, including but not limited to the rendering of advanced
life support care, provided by Bethlehem EMS.
H. EMERGENCY RESPONSE: a BLS or ALS level of service that
has been provided in immediate response to a 911 call. An
immediate response is one in which the ambulance
provider/supplier begins as quickly as possible to take the steps
necessary to respond to the call.
I. LOADED MILES: see “Mileage”.
J. MILEAGE: the distance traveled by an ambulance from
the point where the patient is picked up, to the hospital or to a
rendezvous point.
K. NON-RESIDENT: an individual domiciled outside the City
of Bethlehem.
L. PATIENT: a person who receives an EMS response or a
person who receives emergency medical services from the City of
Bethlehem EMS.
M. REASONABLE COLLECTION EFFORTS: the issuance of a bill
to the patient or to the party responsible for the patient’s
personal financial obligations, and subsequent billings,
ARTICLE 1120
3
collection letters and telephone calls or personal contacts which
constitute a genuine, rather than token, collection effort. The
City expressly incorporates herein by reference any subsequent
definition of this term set forth by the Health Care Financing
Administration in Section 5220 of the Medicare Carriers Manual or
its successor.
N. RESIDENT: an individual domiciled within the City of
Bethlehem. A resident for the purposes of this Article, includes
but is not limited to, full time residents of the City of
Bethlehem, full time students residing within the City limits,
long term guests of a resident of the City, and employees on duty
with City business.
O. SERVICE CHARGE: a charge to a patient who has received
evaluation or treatment but who has not been transported by EMS
due to the refusal of care or for other reasons (auto accidents).
P. STAND-BY SERVICE FEE (per hour): a charge for an
ambulance and crew to an organization or individual for a
mandated or requested scheduled stand-by event (such as
Musikfest, football games, etc.).
Q. THIRD PARTY PAYER: insurance carrier or other coverage
provided, having the responsibility to pay for medical services
rendered to a patient as a result of that patient’s accident,
injury or illness.
(Ord. 2009-11. Passed 4/7/09.)
1120.03 POLICY – ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES REQUIRED
A. The City of Bethlehem hereby mandates Advanced Life
Support (ALS) with a minimum crew of two EMT-paramedics as the
minimum standard of care for all 9-1-1 ambulance calls and
emergency ambulance transports arising in the City of Bethlehem,
and shall bill accordingly at an ALS or BLS level. The
provisions of this paragraph shall apply to all services provided
by the City and to mutual aid response of other ambulance
providers answering emergency 9-1-1 calls within the City limits.
B. Exceptions to the provision of ALS/BLS with two EMTparamedic
crews may be made only in the case of disaster or when
all two EMT-paramedic ALS units are unavailable.
(Ord. 2009-11. Passed 4/7/09.)
1120.04 POLICY FOR EMS BILLING
A. The City of Bethlehem recognizes the need to bill for
these services to aid in the provision of Emergency Medical
ARTICLE 1120
4
Services.
B. No person requiring EMS shall be denied services due to
a lack of insurance or ability to pay.
C. Any applicable charges for EMS rendered shall be billed
directly to the patient or to the patient’s third party payer.
D. A patient who receives emergency medical services from
the City of Bethlehem is obligated, at the time of service or as
soon as practicable thereafter, to provide to the City of
Bethlehem all pertinent insurance and payment information to
facilitate the City of Bethlehem billing of third party payment
sources for services rendered. The City of Bethlehem may, at its
option, and shall, where required by law, bill insurers or
carriers on a patient’s behalf and may accept payment on an
assignment basis.
E. All patients, whether or not domiciled in the City of
Bethlehem, and/or their financially responsible parties, insurers
or carriers, will be billed for emergency medical services
provided by the City of Bethlehem according to the Fee Schedule
established herein or at rates established by the City of
Bethlehem from time to time. All patients, whether or not
domiciled in the City of Bethlehem, shall be liable for any copayment,
deductibles and patient responsibility amounts not
satisfied by public or private insurance, and the City of
Bethlehem shall make reasonable collection efforts for all such
balances according to the most current rules or regulations set
forth by applicable Health Care Financing Administration federal
policies and regulations. The City of Bethlehem may bill any
applicable coinsurance carriers for such amounts. Exceptions
include only those instances where the City of Bethlehem has
knowledge of a particular patient’s indigence or where the City
of Bethlehem has made a determination that the cost of billing
and collecting such co-payments, deductibles and patient
responsibility amounts exceeds or is disproportionate to the
amounts to be collected. (Ord. 2009-11. Passed 4/7/09.)
F. The City of Bethlehem shall not balance bill when
prohibited by law.
G. A patient for whom the City of Bethlehem does not bill
on assignment and who receives payment directly from a third
party payer for emergency medical services rendered by the City
of Bethlehem is obligated to remit such monies to the City of
Bethlehem in the event the City of Bethlehem has not been paid
for services rendered. Patients who do not remit such monies may
be held liable for costs of collection in addition to the charges
for emergency medical services rendered.
ARTICLE 1120
5
H. The City of Bethlehem may, either directly or through
any third party billing agency with which it has contracted for
billing and/or collections for emergency medical services, make
arrangements with patients and/or their financially responsible
party for installment payments of bills so long as the City of
Bethlehem determines that: (1) the financial condition of the
patient requires such an arrangement; and (2) the patient and/or
financially responsible party has demonstrated a willingness to
make good faith efforts towards payment of the bill.
1120.05 PROCEDURE FOR EMS BILLING
A. The City of Bethlehem is hereby authorized to enter
into a contract with a third party billing agency and/or
collection agency for performance of EMS billing and/or
collection services, provided however that the following
standards for such third party billing contracts are met:
(1) All third party billing services are to be
provided at an amount consistent with fair market
value for services rendered. The City will not
contract for such services on a percentage of
collections basis.
(2) The third party billing agency has in place a
compliance program conforming to standards set
forth in the Office of Inspector General’s
Compliance Program Guidance for Third Party
Medical Billing Companies, 63 Federal Register
70138, as amended.
(3) Funds payable to the City of Bethlehem by third
party payers and/or carriers are not negotiated by
billing agencies but are instead deposited
directly into a designated City of Bethlehem
account, through a lock box or similar
arrangement.
(4) Neither the billing agency nor any of its
employees are subject to exclusion from any state
or federal health care program.
(5) The billing agency is bonded and/or insured in
amounts satisfactory to the City of Bethlehem.
B. A detailed listing of patients who utilize Emergency
Medical Services will be compiled by the City of Bethlehem
Emergency Medical Services. This information will be transmitted
to the agency responsible for billing in the form of a patient
care report. The information will however be subject to the
confidentiality requirements of applicable law. This information
ARTICLE 1120
6
will include, at a minimum, the following:
(Ord. 2009-11. Passed 4/7/09.)
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of patient.
(2) Name, address and claim number of insurance
carrier, if applicable.
(3) Date, time and EMS chart number.
(4) Point of origin and destination.
(5) Odometer reading at point of pick up and
destination.
(6) Reason for transport/ patient’s complaint/ current
condition.
(7) Itemization and description of services provided
and charges.
(8) Signature of the patient, when possible, or
authorized decision maker.
(9) Name of receiving physician.
(10) Names, titles, and signatures of ambulance
personnel, when possible.
C. The fee schedule for emergency medical services shall
be as follows:
(1) Advanced Life Support, Level 1 (ALS1): $800.00
(2) Advanced Life Support, Level 2 (ALS2): $875.00
(3) Basic Life Support, (BLS-E): $700.00
(4) Mileage (ALS/BLS) (Per Loaded Mile): $ 15.00
(5) Service charge $ 75.00
(6) Standby Service Fee (per hour) $ 95.00
(7) ALS Treatment No Transport $400.00
(8) ALS Assist with BLS $200.00
(9) Patient Care Report (PCR) $ 25.00
ARTICLE 1120
7
(Ord. 4384. Passed 5/2/06; Ord. 4430. Passed 5/1/07;
Ord. 2009-11. Passed 4/7/09; Ord. 2014-5. Passed 3/4/14.)
D. The fees established in Section C. above shall be
modified from time to time through a Resolution adopted by City
Council. (Ord. 2009-11. Passed 4/7/09; Ord. 2014-5. Passed
3/4/14.)
E. The City may, in its discretion, bill additionally for
material, vehicle and personnel costs in the case of major or
unique incidents.
F. The EMS Bureau may promulgate rules and regulations
pursuant to and not inconsistent with this ordinance, state and
federal law, such rules and regulations to be approved by
Resolution of City Council.
1120.06 EMS RIGHT OF FIRST REFUSAL
As a condition of any lease, license or permit for the use
of City property for a large gathering that may require emergency
medical stand-by services, Bethlehem EMS (EMS) shall have the
right of first refusal to provide such services. (Ord. 2014-5.
Passed 3/4/14.)
(Ord. 3176. Passed 4/19/88; Ord. 3441. Passed 11/19/91; Ord.
3577. Passed 11/9/93; Ord. 3680. Passed 4/4/95; Ord. 3740.
Passed 3/5/96; Ord. 3806. Passed 3/4/97; Ord. 3931. Passed
1/5/99; Ord. 4200. Passed 6/17/03.)
ARTICLE 1122
APPROPRIATE MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
1122.01 General Purpose.
1122.02 Definitions.
1122.03 Conversion Therapy Prohibited.
1122.04 Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board.
1122.05 Enforcement: Investigation of Complaints of Violation, Notice and Hearing.
1122.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
An act enabling certain minors to consent to medical, dental and health services
- See Act of February 13, 1970 (P.L.19, No.10)
Appeals - See 2 Pa.C.S. § 752
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License - See Article 341, Business Privilege and
Mercantile Tax (Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem)
Local Agency Law - See Subchapter B of Chapter 5 and Subchapter B of Chapter 7 of Title 2 of
the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes).
Medical Practice Act of 1985 - See Act of December 20, 1985 (P.L.457, No.112)
Mental Health Procedures Act - See Act of July 9, 1976 (P.L.817, No.143)
Professional Psychologists Practice Act - See Act of March 23, 1972 (P.L.136, No.52)
Social Workers, Marriage and Family Therapists and Professional Counselors Act
- See Act of July 9, 1987 (P.L.220, No.39)
1122.01. GENERAL PURPOSE.
The City has a compelling interest in protecting the physical and psychological wellbeing
of minors, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning youth, and in
protecting its minors against exposure to serious harms caused by conversion therapy. Based
upon conclusions rendered by the American Psychiatric Association, the American
Psychological Association, the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, the
American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Medical Association Council of Scientific
Affairs, the National Association of Social Workers, the American Counseling Association
Governing Council, the American School Counselor Association, the American Psychoanalytic
Association, the Pan American Health Organization, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration of the United States Department of Health and Human Services, City
Council hereby finds that being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender is not a disease, disorder,
illness, deficiency, or shortcoming, and that research has demonstrated conversion therapy can
pose critical health risks to lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender persons. Therefore, it is the
desire of the City Council to prohibit, within the geographic boundaries of the City, the use of
conversion therapy with minors, which has been demonstrated to be harmful to the physical and
psychological well-being of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons.
ARTICLE 1122 2
1122.02. DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Article, except when the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
“Business license” means the Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License, the
issuance of which is required by City ordinances and regulations to permit a person to operate a
business in the City.
“Conversion therapy” means any practices or treatments that seek to change an
individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity, including efforts to change behaviors or gender
expressions or to reduce or eliminate sexual or romantic attractions or feelings toward
individuals of the same gender. Conversion therapy does not include counseling that:
(a) Provides assistance to a person undergoing gender transition; or
(b) Provides acceptance, support, and understanding of a person or facilitates a
person’s coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, including sexual
orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual
practices, if such counseling does not seek to change an individual’s sexual orientation or gender
identity.
“Licensed mental health professional” means a medical doctor licensed by the
Pennsylvania State Board of Medicine who specializes in the field of psychiatry or a
psychologist licensed under the act of March 23, 1972 (P.L.136, No.52), known as the
Professional Psychologists Practice Act
“Mental health professional” means an individual who is licensed, certified or
otherwise authorized to administer or provide professional mental health care or counseling
under the act of March 23, 1972 (P.L.136, No.52), known as the Professional Psychologists
Practice Act, the act of July 9, 1976 (P.L.817, No.143), known as the Mental Health Procedures
Act, the act of December 20, 1985 (P.L.457, No.112), known as the Medical Practice Act of
1985, or the act of July 9, 1987 (P.L.220, No.39), known as the Social Workers, Marriage and
Family Therapists and Professional Counselors Act.
“Minor” means a person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
“Person” means natural persons, corporations, trusts, partnerships, incorporated or
unincorporated associations, and any other legal entities.
1122.03. CONVERSION THERAPY PROHIBITED.
(a) General rule. A mental health professional shall not engage in conversion therapy
with a minor.
ARTICLE 1122 3
(b) Consent of minors. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent a minor from
voluntarily consenting to mental health care as provided in the act of February 13, 1970 (P.L.19,
No.10), entitled "An act enabling certain minors to consent to medical, dental and health
services, declaring consent unnecessary under certain circumstances."
1122.04. APPROPRIATE MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES APPEALS BOARD.
(a) There is hereby established an Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board.
i. The Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall consist of five (5)
members - a member of City Council, the Health Director or designee, a Licensed mental health
professional, and two private citizens nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
ii. The initial terms of the members of the Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board are as follows:
Licensed mental health professional - four (4) years
Health Director or designee - three (3) years
Private citizen - three (3) years
Member of City Council - two (2) years
Private citizen - two (2) years
iii. After the initial terms have expired, members of the Appropriate Mental Health
Services Appeals Board shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years.
iv. After all members have been appointed, the Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board shall hold an organizational meeting within thirty (30) days to appoint a Chair and
Vice-Chair.
v. Thereafter, an organizational meeting shall be held annually.
vi. At its first and annual organizational meetings, the Appropriate Mental Health
Services Appeals Board shall decide whether to engage stenographic services to record hearings
for the ensuing year.
1122.05. ENFORCEMENT: INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS OF VIOLATION,
NOTICE AND HEARING.
(a) There is hereby established a Complaint Administrator to investigate complaints for
the violation of Section 1122.03 of this Article. The Health Director or the designee thereof shall
serve as the Complaint Administrator.
(b) Neither the Complaint Administrator nor the Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board shall have the ability to compel the production of records or any materials that are
made confidential by federal or state law or that are protected from disclosure by a lawful
privilege, unless a valid waiver of the privilege is made.
ARTICLE 1122 4
(c) The Complaint Administrator and the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals
Board shall not divulge confidential or privileged information that is disclosed during the
Enforcement process under this Section 1122.06 to anyone outside the Enforcement process.
(d) Notice of a violation of Section 1122.03 shall be given to the licensee in writing by
the Complaint Administrator, setting forth specifically the grounds of the violation. The notice
shall clearly state that, unless the licensee submits a written objection to the notice of violation to
the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board within ten (10) of the date of the notice,
the licensee’s business license shall be revoked. The notice of violation shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee’s last known address.
(e) A licensee may request a hearing on the notice of violation by submitting a written
objection to the notice of violation to the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board
within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. A failure to submit a timely written objection shall
result in the immediate revocation of the licensee’s business license. A licensee who submits a
timely written objection may continue to operate pending the decision on the violation by the
Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board.
(f) It shall be the responsibility of the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board
to hold hearings to review all written objections to a notice of violation. Hearings shall occur at
monthly public meetings. Monthly meetings may be cancelled if there are no pending objections
as of ten (10) days prior to the scheduled meeting. All hearings on objections to a notice of
violation shall occur within forty-five (45) days of the date of submission of the written
objection.
(g) The Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall serve written notice of
the date, time and place of the hearing upon the licensee and the Bureau of Health at least twenty
(20) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice of hearing served upon the licensee shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee’s last known address.
(h) Failure to hold a hearing within the allotted time shall result in the objection being
sustained and the notice of violation being dismissed.
(i) All hearings shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of the Local Agency Law
(Subchapter B of Chapter 5 and Subchapter B of Chapter 7 of Title 2 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes). At the hearing, the Bureau of Health shall have the burden of proving, by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the licensee has violated Section 1122.03. If a majority of
the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board finds that the licensee violated Section
1122.03, then the Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall overrule the
licensee’s objection and direct that the licensee’s business license be revoked. Otherwise, the
Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall sustain the objection and dismiss the
notice of violation. A licensee has the right to retain the services of a court reporter or
stenographer for the hearing at the licensee’s sole cost should such service not be provided by the
Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board.
ARTICLE 1122 5
(j) The Appropriate Mental Health Services Appeals Board shall issue its decision to
either sustain or overrule the objection within five (5) business days of the conclusion of the
hearing. Notice of the decision shall be served upon the licensee and the Bureau of Health.
(k) Any licensee whose objection is overruled by the Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board may file an appeal pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S. § 752 to the Court of Common Pleas of
the county in which the licensee’s business is licensed by the City.
(l) Any licensee whose objection is overruled by the Appropriate Mental Health Services
Appeals Board may continue to operate during the pendency of appeal with the Court of
Common Pleas.
1122.99. PENALTY.
The penalty for a violation of Section 1122.03 shall be revocation of the licensee’s
business license, after notice and hearing.
(Ord. 2018-18. Passed 7/17/2018)
ARTICLE 1159
Animals
1159.01 Purpose.
1159.02 Definitions.
1159.03 Limitation on Number of Animals.
1159.04 Application for Permit - More Than Six (6) Animals.
1159.05 Animal Control Officer; Powers and Duties; Issuance of Permit.
1159.06 Nuisances.
1159.07 Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Goats, Llamas/Alpacas, Horses, and Fowl in City Prohibited.
1159.08 Rabbits, Guinea Pigs at Large.
1159.09 Animal Coops to be Kept Clean.
1159.10 Distance of Coops from Occupied Dwellings; Distance of Animals from Food Stands.
1159.11 Petting Zoos.
1159.12 Dog License Required.
1159.13 Fees.
1159.14 Additional Enforcement Remedies Pertaining to All Animals.
1159.15 Additional Enforcement Remedies Pertaining to Dogs.
1159.16 Observation for Rabies.
1159.17 Proclamation of Hydrophobia (Rabies) by Mayor.
1159.18 Interference with Officer.
1159.19 Severability.
1159.99 Penalty.
1159.01 PURPOSE.
A. This chapter is enacted to regulate the maintenance, keeping or possession of
animals within the City of Bethlehem in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
its inhabitants.
B. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
other statute, ordinance, regulation or resolution, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any other statute, ordinance, regulation or resolution impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such other statute, ordinance, regulation or
resolution shall be controlling.
ARTICLE 1159 2
C. The City Council makes the following legislative findings, and finds that:
(1) Public nuisances and conditions detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare have been created by the keeping of multiple animals on premises
within the City;
(2) The public nuisances and conditions detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare include, but are not limited to, accumulations of animal wastes,
spread of infectious or contagious diseases or the danger thereof, insect
infestation, smell and noise;
(3) Limiting the number of animals on premises within the City will alleviate,
or at a minimum, help alleviate these public nuisances and conditions;
(4) Limiting the number of animals to not more than six (6) and requiring the
issuance of permits for additional animals exceeding six (6), will alleviate,
or at a minimum help alleviate these conditions which are deemed to be
public nuisances.
(5) The keeping of certain animals within the confines of the City in and of
itself poses a special threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the
City’s residents.
1159.02 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
A. ANIMAL - Construed in a broad sense to include not only all mammals, including
but not limited to dogs, but also birds, fish, reptiles and insects.
B. ANIMAL SHELTER - The premises, any portion of which is utilized for the
temporary harboring of lost, strayed, ill or injured animals, subject to the numerical limitations of
Section 1159.03. Temporary is defined to mean a period of time not exceeding six (6) months.
C. AT LARGE - Shall mean off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
D. DOG - Shall mean both male and female dogs.
E. FOWL - Shall mean any bird typically used for food or eggs, this includes, but is
not limited to chickens, roosters, pigeons, turkeys, geese, ducks, and peacocks.
F. EXHIBITOR - As used in this Article, shall mean any person who by contract,
agreement and/or ownership, takes responsibility for the operation of a petting zoo.
ARTICLE 1159 3
G. OFFICER - Shall mean any Police Officer and/or duly appointed Animal Control
Officer or his/her designee.
H. OWNER - Shall mean and include every person, firm or corporation having a right
of property in any animal which is kept or harbored within the City, as well as every person, firm
or corporation occupying any premises within the City which permits an animal or animals to
remain on or about its premises.
I. PERSON - Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, company, firm,
institution, trustee, estate, trust, any private entity or public entity as well as all officers, agents,
servants, employees or others acting for any of the same, and shall be taken as applying in the
singular or plural as the case may require.
J. PETTING ZOO - As used in this Article, shall mean any enclosure, area, or other
containment where an animal or animals are kept for the purpose of exhibition or education. This
definition excludes those events where no physical contact will occur between the animals and the
public, i.e. a procession or parade, or events such as a domesticated dog or cat exhibition.
1159.03 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF ANIMALS.
Except for species of fish, it shall be unlawful and it shall be deemed a public
nuisance to keep more than six (6) animals six (6) months of age or older on any premises,
regardless of the number of owners; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any
premises for which a kennel license has been obtained pursuant to the Dog Law of 1965 (3 P.S. §
460-208 et seq.), as the same may from time to time be supplemented or amended, nor shall this
section apply if a permit has been issued and is in effect pursuant to Article 1159.04 of this
ordinance.
1159.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT - MORE THAN SIX (6) ANIMALS.
A. An application for a permit for the keeping of more than six (6) animals shall have
attached thereto a registered veterinarian's health certificate for all animals on the premises,
including but not limited to those covered by the permit, shall be verified by affidavit and shall set
forth the following:
(1) The type and number of animals.
(2) The purpose of keeping such animals.
(3) The period for which the permit is requested.
(4) A description of the quarters in which the animals will be kept, including
plans and specifications thereof, where appropriate, and the facilities for
sanitation and disposal of animal wastes.
ARTICLE 1159 4
(5) The circumstances, if any, under which the animals will be removed from
their quarters.
(6) Biographical information about the applicant and any other person to be
placed in charge of the animals, with particular emphasis on the knowledge
of such persons about the animals in question and the experience of such
persons in handling the animals in question and earlier charges and/or
citations for violation of statutes and/or ordinances governing animals,
and/or health and/or safety.
(7) Such additional information as the Officer may require.
B. In addition to such verified information, the Animal Control Officer shall consider
all other relevant conditions, and may independently investigate and/or require the applicant to
submit additional information in writing, verified by affidavit, concerning but not limited to the
following:
(1) The odor emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to persons and
places off the premises.
(2) The noise emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to persons and
places off the premises.
(3) The attitudes of the applicant's neighbors to the proposed permit.
(4) The security with which the pets or creatures will be restrained.
C. All such permits for the keeping of more than six (6) animals must be renewed
annually upon resubmittal of an application of the type required in Article 1159.04-A.
1159.05 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
A. The Mayor of the City of Bethlehem shall appoint an Animal Control Officer. In
addition, the Mayor may from time to time designate a Temporary Animal Control Officer.
B. The Officer shall have the power to review or cause to be reviewed each application
for a permit and may either approve or reject such application or require modification of the
application. When the Officer has approved the application, he/she shall issue the permit. The
permit shall be personal and not transferable and shall be issued for a calendar year or part thereof.
The Mayor or the Officer shall also have the power to revoke the permit for cause.
C. The Officer shall also have the power, with the consent of the City Council, to make
such rules and regulations as he/she shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
The Animal Control Officer and/or Police Officers shall be responsible to determine whether any
person is violating any provisions of this ordinance. In making such determinations as to whether
to approve or reject an application for a permit or an application for renewal of a permit, the
ARTICLE 1159 5
Animal Control Officer and/or Police Officers shall consider whether any one or more of the
following approved standards are not complied with. The failure of the applicant to comply with or
satisfy any one or more of the requirements of Section 1159.04 or to satisfy any one or more of the
following approved standards shall constitute grounds for denial of the application as a public
nuisance:
(1) All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained.
(2) The permittee shall use every reasonable precaution to assure that the
animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any
manner made to suffer by any means.
(3) Animals which are enemies by nature or are temperamentally unsuited shall
not be quartered together or so near each other as to cause the animals fear,
or to be abused, tormented or annoyed.
(4) The permittee shall maintain the premises so as to eliminate offensive odors
or excessive noise.
(5) The permittee shall not permit any condition causing disturbance of the
peace and quiet of his/her neighbors.
(6) Animals must be maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their
escape. The permittee assumes full responsibility for recapturing any animal
that escapes from his/her premises. The permittee shall make adequate
provisions and safeguards to protect the public from the animals.
(7) Every person shall conform to all present and future laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America, the
ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and the rules and regulations that may
accompany this chapter in any way connected with animals, specifically
including anticruelty laws.
(8) Any and all animals must be kept healthy and free from sickness and disease
at all times. Should the Animal Control Officer or any Police Officer
question the health of any animals, he/she shall have the authority to require
an examination by a doctor of veterinary medicine, such examination to be
at the expense of the owner.
(9) The permittee shall be responsible and liable for the actions of all persons
employed by or otherwise associated with him/her as such actions relate to
permittee's obligation to comply with this chapter.
ARTICLE 1159 6
(10) Every owner and occupant of a structure or property shall be responsible for
the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in all areas of the
premises.
D. If the conditions presented by the application for a permit or for renewal of a permit
constitute an actual or potential public nuisance and/or a hazard and/or a danger to the public
health, safety and welfare, the application for a permit or for renewal of a permit shall be denied.
E. The Animal Control Officer and police officers of the City of Bethlehem are
authorized hereby to enter upon any premises within the City for the purpose of investigating a
possible violation of this chapter. If access is denied by the property owner, the Animal Control
Officer and/or Police Officers are authorized to submit an application for a search warrant to the
appropriate judicial authority.
F. The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall have an ongoing duty
to comply with the requirements of the approved standards set forth in Section 1159.05-C of this
ordinance.
1159.06 NUISANCES.
A. When not confined to the owner's premises, all dogs must be under the physical
control of their owner or custodian and physically restrained by a leash or other restraining device
at all times.
B. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal shall cause, suffer
or allow such animal to defecate on any sidewalk, play area, park or any place where people
congregate or walk or on any public property whatsoever or on any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply to that
portion of the street lying between the curb lines in any common thoroughfare, passageway or
bypath, which shall be used to curb such animal under the following conditions:
(1) The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such animal by any sanitary and reasonable manner.
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of in a sanitary manner by the person owning, harboring, keeping
or in charge of any animal curbed in accordance with the provisions hereof.
C. If any person is in possession or ownership of more than six (6) animals six (6)
months of age or older on any premises, and either fails to obtain a permit for the same as required
by this ordinance, or if an application for the permit is made, but the application for such permit is
denied, then in either such event a public nuisance shall be deemed to exist on such premises and
such person shall be deemed to be in violation of this ordinance. In such event, the City shall order
the possessor or owner to remove that number of animals exceeding six (6) to a location outside of
the City of Bethlehem, at the owner’s sole expense, and the possessor or owner shall provide the
City with written certification of compliance with said order.
ARTICLE 1159 7
1159.07 CATTLE, SHEEP, SWINE, GOATS, LLAMAS/ALPACAS, HORSES, AND FOWL IN
CITY PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep or maintain any cattle, sheep, swine, goats, llamas/alpacas, horses or
fowl within the City, except on properties approved for farming previous to the date of this
ordinance amendment and that meet all requirements for farming as outlined in the City of
Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance and at such other places where animals are kept for slaughtering or
for laboratory purposes which have been approved by the Bureau of Health.
1159.08 RABBITS, GUINEA PIGS AT LARGE.
Rabbits, guinea pigs shall not be allowed to run at large, but shall be confined in a suitable
building or coop with an enclosed and covered runway.
1159.09 ANIMAL COOPS TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
A building or coop in which animals are kept must be kept thoroughly clean at all times
and shall be cleaned at least once every week and more often if the Bureau of Health so requires.
All refuse or anything foul or obnoxious must be removed at least twice a week, and all coops,
pens or stables must be thoroughly disinfected at least once every week and more often if the
Bureau of Health so requires.
1159.10 DISTANCE OF ANIMAL COOPS FROM OCCUPIED
DWELLINGS; DISTANCE OF ANIMALS FROM FOOD STANDS.
No part of a building, coop or runway in which animals are kept shall be less than thirty
(30) feet from the doors or windows of any building occupied by human beings, whether for
dwelling or business purposes. In addition, no animals shall be kept less than one hundred (100)
yards from any outside temporary food stands.
1159.11 PETTING ZOOS
A. Any animal exhibitor who will be operating a petting zoo at any event within the
City must notify, in writing, the Bureau of Health no less than five (5) days before the event. This
written notification must consist of the date, time, and location of the petting zoo, the number and
species of animals that will be present, proof of insurance and proof of a USDA license, where
applicable.
B. In addition, the petting zoo must comply with the following requirements:
(1) A minimum of two (2), hand washing stations must be visible, easily
accessible and operating at all times the zoo is open to the public.
ARTICLE 1159 8
(2) A fence barrier must be constructed so as to prevent the public’s direct
contact with the animals. This barrier must be sanitized three (3) times daily
(prior to opening, midway through the event and upon closing). The
operator may be required to sanitize the fence barrier more often when
determined to be necessary by the Health Bureau.
(3) The operator of the petting zoo must have appropriate informational and
educational materials available to the public. Such materials shall inform the
participants of the petting zoo of the dangers associated with lack of hand
washing after contact with animals. This information should consist of, at a
minimum, signs and brochures.
(4) Animal containment areas must be covered with straw or an approved,
equally absorbent material. The area must be completely raked and sanitized
nightly. The operator may be required to rake and sanitize the containment
area more often when determined to be necessary by the Health Bureau.
1159.12 DOG LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall own, keep or harbor within the City any dog six months or older, unless
such dog is licensed by the Treasurer of the proper county in which the dog is kept, and unless
such dog wears a collar and license tag. This provision is not intended to apply to dogs whose
owners are nonresidents, temporarily within the City, or to dogs brought into the City for breeding,
trial or show purposes, or to any “seeing-eye” dog properly trained to assist visually impaired
persons, when such dog is actually used by a visually impaired person for the purpose of aiding
him or her in going from place to place.
1159.13 FEES.
The applicant for any permit hereunder shall, at the time of his/her application, pay to the
City of Bethlehem the following fees:
A. Animal shelters and all other permit applicants twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the
first calendar year or part thereof, renewable thereafter for a like fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) each calendar year or part thereof.
1159.14 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES PERTAINING TO ALL ANIMALS.
In addition, the Officer may institute in the name of the City of Bethlehem any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to restrain, correct or abate a
continuing violation of any provision of this chapter or any rules and regulations made pursuant
hereto.
ARTICLE 1159 9
1159.15 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES PERTAINING TO DOGS.
A. Running At Large Prohibited. No person owning or having in his custody any dog
shall permit the dog to go at large to the injury or annoyance of others, nor shall any dog be
permitted at large upon the streets or other public ways of the City. Such action is declared to be a
public nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety.
B. Impounding of Dogs Found Running At Large. It shall be the duty of the Officer,
and every police officer of the City, to seize and detain any dog, licensed or unlicensed, found
running at large, either upon the public streets or highways of the City or on the property of any
other person, and unaccompanied by an owner or keeper when such Impounding Officer or police
officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog.
C. Notice to Owner; Payment of Charges. The Officer and any police officer of the
City who has seized any dog under the provisions of this article, which does not have a proper
license affixed to its collar, shall see that the dog is properly kept and fed and shall give notice,
either personal or by registered mail, to the owner thereof, if he can be ascertained, to claim such
dog within ten days from the date of the notice. The owner of such dog so seized and detained
reclaiming the dog shall pay all expenses incurred for feeding and harboring before the dog is
returned to him, at the rate of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) per day, and the further sum of Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) to cover the cost of impounding and returning the animal to its owner.
D. Destroying of Dog. Any dog seized and detained by the Officer which has not been
claimed by its owner or sold at public or private sale, as herein provided, shall be destroyed by the
Officer in some humane manner.
E. Sale or Destroying of Unclaimed Dogs. All dogs seized and detained by the Officer
or any police officer and not reclaimed by the owner within ten days after seizure may be sold by
the Officer either at public or private sale. The proceeds shall be applied to discharge the costs of
feeding and harboring the dog, and costs of such sale and the costs and penalties herein provided.
However, no dog detained by the Officer shall be sold to anyone for the purpose of vivisection. No
dog appearing to be suffering from rabies or affected by hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or
dangerous disease shall be sold or released by the Officer, but shall forthwith be destroyed by a
humane method.
F. Running At Large of Certain Dogs. No dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious
propensities and no female dog in heat, whether licensed or not, shall be allowed to run at large or
upon the premises of one other than the owner. Whenever any such dog is found running at large
in violation of this article, it shall be taken up and impounded and shall not be released except
upon approval of the Police Commissioner after payment of the fines provided herein. Any
dangerous, fierce or vicious dog found running at large which cannot be safely taken up and
impounded may be slain by the Officer or any police officer.
ARTICLE 1159 10
1159.16 OBSERVATION FOR RABIES.
A. If any dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a dog suspected of having
rabies, such dog shall be confined by a leash or chain on the premises of the owner and shall be
placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for a period of two
weeks. The owner shall notify the Officer of the fact that his dog has been exposed to rabies. At his
discretion, the Officer is empowered to have such dog removed from the owner's premises to a
veterinary hospital and there placed under the observation of a veterinarian for a period of two
weeks at the expense of the owner.
B. No person, knowing or suspecting that his dog has rabies, shall allow such dog to be
taken off his premises or beyond the limits of the City without the written permission of the
Officer. Every person owning or harboring a dog, upon ascertaining a dog to have rabies, shall
immediately notify the Officer or a police officer, who shall either remove the dog to the pound or
summarily destroy it.
1159.17 PROCLAMATION OF HYDROPHOBIA (RABIES) BY MAYOR.
Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of hydrophobia
(rabies), the Mayor, if he deems it necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person
owning or keeping a dog to confine it securely on his premises, unless such dog shall have a
muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. Any unmuzzled dog running at large
during the time of the proclamation shall be seized and impounded, unless noticeably infected with
rabies. Any dog so noticeably infected with rabies and displaying vicious propensities may be
killed by any police officer or the Officer without notice to the owner. Any dog impounded during
the period of such proclamation shall, if claimed within ten days, be released to the owner, unless
infected with rabies, upon payment of the impounding charges provided for herein. If unclaimed
after that period, such dog may be summarily and humanely destroyed.
1159.18 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER.
A. Any person interfering with the Officer or any police officer in the enforcement of
this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance.
B. Any person who shall take away, or attempt to take away, or who shall cut or
attempt to cut the leash of any dog from the possession and custody of the Officer or any police
officer shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance.
1159.19 SEVERABILITY.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Ordinance, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance
nor the application of such clause, sentence, paragraph or part to other persons or circumstances,
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent that this Ordinance would have been adopted had such
ARTICLE 1159 11
provisions not been included or such persons or circumstances been expressly excluded from their
coverage.
1159.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00;
(b) Second violation - A fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00;
(c) Third violation - A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than
$1,000.00;
(d) Fourth and each subsequent violation - A fine of not less than $1,000.00.
(e) Each day’s failure to comply with any provision of this Article shall constitute a
separate violation.
(Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/89; Ord. 4151. Passed 11/6/02; Ord. 4238.
Passed 12/16/03; Ord. 4397. Passed 10/3/06.)
ARTICLE 1160
Wild and Exotic Animals
1160.01 Definitions.
1160.02 Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
1160.03 Permitting wild or exotic animals owned at the time of
passage of this article.
1160.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
1160.01 DEFINITIONS
1. Animal means all non-human vertebrate and invertebrate
species, whether wild or domestic, commonly considered to be part
of the animal kingdom.
2. City Official means that person or persons designated by
the Mayor to enforce the provisions of this Article. Included in
this definition are the Animal Control Officers, all other police
officers who shall have the same power to act as the Animal Control
Officer, and representatives of the Health Bureau.
3. Owner means and includes every person, firm or corporation
having a right of property in any animal which is kept harbored, or
cared for within the City of Bethlehem for a period of three (3) or
more days as well as every person, firm or corporation occupying
any premises within the City which permits any animal to remain on
or about its premises for a period of three (3) or more days.
4. Wild or Exotic Animal shall mean any animal of a species
prohibited by Title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, or otherwise
controlled by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It shall include
any animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious, or naturally
inclined to do harm.
Wild animals, however domesticated, shall also include but not
be limited to:
Amphibians: All venomous Frogs, Toads, Turtles, etc.;
Bear (Ursidae): All bears, including grizzly bears, brown
bears, black bears, etc.;
ARTICLE 1160 2
Cat Family (Felidae): All except commonly accepted domestic
cats--including lions, pumas, panthers, mountain lions, leopards,
jaguars, ocelots, margays, tigers, wild cats, etc.;
Crocodilians: All alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavials,
etc.;
Dog Family (Canidae): All except domesticated dogs--including
wolf, fox, coyote, dingo or domesticated dogs bred with a wolf,
fox, coyote, dingo, etc.;
Pig: All wild or domestic swine, etc., including Vietnamese
potbellied pigs and similar animals;
Porcupine (Erethizontidae): All porcupines, skunks, etc.;
Primates (Hominidae): All sub-human primate, etc.;
Raccoons (Procynidae): All raccoons and civets, etc.;
Reptiles: All venomous and constricting snakes; venomous
lizards, etc.;
Venomous Invertebrates: All venomous spiders, scorpions,
etc.;
Weasels (Mustelidae): All including weasels, martens, mink,
wolverine, ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mongoose, etc.
1160.02 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED
A. Wild or Exotic Animals Prohibited
No person shall keep a wild or exotic animal in any
place other than a zoological park, veterinary hospital or clinic,
humane society, or circus, sideshow, amusement show or facility
used for educational or scientific purposes, which provides proper
cages, fences and other protective devices adequate to prevent such
animal from escaping or injuring the public, or causing a health
hazard due to fecal matter, or otherwise.
B. Sale, Exchange, Adoption, Exchange or Transfer of Wild or
Exotic Animals Prohibited
No person shall sell, offer for sale, adoption, exchange
or transfer, with or without charge any wild or exotic animal.
This section is not intended to apply to person owning or
possessing wild or exotic animals prior to the passage of this
Article provided that the person or persons taking possession of
such wild or exotic animal following said sale, adoption, exchange
ARTICLE 1160 3
or transfer is/are not a resident of the City of Bethlehem.
C. Disposition and Impoundment
Any person who keeps a wild or exotic animal in
contravention of this Article must dispose of the animal by removal
of the animal from the City or by giving the animal to the City
Official. The City Official is authorized to release the animal to
the wild, to a zoological park, or to dispose of the animal in some
humane manner. Cost of removal and/or placement at a park or other
facility to be accepted by the owner.
1160.03 Permitting Wild or Exotic Animals Owned at the Time
of Passage of this Article
Any person owning or possessing a wild or exotic animal at the
time of enactment of this Article may, pending the approval of the
City Official, obtain a permit for said wild or exotic animal
provided that:
1. A permit application is filed with the Health Bureau
within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this Article.
Such application is to include:
a. Species, age and sex of said wild or exotic animal.
b. A plan for the housing and containment of said wild or
exotic animal.
2. The plan and facilities for the housing and containment of
said wild or exotic animal must be reviewed, inspected and approved
by the City Official as adequate to prevent such animal from
escaping or injuring the public. (Any changes to containment plans
or facilities already permitted must be submitted to and approved
by the City Official before such changes may be implemented.)
3. An annual permit fee of Ten Dollars ($10.00) per wild or
exotic animal shall be paid by the owner or possessor of such
animal to the Treasurer of the City of Bethlehem. Copy of permit
to be filed with the Police Department.
4. Upon the death, sale, adoption, exchange, transfer or
disposal of said wild or exotic animal, the animal may not be
replaced.
5. If wild or exotic animal is taken to any public place, the
permit for such animal must be carried by the owner/possessor.
ARTICLE 1160 4
1160.99 PENALTIES
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) First Violation - a fine of $50.00 or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second Violation - A fine of $100.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(3) Third Violation - A fine of $250.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both;
(4) Fourth and Each Subsequent Violation - A fine of $500,
or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 3822. Passed 6/3/97.)
ARTICLE 1161
Health Nuisances
1161.01 Definition.
1161.02 Establishment of protective rules.
1161.03 Toilet facilities; Separate Facilities.
1161.04 Insanitary and unfit buildings.
1161.05 Failure to abate.
1161.06 Placarding.
1161.07 Noxious Weeds defined; height restrictions; removal.
1161.08 Infestation by vectors.
1161.09 Failure to comply; cost of lien.
1161.10 Liability of property owner.
1161.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Board of Health power to abate nuisances - See 3rd Class §2324 (53 P.S. §37324)
Removal of rubbish from sidewalks - See GEN. OFF. Art. 721
1161.01 DEFINITION.
"Public or common nuisance," when used in this Article, shall be that which is set up,
maintained, continued or permitted to exist, so as to be injurious to the health, or an obstruction to the
use of property by interfering with the repose, health, safety or life of any person; whatever is
dangerous to human life or health; whatever renders the air, food, water or any drink or any product
unhealthy, dangerous or injurious to human life or health. It shall be a violation of this Article to
establish or allow such nuisance to continue to exist. The Bureau of Health shall determine when a
nuisance is being created or perpetuated. (Ord. 3033. Passed 10/22/1985.)
1161.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROTECTIVE RULES.
The Board of Health shall establish rules from time to time as may be deemed necessary for
the protection of the repose, health, comfort, safety or life of the inhabitants of the City. Such rules
shall be duly promulgated and published as provided by law, and the violation of any such rules now
or hereafter established shall be subject to the penalties provided in this Article. (1946 Code C. 13
§8.)
1161.03 TOILET FACILITIES, SEPARATE FACILITIES.
Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.
The following exceptions shall apply:
ARTICLE 1161 2
1. Separate facilities shall not be required in residential occupancies.
2. Separate employee facilities shall not be required in occupancies in which 15 or
less people are employed.
3. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total
occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 15 or less in which food
or beverage is served for consumption within the structure or tenant space.
(Ord. 3033. Passed 10/22/1985; Ord. 4088. Passed 9/4/2001.)
1161.04 INSANITARY AND UNFIT BUILDINGS.
(a) Any dwelling, business place, manufacturing establishment, storeroom, warehouse or
any building used or occupied as a dwelling or for business purposes, wherein conditions are found to
be dangerous or detrimental to the health of the occupants or employees thereof, or to the public, shall
be declared insanitary and unfit for habitation or business purposes.
(b) Any dwelling which is vacant for at least six months and has been found to be unfit
under this Article or which has been condemned for Code Violations under Article 1733, BOCA
National Property Maintenance Code, is declared to be a nuisance under this Article. (Ord. 2898.
Passed 7/5/1983.)
1161.05 FAILURE TO ABATE.
Every owner, agent, lessee, lessor or tenant who maintains or fails to abate a building declared
insanitary and unfit for habitation or business purposes after a twenty-four hours' notice from the
Bureau of Health to do so, shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this Article. (1946 Code C. 13
§11.)
1161.06 PLACARDING.
When the owner, agent, lessee, lessor or tenant of an insanitary house, dwelling, business
place, manufacturing establishment, storeroom, warehouse or any building used for dwelling or
business purposes fails to comply with the order of the Bureau of Health, the house, dwelling or
business place shall be quarantined and a placard stating the nature of the nuisance shall be posted in
a conspicuous place where it shall remain until existing conditions have been abated to the
satisfaction of a representative of the Bureau of Health. (1946 Code C. 13 §11.)
1161.07 NOXIOUS WEEDS DEFINED; HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS; REMOVAL.
(a) Definitions
“Noxious Weeds” shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other
than trees or shrubs; however this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
ARTICLE 1161 3
“Running Bamboo” means any monopodial, or “running”, woody grass that spread
variously, sending out underground runners (rhizomes) which sometimes range far
from the parent plant. The definition refers to all parts of the bamboo including the
above ground plant, its roots and rhizomes. For the purposes of enforcement of this
Article running bamboo shall be identified by the structure of growth and need not be
by biological identification.
(b) No person owning or holding real estate shall allow or maintain on any lot within the
corporate limits any growth of noxious weeds to a height over one (1) foot if such weeds are within
two hundred (200) feet of any buildings or any public right of way. Weeds cut on properties in
violation of this ordinance must be removed from the property at the time of cutting. (Ord. 3130.
Passed 7/21/1987; Ord. 4045. Passed 11/21/2000; Ord. 2017-14. Passed 4/18/2017)
(c) Any property owner or occupant who, with respect to running bamboo, plants,
grows, maintains, or allows any of the same, on the property, or who permits running bamboo to
spread from or to an adjoining property, shall be guilty of a summary offense, unless said owner
can establish to the reasonable satisfaction of the City or court that the following conditions are
met:
(1) Such running bamboo existed at its then present location prior to the
enactment of this ordinance;
(2) No part of the running bamboo and its root system is closer than 20’ from
any property line, utility easement, and public right of way;
(3) Such running bamboo shall be isolated from all other vegetation by a barrier
composed of a high density polypropylene or polyethylene, with a thickness
of at least 40 mils. The barrier shall be secured and joined together with
stainless steel clamps or stainless steel closure stripes designed to be used
with such barriers and shall be installed at least thirty (30) inches deep. At
least three (3) inches of barrier must protrude above ground level and the
barrier shall slant outward from bottom to top.
(d) Disposal of removed running bamboo plant or root system shall be done in an
ecologically sensitive manner within a sealed container.
(Ord. 2017-14. Passed 4/18/2017)
1161.08 INFESTATION BY VECTORS.
When the Bureau of Health determines that an infestation of a building by rats, roaches or
other potential disease vectors exists such as to be a health nuisance, owners of property believed to
be a source of infestation or to be affected by the infestation shall be responsible to abate such
nuisance in a manner and on a schedule prescribed by the Bureau of Health. All such nuisance
abatement shall be done by a professional exterminator, certified in restricted-use pesticides, and
acceptable to the Bureau of Health. In the event that the property owner shall fail to so act, such
ARTICLE 1161 4
property owner shall be liable for the penalties prescribed herein and the Bureau of Health shall then
cause such property to be exterminated at the owner's expense. (Ord. 3033. Passed 10/22/1985; Ord.
2016-15. Passed 6/7/2016)
1161.09 FAILURE TO COMPLY; COST OF LIEN.
Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any of the terms, provisions and
requirements of this Article, or with any notice given in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions
hereof, then the Bureau of Health is empowered and directed to engage all labor and furnish all
materials necessary or required to comply with the notice and the cost and expense thereof, together
with twenty percent, added thereon as a penalty, which shall be certified to the City Solicitor, who
shall enter the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton or
Lehigh Counties and shall proceed to collect same in like manner as other municipal claims are by
law collectible. (Ord. 3033. Passed 10/22/1985.)
1161.10 LIABILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER.
A property owner shall be equally liable with the tenant for a violation of any of the
provisions of this Article and for any expense incurred by proper authority in the abatement of any
nuisance specified by the provisions of this Article. (1946 Code C. 13 §14.)
1161.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $100.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $250.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third violation - A fine of $500.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both;
(d) Fourth and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 3033. Passed 10/22/1985; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/1989.)
ARTICLE 1162
Solid Waste Collection and Enforcement
1162.01 Definitions
1162.02 Director of Community and Economic Development to Regulate Collection Disposal
1162.03 Container Standards
1162.04 Accumulation of Solid Waste, Rubbish and Garbage
1162.05 Owner Responsibility for Solid Waste Services
1162.06 Hauler Responsibility for Solid Waste Collection
1162.07 Placement of Containers
1162.08 Preparation of Solid Waste for Collection
1162.09 Time, Frequency and Manner of Collection
1162.10 Failures to Comply; Cost Of Lien
1162.12 Liability of Owner
1162.13 Severability
1162.99 Penalties and Enforcement
CROSS REFERENCES
? Power to regulate Municipal Solid Waste Collection, Removal and Disposal - See Third
Class City Code (11 Pa.C.S. § 12409)
? Removal of rubbish from streets - See Gen. OFF. Art. 721
? Mechanical food waste disposals - See BLDG. Art. 1717
? Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management- Act 97-1980 (35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq)
? Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (Act 101)
(53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq)
? Optional Third Class City Charter Law, 901-1957 (53 P.S. § 41101 et seq)
? Board of Health power to abate nuisances - See Third Class City Code
(11 Pa.C.S. § 12300 et seq)
STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
The City of Bethlehem shall regulate the time and manner of garbage, refuse disposal and
collection within the City in an effort to prevent environmental contamination and the spread of
disease through vector and animal populations. Garbage not properly stored and collected may
feed and harbor vectors and animals that have been proven to spread diseases throughout the
City and surrounding communities. Failure to properly store the garbage may cause substances
contained within the garbage to leak, thereby contaminating the surrounding environment. The
collection of garbage shall occur as prescribed in this Article so as to preserve the health and
quality of life of residents in the City.
ARTICLE 1162 2
1162.01 DEFINITIONS.
“Approved” means approved and acceptable to the Department of Community and
Economic Development of the City of Bethlehem.
“City” means the City of Bethlehem located in the counties of Northampton and Lehigh,
Pennsylvania, a Pennsylvania Municipal Corporation.
“City limits” means the corporate limits of the City of Bethlehem
“Commercial establishment” means any group of more than four (4) dwelling units, and
establishments engaged in non-manufacturing or non-processing business, including, but not
limited to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and theaters.
“Container” means any receptacle approved by the Department of Community and
Economic Development for the storage of solid waste for collection by a hauler for disposal.
“Disposal” means the deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of solid
waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid
waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of this
Commonwealth.
“Disposal site” means any state-permitted site, facility, location, area or premises to be
used for the disposal of solid waste.
“Dwelling” means a building having one or more dwelling units.
“Dwelling unit” means a room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a single
unit and used for living and sleeping purposes, having its own cooking facilities, and a bathroom
with a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
“Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
“Grass clippings” means waste generated from the mowing and cutting of lawns, which is
placed in containers or earth bags for collection.
“Hauler” means any owner of a solid waste transportation vehicle licensed under
Pennsylvania Act 90 and holding a valid City of Bethlehem Business Privilege License.
“Hazardous waste” means any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other waste
water treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility
and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining, or agricultural operations,
and from community activities, or any combination of the above, (but does not include solid or
dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows
or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under § 402 of the Federal
ARTICLE 1162 3
Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (86 Stat. 880) or source, special nuclear, or by-product
material as defined by the U.S. Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923), which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
(1) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
(2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
The term “hazardous waste” shall not include coal refuse as defined in the act of
September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the “Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act.” “Hazardous waste” shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage
treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with
a valid permit issued pursuant to the act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
“The Clean Streams Law.”
“Industrial establishment” means any establishment engaged in manufacturing or
processing, including, but not limited to factories, foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries,
mines and slaughterhouses.
“Institutional establishment” means any establishment engaged in service, including, but
not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages, schools and universities.
“Mining” means the process of the extraction of minerals from the earth or from waste or
stockpiles or from pits or banks.
“Municipal waste” means garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom, or office waste and other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities and sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, waste water treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
The term “municipal waste” shall include rubbish.
“Pa. D.E.P.” means the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
“Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, Federal Government or agency, State institution and
agency (including, but not limited to, the Department of General Services and the State Public
School Building Authority), or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties. In the provisions of this Article pertaining to a fine,
imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term “person” shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
“Premises” means any parcel of real property in the City, including the land and all
buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements.
ARTICLE 1162 4
“Occupant” or “tenant” means a person who occupies any residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional or municipal establishment, whether or not the person is the owner
thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the owner is established by a written lease or by
other legally enforceable agreement under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
“Owner” means one or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part of
the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership.
“Public nuisance” means that which is set up, maintained, continued or permitted to exist,
so as to be injurious to the public health, or an obstruction to the use of property by interfering
with the repose, health, safety or life of any person; whatever is dangerous to human life or
health; whatever renders the air, food, water, drink, or any product unhealthy, dangerous or
injurious to human life or health. It shall be a violation of this Article to establish or allow such
nuisance to continue to exist. The Bureau of Health shall determine when a nuisance is being
created or perpetuated.
“Recycling” means the collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass,
paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal
waste.
“Recyclable materials” means all materials as described in Article 933 of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
“Residential establishment” means any dwelling of no more than four (4) dwelling units.
“Residual waste” means any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or other waste,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, mining
and agricultural operations and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water
supply treatment facility, waste water treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided
that it is not hazardous. The term “residual waste” shall not include coal refuse as defined in the
act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318), known as the “Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act”. The term “residual waste” shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage
treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid
permit issued pursuant to the act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the “Clean
Streams Law.”
“Roll-off container” means a large container, which is placed by a hauler for the purpose
of accumulating waste and which is then picked up and rolled on a specially framed truck rack in
its entirety and transported to and emptied at a disposal site.
“Rubbish” means waste materials other than garbage. The term “rubbish” shall include
the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other
similar materials.
ARTICLE 1162 5
“Solid waste” means any waste, including but not limited to, municipal, residual or
hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials. The term
“solid waste” does not include coal ash or drill cuttings as those terms are defined in 35 P.S. §
6018.13.
“Storage” or “store” means the containment of any solid waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed that the
containment of any solid waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can
be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
“Transportation” or “transport” means the offsite removal of any solid waste at any time
after generation.
“Yard waste” means leaves, garden residue, shrubbery, tree trimmings and similar
materials excluding grass clippings.
1162.02 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO
REGULATE COLLECTION DISPOSAL.
The Director of Community and Economic Development or his or her designee shall, to
the fullest extent permitted by law, formulate and regulate all aspects of the collection,
transportation and disposal of solid waste from the point of origin to the point of disposal. The
Director shall formulate and promulgate rules and regulations necessary to implement all aspects
of the minimum standards to be observed for the collection, transportation and disposal of solid
waste. Such standards shall be observed and in force by all haulers and shall be filed in the
Office of the City Clerk and the Department of Community and Economic Development. Any
violation of any rule or regulation formulated and promulgated by the Director pursuant to this
Article 1162.02 shall be deemed a violation of this Article.
1162.03 CONTAINER STANDARDS.
The Director of Community and Economic Development or his or her designee shall
formulate standards for the size and types of containers which shall be approved for use under
the provisions of this Article and shall have jurisdiction of waste stream to the point where the
waste is placed in a hauler’s vehicle. No person shall store solid waste in containers other than
containers approved by the Director of Community and Economic Development, or his or her
designee. At a minimum, all containers must be composed of a rigid material and leak proof,
with tight fitting lids to prevent scavenging by animals.
1162.04 ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTE, RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
(a) Owners shall maintain their premises free from any solid waste, garbage, rubbish,
and debris except for that which is properly prepared and stored in compliance with this Article.
ARTICLE 1162 6
(b) Every occupant of any premises shall dispose of all solid waste in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such waste in approved containers, which shall be collected in
compliance with this Article.
(c) Every occupant of any premises shall maintain the interior and exterior thereof to
a level of sanitation whereas a public nuisance does not occur.
(d) No person shall place or store any furniture, materials or other similar products
designed, built or manufactured exclusively for indoor living use on exterior porches, in yards or
any part of the exterior of a premises. The storage or placement of automobile car seats and other
non-weather resistant materials shall also be prohibited.
(e) Burning. No person shall ignite, cause, feed, permit or maintain any fire for the
destruction or disposal of solid waste, yard waste or grass clippings on or in any premises or
structure.
(f) Disposal of Yard Waste. All persons shall keep yard waste separate from all
other forms of solid waste. Leaves shall be collected by the City in the fall of each year and shall
be disposed of at a designated City facility, operated in accordance with any applicable
regulations of the Pa.D.E.P. Yard waste will be collected by the City twice a year at curbside.
Residents may also use the designated City facility.
(g) Grass Clippings. Grass clippings are not permitted to be disposed of with yard
waste or solid waste. All grass clippings are to be mulched into the yard from which they were
collected.
(h) Any articles found within a waste container, recycling container or garbage bag
displaying the name or address of a person or persons shall be presumed to be the property of
such person or persons. The presumption may be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to
the contrary.
(i) Owners of commercial, industrial, municipal and institutional establishments shall
store any solid waste generated at the establishment in the same manner and in the same types of
containers as are approved for residential establishments except where the accumulation of solid
waste makes the use of such containers impracticable, in which case the owner shall make
special arrangements with a hauler for the storing of additional quantities of solid waste. If, to
accommodate the additional quantities of solid waste, the hauler intends to provide the owner
with a dumpster, the dumpster must be approved by the Director of Community and Economic
Development or his or her designee prior to being placed in use. At a minimum, the dumpster
and location of the dumpster must meet zoning and public right-of-way requirements, including
any requirements set forth in Article 721 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem,
and shall have a lid which must remain closed except when solid waste is being added to or
removed from the dumpster.
(j) No person other than a hauler, owner or authorized agent thereof may place or
remove any article from any container in which solid waste is stored. The solid waste container
ARTICLE 1162 7
shall be kept clean and in good repair. In the event of contract termination, it shall be the
responsibility of the hauler servicing the container to empty and remove it, at the hauler’s cost
and expense.
(k) Owners of premises shall comply with the requirements of this Article 1162.04 by
establishing a collection system for solid waste at the premises. It is the owner’s responsibility
to ensure that the collection system includes proper and adequate containers for collecting and
storing waste, easily accessible locations for the containers, and written instructions to each
occupant of any commercial, municipal, industrial or institutional establishment concerning the
use and availability of the collection system. All written instructions shall be available for
review and approved by the Director of Community and Economic Development, or his
designee.
1162.05 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR SOLID WASTE SERVICES.
(a) Owners shall be responsible for preventing accumulation of solid waste on their
premises and for violations of City ordinances or regulations dealing with storage of solid waste.
All owners shall provide for solid waste collection services by a hauler. The responsibility
imposed upon owners by this Article 1162.05 may not be satisfied by delegation to tenants,
lessees, householders, or any other person.
(b) Pursuant to Article 1739.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem,
every owner who is not a full-time resident of the City or who does not reside within a twenty
(20) mile radius of the City shall designate a manager who shall reside in an area that is within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the City. The designation of the manager shall comply with Article
1739.02(B) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
(c) Upon probable cause that an owner has failed to provide for solid waste collection
services in violation of subsection (a), the owner shall, within 72 hours of a request to do so,
provide the City with written confirmation that, as of the date of the City’s request, the owner
had retained a hauler for solid waste collection services.
1162.06 HAULER RESPONSIBILITY FOR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
(a) If at any time a hauler contracted to perform solid waste collection services at any
premises within the City misses the contracted collection date, it is the responsibility of the
hauler to make immediate alternate removal arrangements so as to prevent the occurrence of a
public health nuisance or violation of this Article.
(b) It shall be a violation of this Article for any hauler of solid waste or any kind of
waste, including residual and hazardous waste, to transport such waste within the City limits in
an environmentally unsafe manner.
(c) All open vehicles, containers transported in open vehicles and all roll-off
containers used in the transportation of municipal waste, solid waste, residual waste or recyclable
materials will be tightly tarped or covered at all times during transportation.
ARTICLE 1162 8
(d) Any hauler transporting solid waste shall prevent and remedy any spillage from
its vehicles and containers.
(e) Vehicles or containers shall not be overfilled, and shall be cleaned at sufficiently
frequent intervals to prevent obnoxious odors or unhealthy conditions. Vehicles shall be so
constructed, loaded and driven as to prevent any portion of the load from falling out upon any
street, highway or property.
(f) Any industrial or commercial establishment located in the City using its own or
leased vehicle(s) to haul or transport solid waste or any other kind of waste from its
establishment to a landfill or any other disposal location shall provide copies of weight slips for
the most recent two (2) quarters to the City within 72 hours of a request to do so.
1162.07 PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.
(a) No owner, lessee, tenant, householder or any other person shall deposit, throw,
place or cause to be deposited, thrown or placed, any solid waste on any street, private alley or
vacant lot, public areas and waterways, both natural and man-made, within the City limits.
(b) Containers may be stored anywhere on a premises except:
(1) No container shall be stored in the front of any building on the premises
unless the building is located in an area where there is no access to the rear
or sides by way of easement or public right-of-way. In such a situation,
the container shall be stored on a porch, if possible, to remove it from the
public right-of-way. If a container is stored on the porch, the owner is
responsible for minimizing smell and preventing the existence of a public
nuisance.
(2) No containers shall be stored more than five feet from the front, rear or
sides of a building, except as provided in Article 1162.08(d).
(3) No person shall store containers for solid waste, ashes, rubbish, manure or
garbage on any street, private alley, public right of way or vacant lot.
1162.08 PREPARATION OF SOLID WASTE FOR COLLECTION.
(a) Occupants of residential, commercial, municipal, industrial and institutional
establishments shall deposit all solid waste accumulated within the establishment since the
previous collection of solid waste in containers approved by the Director of Community and
Economic Development or his or her designee.
(b) No solid waste shall be placed in any container unless the solid waste has been
thoroughly drained of all excessive moisture
(c) Solid waste must be contained in a primary collection bag prior to placement into
an approved container. Placement of loose and unwrapped solid waste into a container, without
ARTICLE 1162 9
primary containment through the use of garbage bags or similar materials, is a violation of this
Article. With prior approval from the City Department of Health, rubbish not fitting into an
approved container shall be tightly bundled, with the maximum length of the bundle not to
exceed three feet and the maximum width not to exceed three feet, and shall be stored in the
manner set forth in Article 1162.07.
(d) No earlier than 6:00 PM on the day preceding a collection day, containers may be
placed anywhere on the property except that they cannot be placed within 5 feet of the public
right of way. Containers shall be returned to a place no more than five feet from the front, rear
or sides of a building no later than 8:00 PM on the collection day.
1162.09 TIME, FREQUENCY AND MANNER OF COLLECTION.
(a) Solid waste collection shall be on a six (6) day per week basis (Monday through
Saturday) and shall take place between the hours of 5:00 AM and 4:00 PM on south side of the
City, and between the hours of 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM on the north side of the City.
(b) Solid waste collection from commercial, municipal, industrial and institutional
establishments may be on a seven (7) day per week basis and shall take place between the hours
of 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM, except that Sunday collection shall only take place between the hours
of 8:00 AM and 12:00 Noon.
(c) After a hauler collects solid waste from a container, it shall promptly return the
container to the point of pickup. Any hauler who does not return a container to the point of
pickup or leaves waste lying on a right-of-way or private property, shall be subject to the
penalties under this Article. A hauler shall also gather, collect and remove, within four hours of
notification by the City Bureau of Health, all waste which, by accident or otherwise, may have
been placed or fallen on the sidewalk, street or highway by such hauler.
1162.10 FAILURES TO COMPLY; COST OF LIEN.
Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any of the terms, provisions and
requirements of this Article, or with any notice given in conformity with or pursuant to the
provisions hereof, then the Director of Community and Economic Development, or his or her
designee, is empowered and directed to engage all labor and furnish all materials necessary or
required to comply with the notice and the cost and expense thereof, together with twenty
percent, added thereon as a penalty, which shall be certified to the City Solicitor, who shall enter
the same as a lien against the property in the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton or Lehigh
Counties and shall proceed to collect it in like manner as other municipal claims are by law
collectible.
1162.12 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
An owner shall be equally liable with any tenant for a violation of any of the provisions
of this Article and for any expense incurred by proper authority in the abatement of any nuisance
specified by the provisions of this Article.
ARTICLE 1162 10
1162.13 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Article is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
1162.99 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the
following penalties:
(1) First Violation - A fine of $200, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(2) Second Violation - A fine of $500, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(3) Third and Subsequent Violations - A fine of $1,000, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Each continuing day of violation of this Article shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) The Director of Community and Economic Development is hereby granted the
power to designate those having the power to enforce this Article and issue citations.
(Article 1162 established by Ord. 2016-14, Passed 6/7/2016)
ARTICLE 1163
On-Site Sewerage Systems
1163.01 Permit Required
1163.02 Application And Permit Fee
1163.03 Installation After Testing And Approval
1163.04 Application And Fee For System Repair
1163.05 Fees Not Refundable
1163.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Sewage disposal standards - See 25 Pa. Code §73.1 et seq.
Site investigation and absorption - See 25 Pa. Code §73.61 et seq.
Holding tanks - See 25 Pa. Code §73.81 et seq.
Accessible premises to connect to sanitary sewer - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 921
Privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank prohibited - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 921
1163.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall have authority to install an on-site sewerage system or
make repairs to an on-site sewerage system without first obtaining a permit
from the City Sewerage Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 3034 Passed
10/22/85.)
1163.02 APPLICATION AND PERMIT FEE.
(a) Application for a permit shall be made to the City Sewerage
Enforcement Officer. The permit fee shall be one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) which shall cover all services provided by the Health
Bureau including:
(1) Application processing;
(2) Permit issuance;
(3) Site survey;
(4) Verification of slope reading, test pit analysis and
percolation testing;
ARTICLE 1163 2
(5) Final inspection of system.
(Ord. 4093. Passed 11/20/2001)
(b) The applicant shall be responsible for engaging a qualified person to:
(1) Measure the slope;
(2) Perform soil test pit analysis;
(3) Conduct percolation tests;
(4) Design the proposed system.
All tests must be witnessed and results verified by the City Sewerage
Enforcement Officer. Tests must be performed by a person with appropriate
experience and training in on-site sewerage systems and acceptable to the
Bureau of Health. (Ord. 3034. Passed 10/22/85.)
1163.03 INSTALLATION AFTER TESTING AND APPROVAL.
No work on installing the on-lot system shall be started until all tests
have been conducted and final clearance obtained from the Sewerage
Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 2518 §1. Passed 5/18/76.)
1163.04 APPLICATION AND FEE FOR SYSTEM REPAIR.
No repairs shall be made to an on-site sewerage system without a
permit. The permit application fee shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
System design changes made as part of a repair or other modification of the
system shall only be made by a qualified person acceptable to the Bureau of
Health. No repairs or modifications may be covered or put into use until
final approval is obtained from the City Sewerage Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. 3034. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 4093. Passed 11/20/2001)
1163.05 FEES NOT REFUNDABLE.
Permit fees shall not be refundable. (Ord. 2518 §1. Passed 5/18/76.)
1163.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
ARTICLE 1163 3
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3034 Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242
Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 1165
The Regulation of Day Care Centers
1165.01 Authorization
1165.02 Definitions
1165.03 Staff-Child Ratio
1165.04 Facilities
1165.05 Child Health
1165.06 Staff Health
1165.07 Food Service
1165.08 Plan Review
1165.09 Registration
1165.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
Act 315 of 1951 (16 P.S. §12001-12028)
Retail Food Store Sanitation Code - See HLTH. Art. 1114
1165.01 AUTHORIZATION.
The Bureau of Health is hereby authorized and instructed to develop
and implement a program of registration and inspection of day care facilities
under these regulations. Providers shall make available such information in
their possession concerning care recipients or staff members to the Bureau
upon request. This shall not be interpreted to include information on client
socioeconomic status, costs to clients, or other information not related to
health or safety. Representatives of the Bureau may at any reasonable time
interview or examine for illness or require to be examined any care recipient
or staff member or inspect any facility. Inspection shall be conducted of each
facility at least twice per year. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) Child. Child is a person under 16 years of age.
(b) Day Care Center. Day Care Center is a facility in which care is
provided for seven or more children at any one time. This shall include for
the purposes of these regulations variants such as night care, adult day care,
school extended programs, drop-in care, and so on.
ARTICLE 1165 2
(c) Developmental Level. Developmental Level is the grouping
category appropriate for the child's developmental progress. The following
are approximate age ranges corresponding to developmental levels. Any
child in these approximate age ranges may be placed in another
developmental level if determined by the facility staff and the parent to be
more appropriate for the child's developmental progress.
(1) Infant is a child approximately 0-18 months of age.
(2) Toddler is a child approximately 18-36 months of age.
(3) Preschooler is a child approximately 36 months of age
to approximately the date the child initially enters the
first grade of a public or private school system.
(4) School age child is a child from approximately the date
the child initially enters the first grade of a public or
private school system to 16 years of age.
(d) Direct Caregiving Staff. Direct Caregiving Staff are those persons
who are at a given time providing direct care and supervision to children,
implementing daily program activities, and interacting with the children. In
general, direct caregiving staff includes group supervisors, assistant group
supervisors, and aides.
(e) Facility. Facility is a single-site day care center.
(f) Parent. Parent is the biological or adoptive mother or father or the
legal guardian of the child.
(g) Provider. Provider is a public or private organization or individual
who for profit or not-for-profit delivers day care service for children, either
directly or through contract. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.03 STAFF-CHILD RATIO.
The ratios of direct caregiving staff physically present with the
children at any one time to children shall conform to standards of the
Department of Public Welfare. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
ARTICLE 1165 3
1165.04 FACILITIES.
(a) Each facility shall have minimum of 40 square feet (372 square
decimeters) of indoor space for each child, measured wall to wall inclusive
of space occupied by cupboards, shelves, furniture, and equipment, but
exclusive of hails, bathrooms, offices, kitchens, locker rooms, and related
areas.
(b) If there are unsafe areas, such as open drainage ditches, wells,
holes, or heavy street traffic, in or near an outdoor play space, there shall be
fencing or natural barriers to restrict children from these areas.
(c) The indoor and outdoor play space areas where the children are
being cared for shall not be used for any other business, commercial, or
social purpose when the children are present in these areas.
(d) The same area shall not be used for sleeping/napping and play at
the same time.
(e) Each facility shall have a minimum of 1 toilet for each 15 toilettrained
children below school age and 1 sink for each 25 children below
school age. Each facility shall have a minimum of 1 toilet for each 20
school-age children and 1 sink for each 30 school-age children.
(f) Training chairs shall not be used except as approved by the Bureau
for physically or mentally impaired children.
(g) Toilets and sinks shall be at proper heights for children using them
or shall be easily approached by means of platforms or steps.
(h) All toilets shall be located in rooms separate from those used for
cooking, playing, sleeping, or eating. They must be in close proximity to the
space used by the children and should be on the same floor. When they
cannot be on the same floor, an adult must accompany children going to and
from the toilet area, with the exception of school-age children.
(i) Toilet rooms and fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair.
Toilet rooms shall have easily cleanable waste receptacles and in toilet
rooms used by adult women, receptacles shall have lids and liners.
(j) All toilet rooms accessible to children age two or under shall have
doors which are self closing.
ARTICLE 1165 4
(k) When children are diapered, the facility shall use disposable
diapers, a recognized diaper service, or arrange with the parent(s) to provide
a daily diaper supply.
(1) When the parent(s) provides non-disposable diapers, soiled diapers
shall immediately and without rinsing be put in a securely tied plastic bag
and returned to the parent(s) at the end of the day. When non-disposable
diapers are provided by a recognized diaper service, soiled diapers shall be
placed immediately in the container provided by their service or in a
securely tied plastic bag.
(m) When disposable diapers are used, soiled diapers shall be
disposed of immediately into an outside trash disposal or put in a securely
tied plastic bag and discarded outdoors until outside disposal is possible.
(n) Diaper changing surfaces shall be cleaned after each use by
washing or by changing a pad or disposable sheeting and sanitized or
covered for such use.
(o) All toilet room and diaper change areas shall have immediately
adjacent handwashing facilities including a sink, soap dispensers and
materials for drying hands.
(p) Each facility shall have hot and cold running water. Hot water,
in areas accessible to children, shall not exceed 110° F (43° C).
(q) When not in use electrical outlets shall be capped in such a
manner as to cover openings securely.
(r) All facilities shall conform to City Fire and Building Codes as they
relate to means of egress. Facilities or rooms used during hours of darkness
shall have in the room an operable flashlight or similar source of emergency
light.
(s) Emergency evacuation plan shall be posted on each floor in use as
a day care facility.
(t) Sufficient heat shall be provided such that air temperatures 3 feet
from any wall are not less than 65 ° F.
ARTICLE 1165 5
(u) A smoke detector shall be present and functioning on each floor of
the building in use as a day care facility in activity areas. An additional
smoke detector shall be in use in any room utilized for sleeping purposes.
(v) An operable fire extinguisher or extinguishing system shall be
available in all day care facilities. Such extinguisher(s) shall be of a size and
number recommended by the Fire Department and shall be inspected as
recommended by the Fire Department. Day care operators shall be familiar
with the use of such equipment.
(w) No electrical device or apparatus shall be in use in such manner
that it could potentially be both plugged into an electrical outlet and in
contact with a tub, shower area, or swimming pool at the same time.
(x) If paint or plastic on any surface which is accessible to children is
peeled or damaged, it shall be repaired immediately.
(y) When surfaces are repaired or any new surfaces which will be
accessible to children are painted, no paint containing lead in excess of .06%
shall be used.
(z) Poisonous plants shall not be permitted in the facility.
(aa) There shall be no smoking, cigarettes, pipes, cigars, butts, or
ashes in the child care areas or in the food preparation areas while the
children are present in the facility.
(bb) All floors, walls, ceilings and other surfaces shall be kept clean
and in good repair.
(cc) All stairs used by the children shall have right hand descending
handrails and be illuminated by natural or artificial light. Landings or gates
shall be provided beyond each exterior and interior door which opens into a
stairway. Gates or other protective devices shall be used at the top and
bottom of all stairs of more than three risers or at entrance/exits of all rooms
occupied by children.
(dd) Where glass is used in traffic areas, a visual strip or other visual
identification shall be provided so that the glass is noticeable.
ARTICLE 1165 6
(ee) Rooms utilized by children shall have openable window areas
equal to at least 5% and total window area of at least 10% of the floor area
of the room except for toilet rooms and kitchens. Rooms without windows
shall be provided with mechanical ventilation.
(ff) All windows above ground level in areas used by children under
school-age shall be constructed, adapted or adjusted to limit the exit opening
to less than 6 inches (15 centimeters) to prevent children from falling. All
windows shall be screened to prevent entry of insects.
(gg) Hot water pipes and other sources of heat accessible to children
exceeding 110° F (43° C) shall be equipped with protective guard or
insulated to prevent children from coming into direct contact with them.
(hh) No free-standing space heaters shall be used. Space heaters that
are fixtures shall be equipped with protective guards to prevent children
from coming into direct contact with them. Fireplaces shall be securely
screened. All facilities shall have available an acceptable source of central
heat.
(ii) Toys, play equipment, and any other equipment used by the
children shall be of substantial construction and free from rough edges,
sharp corners, pinch and crush points, splinters, exposed bolts, and
unguarded ladders on slides.
(jj) Toys and objects with a diameter of less than 1 inch (2.5 centimeters),
objects with removable parts that have a diameter of less than 1 inch (2.5
centimeters), plastic bags, and styrofoam objects shall not be accessible to
children who are still placing objects in their mouths.
(kk) Outdoor equipment, such as climbing apparatus, slides, and
swings, shall be anchored firmly, in good repair, and placed in a safe
location. Slides more than 4 feet in height shall have guard rails on each
side.
(ll) All swimming pools shah meet Department of Environmental
Resources or local Health Department standards. All in-ground swimming
pools located in the outdoor play space area or accessible to children shall be
fenced with a locked gate. When children are swimming, supervision shall
include at all times at least I person certified in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and Red Cross Advanced Life Saving or an equivalent
certificate by a recognized agency. All staff, volunteers, and other adults
ARTICLE 1165 7
who are counted in the adult-child ratio for swimming shall receive basic
water safety instructions from the person certified in lifesaving. The adultchild
ratio when children are swimming shall meet the Department of Public
Welfare Standards.
(mm) Portable wading pools shall be permitted if they are emptied
and cleaned daily. All children, including school-age children, shall be
directly supervised at all times when wading. Equipment shall be available
to test for and maintain a measurable residual chlorine content in the water.
(n) Furniture shall be durable, safe, easily cleanable, and appropriate
to the child's size, age, and disability, if any.
(oo) High chairs, when used, shall have a wide base and means of
adequately securing the child in the chair.
(pp) Each child, except school-age children who do not take naps,
shall have individual clean, age-appropriate rest equipment, such as a crib,
cot, bed, mat, or bedding which shall be labeled with the child's name and
used only by the child while enrolled in the program. Seasonably appropriate
top and bottom covering, such as sheets or blankets, shall be provided.
(qq) At least 2 feet (6 decimeters) of space shall be provided between
beds, cots, cribs, or other rest equipment while in use. Placement of care
recipients shall be foot-to-head in orientation.
(rr) Linens, blankets, mats, and bedding shall be cleaned at least
weekly. Cribs, cots, beds, and mattresses shall be cleaned thoroughly with a
cleaning agent at least monthly. Linens shall not be transferred from the use
of one care recipient to another without first being laundered.
(ss) Each child shall have a separate clean towel and wash cloth.
Paper towels are acceptable for use as both towels and wash cloths. Soap
dispeners shall be available for use.
(tt) All carpeting, wails, toys, and other surfaces shall be maintained
in reasonably clean condition.
(uu) Thermometers shall be cleaned after each use.
(vv) Sandboxes outdoors shall be covered when not in use in such
manner as to prevent entry of animals.
ARTICLE 1165 8
(ww) Crib and playpen slats shall not be separated by spaces greater
than 2-3/8".
(xx) There shall be no visible signs or evidence of rodent or insect
infestation. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.05 CHILD HEALTH.
(a) Telephone numbers of the nearest hospital, police department, fire
department, ambulance, and poison control center shall be posted by each
telephone.
(b) No prescription medication shall be given to a child without a
physician's current (period of time specified on instructions), written
instructions and written consent from the child's parent(s). Prescription
medication shall only be dispensed to children by the administrator, director,
group supervisor or person with equivalent qualifications under the
regulations of the Commonwealth. Non-prescription medications shall not
be administered without specific written permission of the parent(s).
(c) A provider who accepts responsibility for administration of
medication shall assure proper labeling of medication and record dose and
times administered, medication, and person administering in a log.
(d) All medication in the facility shall be kept in a place inaccessible
to children. All medications shall be kept in their original containers, labeled
with the original prescription label, and have safety lock closures on the
containers. All medications requiring refrigeration shall be refrigerated at the
proper temperature.
(e) All medicines, drugs, cleaning materials, detergents, aerosol cans,
and other poisonous and toxic materials shall be stored in their original
containers and used in such a way that shall not contaminate play surfaces,
food, food preparation areas, or constitute a hazard to the children. Such
materials shall be kept from child care areas, food and food preparation
areas.
(f) The day care staff shall have the option to deny care to ill children
on any given day, or, to request that a child be removed from the facility if
the child is determined by the day care staff to be too ill to remain in care.
The parent(s) shall always be notified when a child becomes ill while in
ARTICLE 1165 9
care. If the day care staff decided that a child is too ill to remain in the
facility for the remaining period of the day, the day care staff shall notify the
parent(s) upon receiving the child that care will not be provided. When a
facility allows admission of ill children, a plan for care of such children shall
be arranged with the parent(s) to assure that the needs of the child for rest,
attention, and administration of prescribed medication, if applicable, are met.
Contact with the parent(s) and the child's source of health care for purposes
of consultation shall be readily available to the day care staff.
In the absence of a registered professional nurse, day care centers
shall not accept for care nor maintain in care children who have or are
suspected of having one or more of the following conditions: conjunctivitis,
ringworm (untreated and uncovered), herpes (not covered or crusted),
scabies, lice, diarrhea, axillary temperature greater than 100° F, oral
temperature greater than 101°F, rectal temperature greater than 102° F,
cough with fever, rash with fever, rash with upper respiratory infection,
chicken pox or shingles (uncrusted or less than 7 days old), impetigo or
draining skin lesion, repeated or projectile vomiting.
A client so excluded may be readmitted with proof of examination by
a physician stating that such person has been examined and is not/is no
longer a significant threat of infection. Alternatively, a fully documented
phone call from the physician or his/her agent to the director of the facility is
also acceptable. Either documentation shall be retained by the day care
center for one year in the child's health file. Persons readmitted must be
exhibiting behavior normal for their age and may not, under any
circumstances, be readmitted with a continuing combination of diarrhea and
fever. Children excluded may be readmitted without examination after
symptoms are gone.
If children with any of the above conditions are accepted or
maintained in care, the nurse shall have sole authority to make decisions
regarding isolation of care recipients, need for emergency treatment, and
other matters relating to the care of sick persons and the prevention of the
spread of disease. Facilities which do not have a registered professional
nurse present in the facility shall, upon observing signs of illness in a care
recipient, return such person to the care of his/her parent or deliver such
person into the care of a medical professional. Day care centers which retain
ill children shall have an area for isolating them which is acceptable to the
Bureau.
ARTICLE 1165 10
(g) Each child care area shall have a first aid kit, which is kept in a
place inaccessible to children. The first aid kit shall contain the following:
soap, an assortment of adhesive bandages, sterile gauze pads, tweezers, tape,
scissors, and syrup of ipecac. An adequate number of first aid kits shall be
taken on trips, with the exception of neighborhood excursions.
(h) At least 1 individual competent in first aid techniques including
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and anti-choking shall be present with
the children whenever the children are in care. Competence shall be satisfied
by successful completion of training provided by a public or private health
professional.
(i) Any pet or animal present at the facility, indoors or outdoors, shall
be in good health, show no evidence of carrying disease, and be a friendly
companion for the children. This shall also apply to those pets or animals
present at the facility which do not belong to the provider. All dogs and cats
present in the facility shall have their health status reevaluated at least every
six months by a licensed veterinarian with the written report available at the
facility. This evaluation shall include stool analysis and culturing capable of
detecting all common zoonotic microorganisms and parasites. Exotic or wild
animals including turtles, shall not be permitted. Exotic animals shall
include those animal varieties whose members exist principally in zoos
and/or in the wild.
(j) Children shall be restrained during travel in a vehicle as
required by the Commonwealth.
(k) The provider shall submit a report to the Bureau of Health within 24
hours of any accident resulting in injuries to a care recipient if those injuries are
such as to require treatment by a physician. The report shall provide information
as to the nature of the injury, treatment provided, and names of the injured party
and physician. The facility shall also report fires requiring the services of the
Fire Department. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.06 STAFF HEALTH.
(a) All staff, including temporary and substitute employees and
volunteers who serve on a regular basis, who come into contact with the
children, or who work with food preparation, shall have a health appraisal
within 3 months prior to providing initial day care service and annually
thereafter. Health appraisals shall be certified by a licensed physician. The
health appraisal shall include:
ARTICLE 1165 11
(1) A physical examination;
(2) Tuberculosis screening and follow-up which assures freedom
from communicable TB (screening required only every 2 years);
(3) Detection of chronic diseases that require medication or
restriction of activity; and
(4) Any information noting any special medical problem which
would interfere with the health of the children or prohibit the individual
from providing adequate care for the children.
If day care employment or service to children is interrupted or
sporadic during the year, 1 annual health appraisal shall be sufficient as long
as the health appraisal is performed 3 months prior to providing initial day
care service.
(b) When suspicion arises that any staff or volunteer has a
communicable disease of a serious nature, such as strep throat, salmonella or
conjunctivitis, an immediate examination and recommendation by a licensed
physician shall be required. Health precautions as recommended by the
licensed physician shall be taken to assure the health of the children. The
Bureau of Health shall have the authority to exclude from employment any
individual suspected of having a disease in a communicable form until
evidence is available satisfactory to the Bureau that the individual is not a
significant threat of infection to others.
(c) Any staff or volunteer who has a discharging or infected wound,
sore or lesion on hands, arms, or any exposed portion of the body, shall be
excluded from those operations which will bring him/her into contact with
food, beverages, utensils or equipment used in the facility's eating or
drinking places, and infant and child care.
(d) Staff with cold sores (herpes) infections shall not be permitted to
care for infants under 3 months of age.
(e) Staff shall wash their hands thoroughly after using the toilet or
contacting the secretory/excretory products of the children. (Ord. 3017 §2.
Passed 9/17/85.)
ARTICLE 1165 12
1165.07 FOOD SERVICE.
(a) All food service facilities shall conform to the Food Service
Sanitation Code of the City of Bethlehem. Food brought with the day care
recipient shall be stored, reheated, or otherwise handled in a manner
consistent with the requirements of the Code.
(b) Except for facilities which have only one adult present, persons
responsible for diapering activities with children not toilet-trained shall not
also prepare food. This shall not, however, prevent such persons from
serving food.
(c) Diapering or toilet areas shall not also be used a food preparation
areas. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.08 PLAN REVIEW.
All new or substantially remodeled day care facilities must submit
plans acceptable to the Health Bureau prior to construction. Such plans shall
be reviewed on the basis of health, fire, zoning and other City Ordinances
and Codes. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.09 REGISTRATION.
All day care centers shall be registered with the Bureau of Health as to
location, enrollment, and ownership. (Ord. 3017 §2. Passed 9/17/85.)
1165.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242
Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 1167
Lead Poison Control
1167.01 Definitions
1167.02 Inspections
1167.03 Determination of Health Hazard
1167.04 Notice of Health Hazard
1167.05 Examination of Children
1167.06 Abatement of Health Hazard
1167.07 Protection of Occupants
1167.08 Severability
1167.09 Remedy
1167.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCE
1167.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this
Article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) The City of Bethlehem Bureau of Health or any successor
department or agency, or any authorized representative thereof,
shall be the "enforcement authority" hereunder.
(b) "Chewable surface" shall include, but not be limited to,
such surfaces as windows, window sills, window frames, doors, door
frames, handrails, toys, furniture, food utensils and other
appurtenances offering a biting surface to a child or other persons
who have demonstrated an evidence of lead poisoning.
(c) "Dwelling" means a building or structure occupied or
designed or intended to be occupied as a place for human habitation
or use, or any part thereof, including an accessory building or
structure belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and any
institutional structure used for the care of or frequented by
children, such as a day care center.
(d) "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms with provision
for cooking, living, sleeping, and sanitary facilities, or any part
thereof, arranged for the use of one or more human occupants.
(e) "Elevated blood level," confirmed by venous sample, shall
mean the level defined by the Centers for Disease Control as
requiring environmental intervention.
ARTICLE 1167 2
(f) "Emergency" shall be defined as any case where a
physician examining a person deems the blood lead level of the
person to be high enough to require chelation of the person.
(g) "Exposed surface" means all interior surfaces of a
dwelling or dwelling unit and those exterior surfaces of a dwelling
or dwelling unit which are readily accessible to children under six
(6) years of age, or other persons who have demonstrated an
evidence of lead poisoning. Such surfaces include but are not
limited to stairs, decks, porches, railings, windows, doors and
siding from ground level to a vertical distance of five (5) feet.
Any peeling paint or friction surface constitutes an exposed
surface. Such surfaces on appurtenant structures such as garages,
garden sheds, fences or other painted surfaces are also considered
exposed surfaces.
(h) "Lead-based coatings requiring abatement" means any
paint, varnish, glaze or other applied liquid surface coating and
putty or plaster which contains a quantity of lead equal to or
greater than one-half of one percent (0.5%) by weight or 1.0 mg/cm2
as measured by an x-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF).
(i) "Occupant" means any person living, sleeping, cooking,
eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit.
(j) "Operator" means any person who has charge, care or
control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units are
let.
(k) "Owner" means a holder of legal title to the premises,
whether alone or jointly with others, and whether in possession or
not.
(l) "Premises" means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including
all facilities and improvements thereon.
(m) "Surface" means the outermost layer or superficial area
of materials (excluding paint, plaster or putty) of which the
interior or exterior of a dwelling or dwelling unit is constructed.
This includes, but is not limited to, floors, stairs, windows,
window sills, window frames, window sashes, doors, door frames,
baseboard and woodwork of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
(n) "Temporary hazard abatement" means repair or housekeeping
measures that can be undertaken immediately, safeguarding the
occupants until permanent abatement can be completed as set forth
by the City of Bethlehem Bureau of Health.
ARTICLE 1167 3
(o) A "lead source" is a lead-based coating or the presence
of lead in dust, soil, water or other environmental sources
exceeding acceptable standards as defined by the City of Bethlehem
Board of Health.
(p) A "lead-safe environment" means an environment free from
chipping and peeling lead-based paint and safe from other lead
sources exceeding acceptable standards as defined by the City of
Bethlehem Board of Health.
(q) "Abatement of lead-based paint" means the appropriate
removal of the hazards exceeding acceptable standards as defined by
the City of Bethlehem Board of Health.
(r) "Abatement of lead hazards" means appropriate removal of
such hazards in dust, soil, water or other environmental sources
exceeding acceptable standards as defined by the City of Bethlehem
Board of Health.
1167.02 INSPECTIONS
(a) The Bureau of Health shall have the authority to enter
and inspect a dwelling or dwelling unit in order to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public under the provisions of
this Article whenever it has probable cause to conduct such an
inspection. For the purposes of this Article, a probable cause to
gain access and to inspect a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) That the Bureau of Health receives a report of
elevated blood level of any person who resides or
has recently resided or frequently visits the
dwelling or dwelling unit to be inspected; or
(2) That such entry is for the purpose of reinspecting
a dwelling or dwelling unit previously determined
to be in violation of this Article; or
(3) That the Bureau of Health, after investigation, has
knowledge, information or a reasonable belief that
a violation of this Article exists in the dwelling
or dwelling unit; or
(4) That the Bureau of Health has received a complaint
concerning a violation of this Article in the
dwelling or dwelling unit.
ARTICLE 1167 4
(b) The Bureau of Health shall notify the owner, operator,
occupant or other person in charge of the dwelling or dwelling unit
of the purpose of the inspection, shall display proper
identification and shall attempt to enter and inspect the dwelling
or dwelling unit at reasonable times.
(c) If any owner, operator, occupant or other person in
charge of the dwelling or dwelling unit refuses, restricts or
obstructs entry and inspection of a dwelling or dwelling unit which
is authorized by this Article, the Bureau of Health shall apply for
a search and inspection warrant to a court of competent
jurisdiction and shall supply all necessary and reasonable
affidavits and testimony to indicate that there is reasonable or
probable cause to conduct the inspection.
1167.03 DETERMINATION OF HEALTH HAZARD
Any lead source which contains an amount of lead equal to or
greater than 0.5% by weight or 1.0 mg/cm2, as measured by an x-ray
fluorescence analyzer, shall be considered a health hazard to
children under six (6) years of age, pregnant women, or other
persons who have demonstrated an evidence of lead poisoning or are
cared for in such surroundings, IF:
(a) Said lead source exists in or about, but not limited to,
a dwelling, dwelling unit, household, school, day care facility,
church, or recreational facility; AND
(b) Said lead source is determined to be on any flaking or
peeling surface or exposed surface and/or on any chewable surface;
OR
(c) Said lead source is determined by inspection to be in
dust, soil, water or other sources;
in which children, pregnant women, or other persons who have
demonstrated an evidence of lead poisoning commonly reside or
visit.
1167.04 NOTICE OF HEALTH HAZARD
The Bureau of Health shall report the findings of a lead
source health hazard immediately to all occupants of the affected
premises and to the owner and/or operator of said premises. The
Bureau of Health shall cause to have prominently posted on all
entrances to said premises a notice as follows:
ARTICLE 1167 5
THIS DWELLING UNIT CONTAINS DANGEROUS AMOUNTS OF LEAD
PAINT AND IS UNFIT FOR HABITATION BY PREGNANT WOMEN AND
CHILDREN UNDER SIX (6) YEARS OF AGE.
Such notice shall not be removed without the approval of the Bureau
of Health. A report of the finding shall be given to other persons
or agencies as required by law.
1167.05 EXAMINATION OF CHILDREN
When a lead source health hazard is found in a dwelling, the
Bureau of Health may cause to have examined all children under six
(6) years of age, and such other children as it may find advisable
to examine, residing or who recently resided in said dwelling. The
results of such examination shall be reported to Bureau of Health,
to the parent or legal guardian of the affected child, and to the
appropriate Department of Health District Office.
1167.06 ABATEMENT OF HEALTH HAZARD
(a) When the Bureau of Health determines that any lead source
creates a health hazard, it shall issue a written order to the
owner, and to any operator or occupant, to abate the hazard. The
cost of hazard abatement shall be the responsibility of the
property owner. The order to abate the hazard shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address
of the owner. In addition, the Bureau of Health shall post the
order on the premises described in the order. If an emergency is
determined to exist, or if any person is hospitalized due to lead
poisoning, temporary hazard abatement must be accomplished in three
(3) days.
(b) Within seven (7) days following receipt of the written
order, or posting of the property, whichever is earlier, the owner
shall submit to the Bureau of Health a written plan and schedule
for abatement of the lead hazard. Upon request, the Bureau of
Health will provide assistance in developing the abatement plan.
Said plan and schedule shall specify in detail the means, methods,
materials and dates by which abatement will be achieved and shall
include one or more of the following:
(1) Replacement of building components with components
not coated with lead-based paint.
(2) The covering of such surfaces which contain lead
at unacceptable levels with permanently affixed
coverings, the surface of which are lead free and
ARTICLE 1167 6
which said permanently affixed coverings are
incapable of being readily chewed through, torn
from the surface, chipped or peeled from the
surface, or otherwise removed in such manner as to
expose the hazardous surface (for example,
hardboard, plywood, drywall).
(3) Stripping of the surface to the bare underlying
materials which do not contain lead at unsafe
levels.
(4) Such other methods as are established by the Bureau
of Health or appropriate State or Federal agencies,
and are approved by the Board of Health.
(c) Promptly upon receipt of the plan and schedule, the
Health Bureau shall approve or disapprove such plan and schedule.
Notice of any disapproval shall be accompanied by specific reasons
therefor. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner shall within four
(4) days resubmit the plan and schedule with such revisions as are
necessary to remove the objections. Upon disapproval of a second
plan by the Health Bureau, the owner shall be issued a written
notice indicating the schedule and method of abatement which will
be required to bring the dwelling into compliance. The owner shall
complete abatement of the lead hazard in accordance with the order
to abate within fourteen (14) days after receiving notification
from the Health Bureau that the schedule has been approved, unless
the Health Bureau extends the time for compliance.
(d) Upon completion of the correction procedures, the Health
Bureau shall conduct a preliminary inspection of any area cited as
a health hazard to approve such area as "lead-safe" before painting
or refinishing and to determine if the hazard has been
satisfactorily abated. A final clearance inspection shall be made
after painting or refinishing in accordance with standards as
defined by the Board of Health.
1167.07 PROTECTION OF OCCUPANTS
(a) No owner or operator found to be in violation of this
Article may evict, or cause to be evicted, occupants, including
children, of any dwelling or dwelling unit found to be in violation
of this Article, for the purpose of avoiding corrective measures
which may have been ordered by the Health Bureau, the Court, or any
other appropriate authority.
(b) In the event the dwelling or dwelling unit in which a
lead hazard has been identified is vacated by the occupant who
occupied same at the time of the issuance of the corrective notice
ARTICLE 1167 7
referred to in Section 1167.06(a), such dwelling or dwelling unit
shall not be let to or occupied by any person until such corrective
notice is complied with.
1167.08 SEVERABILITY
In the event any part or provision of this Article shall be
held to be illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction,
this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the
other parts or provisions thereof. Any invalid part of this
Article shall be segregated from the remainder of the Article by
the court holding such part invalid, and the remainder of the
Article shall remain in full force and effect.
1167.09 REMEDY
The imposition of a penalty herein prescribed shall not
preclude the City of Bethlehem from instituting appropriate action
by injunction or any other legal remedy to prevent or correct any
violation of this Article including, but not limited to, the right
to make corrections, using qualified municipal personnel, or to
have corrections made under agreement with an independent
contractor, for any property not in compliance with this Article
whose owner or operator cannot be located or who does not comply
with any order to make corrections. The City of Bethlehem shall
bill the property owner for any expenses incurred and place a lien
against the property for any such bill which is unpaid.
1167.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $600.00 or imprisoned for
not more than ninety (90) days or both. Each day that a violation
is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 3554 - Passed 6/1/93.)
ARTICLE 1317A
I-R INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
1317A.01 Purpose
The purpose of this district is to promote the economic revitalization of underutilized
heavy industrial properties. In order to accomplish this purpose a variety of land
uses will be permitted within this district and flexible design standards will be
applied during the site plan approval process.
1317A.02 Special Requirements
(a) The property owner shall submit the following to the City Planning
Commission for approval:
(1) A boundary plan of the property owned by the applicant; and,
(2) A report describing:
( i) The existing general site conditions for the property of the IR
District including:
(a) Existing public easements, public rights of way,
roads and streets, and major waterways;
(b) Existing public utilities including storm drains,
sanitary sewers, and water lines and railroad lines;
and
(c) Existing topography, major building locations, soil
and subsoil conditions, location and character of
surface water, and areas subject to flooding (100
year floodplains), steep slopes, wooded areas, and
recorded historical and archeological sites.
(ii) The general character of the proposed development
including:
(a) Goals and objectives for development;
(b) Potential future uses;
(c) Anticipated demand on existing utilities including
storm drains, stormwater management, sanitary
sewer, and water lines; and,
(d) Potential site access points.
1317A.03 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes, and no other subject to applicable provisions of Article 1318,
"General Regulations", and other applicable provisions of this and other city
ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Commercial recreation facilities and sports facilities.
(2) Public or parochial school, college, seminary, or similar non-profit
educational institution.
(3) Hospital, medical or health center or similar health facility.
(4) Hotel, motel lodge, and motel.
(5) Retail and service use.
(6) Banks, brokerage firm, insurance agency, and other financial
institutions.
(7) Business or professional offices.
(8) Theater, auditorium, museum, library, and other civic and cultural
facility including an amusement and recreational facility.
(9) Any facility whose purpose is dedicated to historic preservation.
(10) Restaurant for the sale and consumption of food and beverage.
(11) Bar.
(12) Visitor Center.
(13) Radio and television broadcasting, studio and transmission towers.
(14) Printing, newspaper publishing and bookbinding, lithographing or
similar establishment.
(15) City Government uses.
(16) Meeting and banquet halls, conference and convention centers.
(17) Office, and studio, or headquarters, including data processing
and record storage.
(18) Passenger terminal facility including taxi stand, bus and rail
passenger station, and shelter.
(19) Laboratory, research, testing, and experimental use not involving
danger of fire or explosion or any offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, glare, heat, or other objectionable influence.
(20) Photographic developing and printing establishment.
(21) Parking lots and structures.
(22) Barber and beauty shops.
(23) Tailor.
(24) Florists.
(25) Hardware store.
(26) Food store.
(27) Magazine store.
(28) Candy store.
(29) Bakery store.
(30) Doctor's office.
(31) Dentist's office.
(32) Warehousing, wholesale, storage or distribution use.
(33) Manufacture, assembly or treatment of articles or merchandise from
the following previously prepared materials: plastics, bone, canvas,
cellophane, cork, feathers, fiber, glass, horn, leather, and fur
(excluding tanning, curing, and dyeing); precious or semi-precious
metals or stones, shell, textiles and tobacco.
(34) Manufacture of: ceramic products (using only previously pulverized
clay); novelty or small products from previously prepared paper or
cardboard (not including bulk processing); jewelry, clocks and
watches, medical, drafting, optical and other professional and
scientific instruments and equipment, musical instruments, small
rubber products and synthetic treated fabrics (excluding all rubber
and synthetic processing); textiles (including spinning and weaving,
but not including wool scouring and pulling, or jute or burlap
processing or reconditioning); toys, wood products (excluding
planning mills and bulk processing of wood and lumber).
(35) Processing, packaging and treatment or compounding of such
products as cosmetics and toiletries, drugs, perfumes, and
pharmaceutical.
(36) Manufacture and assembly of electrical or electronic devices; home,
commercial and industrial appliances and instruments, and electrical
supplies, including such equipment and supplies as: lighting fixtures,
fans, home radios and television receivers, electrical switches,
lamps, washing machines, refrigerators and air conditioners.
(37) Processing and combining of food or candy products (except meat
and fish), including baking, canning, cooking, freezing, and mixing,
but not including manufacture of basic products from the raw state
or such processes as: drying, preserving or curing meats,
manufacturing sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, fish, milling flour,
roasting coffee or spices.
(38) Light metal processes, such as: metal machining, finishing, grinding,
and polishing, metal stamping and extrusion of small products, (such
as costume jewelry and kitchen utensils); and the manufacture of
light metal products, tools and hardware, (such as sculptures, hand
tools, bolts, nuts).
(39) Bottling, packing or packaging establishment.
(40) Central heating plant.
(41) Manufacture of paper or cardboard boxes, envelopes, containers
and novelties from previously prepared paper or cardboard.
(42) Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises, provided the quarters are located within the main building.
(43) Personal service, convenience and indoor recreational facilities
planned for the use of the employees of the district, and only
incidentally for the general public, such as branch bank, branch post
office, drugstore, restaurant, variety store, barber shop, beauty
parlor, offices and bowling alley, if developed as an integrated
service center.
(44)43 Manufacture of ferrous and non-ferrous metal.
(45)44 Private power generation facilities.
(46)45 Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(46) Indoor public recreation facility.
(47) Public utility installation.
(48) Repair garage.
(49) Service station.
(50) Motor vehicle sales and service agency.
(51) Municipal uses such as, but not limited to, municipal buildings,
municipal garages, municipal storage areas, fire stations and
police stations.
(52) Open space.
(53) Residential uses are permitted only in office building uses that
existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance.
(b) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use in
this Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these
regulations.
(c) None of the permitted uses for this District are required to have
conditional use approval.
(b)(d) Additional uses and their customary accessory uses that are compatible
with uses that are permitted by right may be permitted as special exception
uses when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
Article 1325.
(c)(e) The following uses shall not be permitted:
(1) Prison facility.
(2) Trash or Waste Incinerator Facility.
(3) Storage of Used or Discarded Motor Vehicle Tires.
(4) Junkyard.
(5) Landfill.
(6) Cement Manufacturing Plant.
(7) Manufacture of Asphalt.
(8) Manufacture of Paint.
(9) Petroleum Refining Storage or Distribution.
1317A.04 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
The area, yard, and building regulations for each proposed use shall be governed
by the most intense applicable zoning district in which the use is permitted by right.
The applicant and City Planning Commission shall consider modifications to these
standards in accordance with the terms or Article 1351.03 of the Subdivision and
Development Ordinance.
1317A.05 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Off street parking and loading regulations shall be governed by Article 1319. Off
street parking shall be permitted on a lot other than the proposed development site,
provided adequate assurances are given that such parking will not be eliminated by
future development. The applicant and City Planning Commission shall consider
modifications to these standards based on existing site conditions, the proposed
use, hardships, or innovations in technology in accordance with the terms of Article
1351.03 of the Subdivision and Development Ordinance and such modifications
shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Shared parking pursuant to Section 1319.02(e);
(b) Providing for up to 30% of the total parking required as compact spaces;
compact spaces shall have a minimum dimension of 8 feet in width and 16
feet in length;
(c) Credit for other methods of transportation to the site, including bus and rail
service; and
(d) Recent authoritative standards information regarding parking standards for
individual uses will be employed.
1317A.06 Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be governed by Article 1320. The applicant and City
Planning Commission shall consider modifications to the standards based on the
existing site conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or innovations in technology
in accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of the Subdivision and Development
Ordinance.
1317A.07 Site Plan Review Requirements
Property owners within this zoning district must submit site plans in accordance with
this Article or in accordance and with Article 1317 1321, except as modified by
Section 1317A.03(c) 1317A(02), special requirements for each development
project. If the property owner elects to proceed under this Article, it shall submit
plans in accordance with Article 1321 for each proposed development project. If
there is a substantial deviation in the development submission from what is
described in 1317A.03(ii) 1317A.02(a)(2)(ii), (describing the general character of
the proposed development), the City Planning Commission may require
additional information to approve the proposed modification.

ARTICLE 1317B
IR-F INDUSTRIAL REDEVELOPMENT – FLEXIBLE DISTRICT
1317B.01 Purpose
The purpose of this district is to promote the economic revitalization of underutilized
industrial properties and to provide suitable areas for the use of business and
industry. In order to accomplish this purpose a variety of land uses will be permitted
within this district and flexible design standards will be applied during the site plan
approval process.
1317B.02 Special Requirements
(a) The property owner shall submit the following to the City Planning
Commission for approval:
(1) A boundary plan of the property owned by the applicant; and,
(2) A report describing:
( i) The existing general site conditions for the property of the
IR-F District including:
(a) Existing public easement, public rights of way, roads
and streets, and major waterways;
(b) Existing public utilities including storm drains,
sanitary sewers, water lines and railroad lines; and
(c) Existing topography, major building locations, soil
and subsoil conditions, location and character of
surface water, and areas subject to flooding (100-
year floodplains), steep slopes, wooded areas, and
recorded historical and archeological sites.
(ii) The general character of the proposed development
including:
(a) Goals and objectives for development;
(b) Potential future uses;
(c) Anticipated demand on existing utilities including
storm drains, storm water management, sanitary
sewer, and water lines; and,
(d) Potential site access points.
1317B.03 Use Regulations
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of
the following purposes, subject to applicable provisions of Article 1318, “General
Regulations”, and other applicable provisions of this and other city ordinances.
(a) The following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Indoor commercial recreation facilities and sports facilities.
(2) College, seminary, or similar for-profit or non-profit post-secondary
school or educational institution.
(3) Hotel, motel lodge, and motel.
(4) Retail and service use.
(5) Banks, brokerage firm, insurance agency, and other financial
institutions.
(6) Business or professional offices, including studio.
(1) Theater, auditorium, museum, library, and other civic and cultural
facility including an indoor amusement and recreational facility.
(2) Any facility whose purpose is dedicated to historic preservation.
(3) Restaurant for the sale and consumption of food and beverage.
(4) Bar.
(5) Visitor Center.
(6) Radio and television broadcasting, studio and transmission towers.
(7) Printing, publishing, bookbinding, lithographing or similar
establishment.
(8) City Government uses.
(9) Meeting and banquet halls, conference and convention centers.
(10) Headquarters or other offices building, including data processing
and record storage.
(11) Passenger terminal facility including taxi stand, bus and rail
passenger station, and shelter.
(12) Laboratory, research, testing, and experimental use not involving
danger of fire or explosion or any offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, glare, heat, or other objectionable influence.
(19) Photographic developing and printing establishment.
(20) Parking lots and structures.
(21) Barber and beauty shops.
(22) Tailor.
(23) Florists.
(24) Hardware store.
(25) Food store.
(26) Magazine store.
(27) Candy store.
(28) Bakery store.
(29) Doctor’s office.
(30) Dentist’s office.
(31) Warehousing, wholesale, storage or distribution use.
(32) Manufacture, assembly or treatment of articles or merchandise from
the following previously prepared materials: plastics, bone, canvas,
cellophane, cork, feathers, fiber, glass, horn, leather, and fur,
precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles and
tobacco.
(33) Manufacture of: ceramic products; novelty or small products from
previously prepared paper or cardboard; jewelry, clocks and
watches, medical, drafting, optical and other professional and
scientific instruments and equipment, musical instruments, small
rubber products and synthetic treated fabrics, textiles (including
spinning and weaving, but not including wool scouring and pulling,
or jute or burlap processing or reconditioning); toys, wood products.
(34) Processing, packaging and treatment or compounding of such
products as cosmetics and toiletries, drugs, perfumes, and
pharmaceutical.
(35) Manufacture and assembly of electrical or electronic components or
devices; home, commercial and industrial appliances and
instruments, and electrical supplies, including such equipment and
supplies as: lighting fixtures, fans, home radios, and television
receivers, electrical switches, lamps, washing machines,
refrigerators and air conditioners.
(36) Processing and combining of food or candy products, including
baking, canning, cooking, freezing, and mixing, but not including
manufacture or basic products from the raw state or such process
as: drying, preserving or curing meats, manufacturing sauerkraut,
vinegar or yeast, fish, milling flour, roasting coffee or spices.
(37) Light metal processes, such as: metal machining, finishing, grinding,
and polishing, metal stamping and extrusion of small products, (such
as costume jewelry and kitchen utensils); and the manufacture of
light metal products, tools and hardware, (such as sculptures, hand
tools, bolts, nuts).
(38) Bottling, packing or packaging establishment.
(39) Central heating plant.
(40) Manufacture of paper or cardboard boxes, envelopes, containers
and novelties from previously prepared paper or cardboard.
(41) Manufacture of ferrous and non-ferrous metal.
(42) Public or private power generation facilities.
(43) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
[See Section 1318.28A]
(44) Public or private utility installation.
(45) Repair garage.
(46) Service station.
(47) Motor vehicle sales and service agency.
(48) Open space.
(b) Accessory uses customary with and incidental to any aforesaid use in this
Article are permitted unless otherwise excluded by these regulations.
(c) None of the permitted uses for this District are required to have conditional
use approval.
(d) Additional uses and their customary accessory uses that are compatible
with uses that are permitted by right may be permitted as special exception
uses when authorized by the Planning Commission in accordance with
Article 1322.
(e) The following uses shall not be permitted:
(1) Storage of Used or Discarded Motor Vehicles Tires.
(2) Landfill.
1317B.04 Area, Yard and Building Regulations
(a) Minimum Yard Requirements: The following setbacks shall be applicable
only if the adjacent property affected is in a Residential District. If the
adjacent property affected is in a different zoning district that Residential,
then the front yard setback may be reduced to twenty (20) feet, and there
shall be no rear or side yard setback requirements under this Part Thirteen
– Zoning Code.
(1) Front Yard (Ft.): 50
(2) Rear Yard (Ft.): 50
(3) One Side (Ft.): 50
(4) Both Sides (Ft.): 100
(b) Maximum building height shall be 75 feet. There is no maximum building
coverage limitation. There is no minimum lot width requirement.
(c) The City Planning Commission may consider requested modifications to
these standards in accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of the
Subdivision & Development Ordinance.
(d) The provisions of section 1318.01 shall be deemed to be either amended or
suspended so as to conform with Section 1317B.04(a) – Minimum Yard
Requirements, as set forth above.
1317B.05 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Off street parking and loading regulations shall be governed by Article 1319, Off-
Street Parking and Loading, except as modified by this section.
(a) Shared parking shall be permitted pursuant to Section 1319.02(e);
(b) Section 1319.01(a)(30) shall be modified in this zoning district to require for
warehouse, freight terminals and trucking terminals, one parking or storage
space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus one
(1) parking space for each person regularly employed on the premises.
(c) Shade trees. If the applicant can provide information that an area is not
visible from a public way and there is no access to the area or visibility to
the area by the public way and there is no access to the area or visibility to
the area by the public, then the Planning Commission may consider waiving
or partially waiving the shade tree requirements of Section 1319.02(j),
following review and recommendation by the City’s Planning and Zoning
Bureau.
(d) Off-street parking shall be permitted on a lot other than the proposed
development site, provided adequate assurances are given that such
parking will not be eliminated by future development.
(e) The City Planning Commission may approve a reasonable reduction of the
minimum off-street parking and loading facilities standards based the
proposed use. Such reductions shall include but not be limited to:
(1) providing for up to 30% of total parking required as compact spaces;
compact spaces shall have a minimum dimension of 8 feet in width
and 16 feet in length;
(2) credit for other methods of transportation to the site, including bus
and rail service; and
(3) recent authoritative standards information including parking use
studies supplied by the applicant regarding parking standards for
individual uses shall be employed.
(f) The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(1) A maximum of one hundred fifteen (115) feet at the curb line for
one-way use only.
(2) For two-way use, a maximum of one hundred thirty (130) feet
measured along the curb line between the points of intersection of
the two opposing driveway curb returns. Depressed curb driveway
aprons shall not be required.
1317B.06 Additional Provisions
Because of the extremely large lots proposed within the IR-F zoning district and the
proposed limited access by the general public and the unique access provisions of
the combined rail and truck access, the following general provisions are also
permitted in the IR-F zoning district:
(a) The steep slope provisions of section 1318.29 shall not apply in the
Industrial Redevelopment-Flexible zoning district.
(b) The Special Conditions for an industrial park in section 1322.04(e) shall not
be applicable in the Industrial Redevelopment – Flexible zoning district.
(c) The Planning Commission may consider waivers from sections 1321.03 (e),
utilities, and (f), special features, pursuant to section 1351.03 of the
Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
1317B.07 Sign Regulations
Sign regulations shall be governed by Article 1320. The City Planning Commission
may consider modifications to the standards based on the existing site conditions,
the proposed use, hardships, or innovations in technology in accordance with the
terms of Article 1351.03 of the Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
1317B.08 Site Plan Review Requirements
Property owners within this zoning district must submit site plans in accordance with
this Article, except as modified by Section 1317B(02), special requirements, for
each development project. If there is a substantial deviation in the development
submission from what is described in 1317B.02(a)(2)(ii), (describing the general
character of the proposed development), the City Planning Commission may
require additional information to approve the proposed modification.
1318.28A Regulations for Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas
(a) Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to minimize the number of new
commercial communication towers through encouraging co-location
of commercial communication antennas, to ensure that new towers
will be safe and be placed in suitable locations, and to help ensure
that municipal land use regulations are in compliance with the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
(b) Definitions
(1) Cellular Telephone - A system providing portable telephone
service to specific subscribers. A cellular telephone may also
be referred to as a wireless telephone.
(2) Commercial Communications Antenna - Any device used for
the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless
telephone, pacer, commercial mobile radio service or any other
wireless communications signals, including without limitation
omnidirectional or whip antennas, and directional or panel
antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate
such device. This definition shall not include private residence
mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur
radio equipment including without limitation ham or citizen
band radio antennas.
(3) Commercial Communications Tower - A structure other than a
building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower,
designed and used to support commercial communication
antennas.
(4) Fall Zone - The area on the ground within a prescribed radius
from the base of a commercial communications tower. The fall
zone is the area within which there is a potential hazard from
falling debris or the collapsing of the commercial
communications tower. The fall zone shall be determined by
the applicant's engineer and subject to the review and approval
of the City Engineer.
(5) Height of Tower - The overall height of the tower from the base
of the tower to the highest point of the tower, including, but not
limited to, antennas, transmitters, satellite dishes or any other
structures affixed to or otherwise placed on the tower. If the
base of the tower is not on ground level, the height of the tower
shall include the base of the building or structure to which the
tower is attached.
(6) Public Utility Transmission Tower - A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, designed and used to
support overhead electricity transmission lines.
(c) District Requirements
(1) Commercial communication towers shall not be permitted in
any residential zoning district.
(2) Commercial communication towers shall not be permitted
within 100' of any residential zoning district.
(3) After review and approval of a site plan by the City Planning
Commission, commercial communication towers may be
permitted in any commercial, institutional or industrial district.
(4) After approval by the Chief Building Inspector commercial
communication antennas shall be permitted by right in any
zoning district if placed on an existing commercial
communications tower, public utility transmission tower or any
other structure at least sixty (60) feet high.
(5) Commercial communication antennas that are located within
an existing structure shall be excluded from the heights
requirements of paragraph (4) above.
(d) Special Requirements
(1) Site Plan - A site plan for any proposed commercial
communications tower shall be prepared by the applicant and
submitted to the City Planning Commission for review in
accordance with all applicable zoning and subdivision and
development ordinance regulations.
(2) Setback - A commercial communications tower shall be set
back from all property lines the most restrictive of the following:
a minimum distance equal to 1/2 (one-half) its height or a
distance equal to the commercial communications tower fall
zone.
(3) Fence - The base of a commercial communications tower shall
be surrounded by a secure fence with a minimum height of
eight (8) feet.
(4) Landscaping - Evergreen plantings shall be required to screen
the fence surrounding the tower and any other ground level
features such as a building or parking area. The evergreen
screen shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high at planting with
an expectation to grow to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet high at
maturity. At the discretion of the City Planning Commission
landscaping requirement may be altered or waived in an
Industrial District.
(5) Parking - A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall
be provided for a commercial communications tower.
(6) Wind Resistance - For any commercial communications tower
or antenna higher than fifty (50) feet, the applicant shall
provide, at the time of applying for a building permit,
certification from a registered professional engineer as to the
overall structural integrity of the tower and that the tower or
antenna meets the wind resistance requirements stated in the
latest version of the BOCA National Building Code.
(7) Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
( I) The applicant shall provide documentation of FAA
approval for commercial communication towers or
antennas exceeding two (2) hundred feet in height.
Commercial communication towers or antennas less
than two (2) hundred feet in height shall meet the
requirements of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part
77.13(a), as amended (copy attached).
(II) No commercial communications tower or antenna shall
be artificially lighted except when required and
approved by the FAA.
(8) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (Aviation)
( I) The applicant shall provide documentation of PennDOT
Bureau of Aviation approval for commercial
communication towers or antennas in accordance with
P.L. 837, No. 164 and Title 67 PA Code Chapter 479,
Section 479.4.
(II) No commercial communications tower or antenna shall
be artificially lighted except when required and
approved by PennDOT Bureau of Aviation.
(9) Airport Coordination - The applicant for a proposed commercial
communications tower or antenna, located within a five (5) mile
radius of an existing or planned airport, will notify the airport
manager in writing of its intent to place such structures. If, in
the judgement of the airport manager, the proposed structure
should be marked and/or lighted, the applicant will comply with
the finding of the airport manager. Such findings will supersede
findings issued by the FAA or PennDOT that do not require
marking or lighting. Any marking or lighting required by the
airport manager shall be consistent with FAA advisory circulars
in effect at the time.
(10) Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
( I) The commercial communications company shall
provide documentation that it is licensed by the FCC.
( II) Whenever applicable, the applicant shall provide
documentation that the FCC has approved the
proposed commercial communications tower or
antenna.
( III) Whenever applicable, the applicant shall provide
documentation that the proposed commercial
communications tower or antenna complies with all
applicable standards established by the FCC governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
(11) Documentation of Need - The commercial communications
company shall demonstrate, using technological evidence, that
in order to satisfy its functional requirements, the tower and/or
antenna must go where it is proposed. Also, if a tower is
proposed, that there are no existing structures within 1/4 mile
of the site on which to place the antenna.
(12) Removal of Commercial Communication Towers and
Antennas - If a commercial communications tower and/or
antenna remains unused for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and
remove the tower and/or antenna within six (6) months of
notice to do so by the City. In addition, all portions of the base
that are at or above the existing grade shall be demolished and
removed from the site. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the City, the applicant shall post security in a form
acceptable to the City Solicitor favoring the City in an amount
to cover the costs of tower and/or antenna removal and site
clean-up. The security shall be utilized by the City in the event
that the owner or operator of the facility fails to remove the
tower and/or antenna within six (6) months of notification by
the City.
Add the following Sections:
1309.02(a) ( 2) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1310.02(a) (19) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1311.02(a) (10) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1312.02(a) (17) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1313.02(a) (14) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1313A.02(a) (12) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1314.02(a) (11) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1315.02(a) (20) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1316.02(a) (24) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1317.02(a) ( 5) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
1317A.03(a) (46) Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas.
(See Section 1318.28A)
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
INTER-OFFICE DEPARTMENTAL CORRESPONDENCE
TO: Community Development Committee of City Council
FROM: Samuel A. Guttman, Director of Planning
SUBJECT: Proposed Changes to the Draft Ordinance for Commercial Communication
Towers and Antennas
Following is the list of the proposed additions and modifications to the above:
Section 1318.28A - subsection (c)(4) - After approval by the Chief Building
Inspector commercial communication antennas shall be permitted by right in any zoning
district if placed on an existing commercial communications tower, public utility
transmission tower or any other structure at least sixty (60) feet high.
Section 1318.28A - Add subsection (c)(5) - Commercial communication antennas
that are located within an existing structure shall be excluded from the heights
requirements of paragraph (4) above.
Section 1318.28A - subsection (d)(4) - Landscaping - Evergreen plantings shall
be required to screen the fence surrounding the tower and any other ground level
features such as a building or parking area. The evergreen screen shall be a minimum
of six (6) feet high at planting with an expectation to grow to a minimum of fifteen (15)
feet high at maturity. At the discretion of the City Planning Commission landscaping
requirement may be altered or waived in an Industrial District.
Section 1318.28A - subsection (d)(6) - Wind Resistance - For any commercial
communications tower or antenna higher than fifty (50) feet the applicant shall provide,
at the time of applying for a building permit, certification from a registered professional
engineer as to the overall structural integrity of the tower and that the tower or antenna
meets the wind resistance requirements stated in the latest version of the BOCA
National Building Code.
Section 1318.28A - subsection (d)(10)( II) - Whenever applicable, the applicant
shall provide documentation that the FCC has approved the proposed commercial
communications tower or antenna.
Section 1318.28A - subsection (d)(10)(III) - Whenever applicable, the applicant
shall provide documentation that the proposed commercial communications tower or
antenna complies with all applicable standards established by the FCC governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
April 29, 1998
Comm. Towers/Antennas
Page 2
Section 1318.28A - subsection (d)(11) - Documentation of Need - The
commercial communications company shall demonstrate, using technological evidence,
that in order to satisfy its functional requirements, the tower and/or antenna must go
where it is proposed. Also, if a tower is proposed, that there are not existing structures
within 1/4 mile of the site on which to place the antenna.
1309.02(a)(2) - That an additional section by added:
SECTION 11. That a new section 1317.02(a)(5) be added to read as
follows:
1317.02(a)(5) Commercial Communications Towers and Antennas
(See Section 1318.28A)
And the subsequent numbers of the "SECTIONS" follow in succeeding order.
SAG/dlb
cc: Mayor
Cunningham
Members of City Council
J. Leeson
C. Spadoni
file
Date: April 29, 1998
Samuel A. Guttman
Director
ARTICLE 1320
SIGNS
1320.01 Purpose
This Article recognizes that although signs perform an important function by
identifying residences and businesses, minimum control of signs is necessary to
promote the health, safety and general welfare: by lessening hazards to pedestrian
and vehicular traffic; by preserving property values; by preventing unsightly and
detrimental development which has a blighting influence upon residential, business
and industrial uses; by preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that they
obscure one another to the detriment of all concerned; and by securing certain
fundamentals of design for the City.
1320.02 Definition of Sign
Sign shall mean and include any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof,
or any device attached, painted, or represented directly or indirectly on a structure
or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word insignia, flag, or
representation used as, or which is the nature of, an advertisement, announcement,
visual communication, direction, or is designed to attract the eye, or bring the
subject to the attention of the public. Flags of any governmental unit or branch or of
any charitable or religious organizations, interior signs not visible from a public rightof-
way or adjoining property, and cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a
building are excluded.
1320.03 Location of Signs
(a) On-Premises Sign - A sign which directs attention to a person, business,
profession, occupation or activity conducted on the same lot.
(b) Off-Premises Sign - A sign which directs attention to a person, business,
profession, product, home occupation or activity not conducted on the same
lot.
1320.04 Types of Signs
(a) Free Standing Signs - A self-supporting sign resting or supported by means
of poles or standards on the ground.
(b) Parallel Sign - A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other vertical building
surface.
(c) Window Sign - A temporary or permanent sign which is oriented to the
public right-of-way, is legible to persons in vehicles, and is located on the
outside or inside of a window to direct attention to an activity conducted on
the same lot.
(d) Projecting Sign - Any sign mounted to a wall or other vertical building
surface other than a parallel sign.
(e) Roof Sign - A sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet of a building.
(f) Animated Sign - A sign with action or motion with moving characters or
changing colors which require electrical energy, but not including wind
actuated elements, such as flags or banners. This definition does not
include public service signs, such as time and temperature signs.
(g) Directly Illuminated Sign - A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly
(or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within
such sign, including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs.
(h) Indirectly Illuminated Sign - A sign illuminated with a light so shielded that no
direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot where said illumination
occurs. If such shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to
be a directly illuminated sign.
(i) Flashing and Moving Sign - An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
when in use. Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date or
other public service information shall not be considered flashing signs, but
shall be subject to site plan approval by the Planning Commission and
review by the Traffic Bureau.
(j) Portable Sidewalk Sign - A sign which is located on a sidewalk, which is not
permanently attached to the ground, a structure, or any other sign.
1320.05 Area of Signs
(a) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, working, and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether
open or closed, on which they are displayed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself.
(b) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or
painted on a surface, building, wall, or window, the area shall be considered
to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and
symbols.
(c) In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one side shall be
considered provided both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by
the two faces of the double-faced sign is greater than forty-five (45)
degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the
sign area.
1320.06 Permit Requirements for Signs
All on-premises signs over six (6) square feet in area and all off-premises signs
regardless of size shall require the issuance of a zoning and building permit before
erection or replacement. All signs must comply with all of the regulations contained
herein, regardless of whether a permit is required. No permit shall be required for a
mere change of copy on a sign, the customary use of which involves frequent and
periodic changes of copy.
1320.07 General Sign Regulations
The following requirements shall apply to all signs:
(a) Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have such lighting
shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or in the normal
line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks. No floor or spot
lights shall be mounted higher than twenty-five (25) feet above ground level.
(b) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic through
glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or
driveway, through confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of color,
location, shape or other characteristic), or through any other means. No
sign shall violate the corner visibility restrictions in Section 1318.06.
(c) All signs except temporary signs shall be constructed of durable material
and kept in good condition and repair. Electrical signs shall be subject to
the performance criteria of the Underwriters Laboratory, Incorporated and to
annual inspection by the City Electrical Inspector.
(d) Signs existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance which do not
conform to the requirements of the Ordinance shall be considered nonconforming
signs. However, non-conforming signs may be repainted,
repaired (including lighting) or replaced provided such repainted, repaired or
replaced signs do not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign. Copy
may also be changed. Non-conforming signs, once removed for a period of
ninety (90) days, may be replaced only with signs which conform to
provisions of this Ordinance.
(e) If an establishment has walls fronting on two (2) or more streets, the sign
area for each street may be computed separately.
(f) No signs except those of a duly constituted governmental body, including
traffic signs and similar regulatory notices shall be allowed within street lines
unless specifically authorized by other ordinances and regulations of the
City.
(g) No sign except such directional devices as may be required by the Federal
Aviation Authority, shall be placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof or
upon any structure which extends above the roof of any building.
(h) Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of
such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle’s primary purpose
but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall be considered a free-standing
sign and as such be subject to the provisions regarding free-standing signs
in the district in which such vehicle is located.
(i) No sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered only elsewhere than upon the
premises where it is displayed shall be established nearer than one hundred
(100) feet to a Residential District unless the advertisement surface of such
sign is not visible therefrom.
(j) No sign in other than a Residential or Institutional District shall be located so
as to face any Residential or Institutional District on the same side of the
street on which the property bearing the sign fronts. This provision shall not
apply to signs at right angles to the street line of such street.
(k) Flashing signs, flood lights, flags, banners, twirling, "A" type, sandwich type,
sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or other air or gas-filled figures and
special promotional devices shall only be permitted for a new business in a
Commercial or Industrial District for a period of not more than fifteen (15)
days after the opening of such new business. At no other time shall such
devices be permitted except as provided for in Section 1320.10.
(l) All free-standing signs shall conform to the setbacks required for other
buildings and structures. No free-standing sign in other than a Residential
or Institutional District shall extend within twenty-five (25) feet of any
Residential or Institutional District boundary line. The location of signs for
service stations shall not be located within any street right-of-way.
(m) Only one (1) on-premises sign with a maximum area of one hundred (100)
square feet may be erected which faces or is primarily intended to be visible
from an Interstate Highway, Limited Access Highway, Parkway or
Expressway. No off-premises signs shall be erected which face or are
primarily intended to be visible from an Interstate Highway, Limited Access
Highway, Parkway or Expressway.
(n) The office of the Bureau of Inspections shall issue a permit for all temporary
signs for all temporary uses which shall be considered as uses which
operate for a period of four (4) months out of a year. Said temporary signs
shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and shall be removed one
hundred and twenty (120) days after erected.
(o) Parallel signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface
to which they are mounted, and shall not project more than fifteen (15)
inches from its surface.
(p) Projecting signs shall not project more than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet
from the wall or surface to which they are mounted nor in any way shall they
interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
1320.08 Signs Permitted in Residential and Institutional Districts
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) On-Premises Signs.
( 1) Official traffic signs and other official Federal, State, County and City
governmental signs.
( 2) Signs displaying only the name and address of the occupant of the
premises provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
one (1) square foot and not more than one (1) such sign shall be
erected for each occupant of a premises, unless such property
fronts on more than one (1) street, in which case one (1) such sign
may be erected on each street frontage.
( 3) Signs for bulletin or announcement boards for identification of
permitted non-residential buildings provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. In the R-T
Residential District, signs which shall not exceed four (4) square feet
for a tourist home and boarding house and six (6) square feet for
motor vehicle parking lots may be erected on any lot where such
use exists. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on each
street frontage.
( 4) Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of property, provided that
the area of any such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet and
not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on property held in
single and separate ownership unless such property fronts on more
than one (1) street, in which case, one (1) such sign may be erected
on each street frontage. All signs shall be removed within seven (7)
days after an agreement of sale or rental has been entered into. In
addition to the foregoing, one (1) open house sign shall be permitted
subject to the five (5) conditions listed under 1320.08(b)(3). Two (2)
off premises signs shall also be permitted as stated in 1320.08(b)(3).
( 5) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway, or premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall
not exceed two (2) square feet.
( 6) Temporary signs erected in connection with the development or
proposed development of the premises by a builder, contractor,
developer or other persons interested in such sale or development,
provided that the aggregate area of the signs shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet. Such signs shall be removed within
twenty (20) days after the last structure has been initially occupied.
Where a real estate developer is engaged in selling lots only, then
temporary signs advertising the sale of lots in the subdivision shall
be permitted during the initial period of the development project,
which period shall commence with the recording date of the
subdivision map and shall end twelve (12) months thereafter. The
permit for such signs may be renewed at the end of each twelve (12)
month period.
( 7) Temporary signs of mechanics or artisans may be erected and
maintained during the period such persons are performing work on
the premises on which such signs are erected, provided that such
signs shall be removed upon completion of work by the mechanic or
artisan, and the total areas of all such signs shall not exceed twenty
(20) square feet.
( 8) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive, or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational, or religious organization shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet in area and shall be removed immediately
upon completion of the campaign, drive, or event.
( 9) Signs for identification of permitted home occupation or home
professional office uses, provided that the area of any such sign
shall not exceed two (2) square feet. However, the aggregate
square footage of signs erected under 1320.08(a)(2) and this
Section shall not exceed two (2) square feet. Such signs exceeding
a total of one (1) square foot in size shall have to meet the front yard
setback requirements of this Ordinance.
(10) Apartment developments may have one (1) sign, one (1) square foot
in area, for each dwelling unit in the development up to a maximum
of twenty (20) square feet. If the development fronts on more than
one (1) street, there may be one (1) such sign for each street
frontage.
(11) Parallel and projecting signs for non-conforming uses, also subject
to the provisions of Section 1320.07.
( I) Signs attached to the main wall of a principal building shall
not project more than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet
therefrom and no portion shall be less than ten (10) feet
above the basic grade and no more than twenty-five (25)
feet above grade. Such signs shall not exceed twenty-two
and one-half (22-1/2) square feet.
( II) The total area of all signs shall not exceed twelve and onehalf
(12-1/2) percent of the area of the building face
(including window and door area and cornices) to which they
are attached. In no case, however, shall the total area of all
signs exceed fifty (50) square feet.
( III) Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel signs
and included in this computation, but shall nevertheless not
exceed twenty (20) percent of the total window area on each
street.
( IV) Such signs shall conform to the setback regulations for a
non-residential use in the district.
(12) No sign identifying a home professional office shall be illuminated
between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 9:00 A.M.
(13) Signs for any use specified in Article 1309 (I-Institutional District) but
located in a Residential District, may contain one (1) square foot in
area for each ten (10) feet of lot frontage in a City street of at least
forty (40) feet in width. The total area of all signs for such uses shall
not exceed forty (40) square feet. All such signs over eight (8)
square feet in size shall be non-illuminated; smaller signs may be
illuminated but only internally. Both sides of a double-faced sign
shall be considered when computing the area of such signs for the
above uses.
(14) Signs for institutional uses in an Institutional District may contain one
(1) square foot in area for each ten (10) feet of lot frontage on a City
street of at least forty (40) feet in width. The total area of all signs for
such uses shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
(b) Off-Premises Signs.
( 1) Signs directing patrons, members, or audiences to temporary
exhibits, shows, or events located in the City and signs erected in
conjunction with a political election, subject to the following
requirements:
( I) No such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area.
( II) Signs shall be removed within one (1) week after the date of
the exhibit, show or election.
( III) No permit shall be issued for the erection of such signs until
a deposit shall be made with the Zoning Officer in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by City Council to
guarantee removal within the time prescribed. Failure to
remove such signs within the time prescribed shall result in
forfeiture of the deposit.
( IV) No such sign shall be posted earlier than three (3) weeks
before the occurrence of the event to which it relates with the
exception of political signs which shall be posted not earlier
than one (1) month prior to an election.
( V) No such sign shall impede the safety of traffic or pedestrians.
( 2) Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic,
street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings, and
other official signs which are similarly authorized or erected by a
duly constituted governmental body.
( 3) The placement of signs directing persons to the sale, lease, or rental
of property shall be permitted, with the written approval of the owner
of the property on which the sign is to be placed, subject to the
following conditions:
( I) The signs shall only be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays,
and Holidays.
( II) No sign shall exceed six (6) square feet.
( III) No sign shall be posted earlier than 8:00 A.M. on the day
that it is displayed.
( IV) Signs shall be removed before 7:00 P.M. each day.
( V) No sign shall impede the safety of traffic or pedestrians.
1320.09 Signs Permitted in the Commercial Districts
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) On-Premises Signs.
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.08(a) at the standards prescribed
therein except as otherwise provided in this Section and in Section
1320.07.
( 2) Parallel and projecting signs, providing:
( I) Signs attached to a main wall of a principal building shall not
project more than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet therefrom
and that no portion shall be less than ten (10) feet above the
basic grade and no more than twenty-five (25) feet above
grade. If not projecting more than three (3) inches from a
wall of a building, the sign need not conform to the height
limits.
( II) The total area of all signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the area of the exterior building face (including
window and door area and cornices) to which they are
attached. In no case, however, shall the total area of all
signs exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
( III) Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel signs
and included in this computation but shall nevertheless not
exceed forty (40) percent of the total window area on each
street.
( IV) In the case of a Shopping Center or Commercial Recreation
District the provisions of this Section relating to the total area
of signs permitted on a premise shall apply with respect to
each building, separate store, or similar use in percentage of
exterior building face, but not in square feet. All signs shall
conform to an overall scheme or arrangement design which
shall be subject to approval or disapproval by the City
Planning Commission. Sign materials, lighting, position on
the building, and size, shall all be specified in such approval.
If the Shopping Center or Commercial Recreation District
shall contain a mall area, each entrance to the mall may be
designated by a sign no wider than the entrance, and at a
height to be determined by the City Planning Commission.
( 3) Free Standing Signs.
( I) Shall be limited to one (1) except for an establishment which
fronts on two (2) or more streets, in which case a sign may
be erected in each yard fronting on a street.
( II) No portion of any such sign shall be less than ten (10) or
more than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground, except
such signs described in (IV) and (V) below.
( III) The area of any free standing sign except such signs as
described in (IV) and (V) below, shall not exceed one (1)
square foot for each two (2) feet of lineal lot frontage or fifty
(50) square feet, whichever is smaller.
( IV) No sign shall be located beyond the rear or side wall of the
main building when the rear or side property line on which it
is situated abuts a Residential or Institutional District, except
signs that convey information such as parking, entrances
and traffic flow directions. The area of one (1) side of any
such sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. The name
of the business located on the premises may appear on such
signs.
( V) No portion of a Shopping Center or Commercial Recreation
Center free standing sign shall be less than twenty (20) or
more than forty (40) feet above the ground. The area of any
one side of such sign shall not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet. The location or orientation of such sign
shall be shown on the development plan.
( VI) In the case of a Shopping Center or Commercial Recreation
District, the number of its free standing signs shall be
according to the following schedule: Parking facilities from
100 to 500 cars - one free standing signs shall be allowed.
For every additional increment of 500 parking spaces, one
(1) additional free standing sign is permitted. At no time
shall there be more than four (4) free standing signs per
Shopping Center or Recreation Center.
(VII) In the case of a group of business uses other than a
Shopping Center, on a lot held in single and separate
ownership, a single free standing sign including individual
signs identifying different establishments, may be erected on
a common backing provided that the total area of one (1)
side of the sign does not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet. The structural backing for all such signs shall be
uniform and no sign may extend, in any direction, beyond
the outside edge of the backing. No portion of any such
backing shall be less than five (5) feet or more than twelve
(12) feet above the ground.
(b) Off-Premises Signs
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.08(b) at the standards prescribed
therein except as otherwise provided in this Section.
( 2) Only such directional devices as may be required by the Federal
Aviation Authority shall be placed, inscribed, or supported upon the
roof or upon any structure which extends above the roof of any
building.
( 3) Signs for permitted non-residential uses provided:
( I) All parallel and projecting signs shall not exceed two (2)
square feet for each foot of length of that portion of such wall
which is devoted to such establishment or one hundred
(100) square feet, whichever is smaller. Said signs are
permitted on a side or rear wall only if such wall abuts a
street, driveway, or parking area. No sign shall be more than
twenty-five (25) feet above the basic grade.
( II) Free standing signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot of
sign area for each two (2) feet of lot frontage or one hundred
(100) square feet, whichever is smaller. Not more than one
(1) such sign shall be placed on property in single and
separate ownership unless such property fronts on more
than one (1) street, in which case one (1) such sign may be
erected on each street frontage. No sign shall be more than
twenty-five (25) feet above the basic grade. No sign shall be
located beyond the side property line upon which it is
situated where it abuts a Residential District.
1320.10 Signs Permitted by Special Exception in Commercial Districts
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) Portable sidewalk signs may be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board in
CB Districts based on the following requirements:
( 1) Proof by the applicant that the location of the business or the
configuration of the store front and fenestration is such that it cannot
be adequately identified through the signage provided otherwise in
Article 1320 of the Zoning Ordinance.
( 2) No more than one (1) sign may be permitted per building no matter
how many businesses are located in the building except where the
building has rear access onto a sidewalk or other public way, then
two (2) signs are permitted. This also applies to corner buildings
fronting on two (2) streets.
( 3) The following general requirements apply to all portable sidewalk
signs:
( I) Signs may be displayed only during business hours,
otherwise sign must be removed from sidewalk area.
( II) Signs may not have any moving parts, flags, banners,
balloons or other attachments.
( III) Signs may not be illuminated directly or indirectly.
( IV) If approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant must
supply a Certificate of Insurance naming the City of
Bethlehem as an additional insured and comprehensive
general liability insurance with a minimum of $1,000,000 per
individual and aggregate of $1,000,000.
( V) If such sign is proposed to be located in the Historic Area it
must be reviewed by the Board of Historic and Architectural
Review and a Certificate of Appropriateness granted by City
Council.
( 4) The following design and location requirements apply to portable
sidewalk signs:
( I) All signs shall be a maximum of five (5) feet high, three (3)
feet wide and three (3) feet deep (spread at the base).
( II) The maximum signage area per face shall be fifteen (15)
square feet and a total of two (2) faces are permitted for
each sign, totaling a maximum of thirty (30) square feet.
( III) Signs shall be constructed of durable material and be
appropriately weighted to provide stability.
( IV) When located in the Historic District, the design, character,
configuration, and coloring shall be compatible with Section
11 of Article 1713 of the Ordinance creating the Historic
District and the Review Board.
( V) The location of a portable sidewalk sign shall be a minimum
of one and one-half (1-1/2) feet back from the face of curb
and a maximum of four and one-half (4-1/2) feet back from
the face of curb.
( VI) All signs shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the
street intersection of two (2) curb lines.
1320.11 Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts
(a) On-Premises Signs
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.09 at the standards prescribed
therein except as otherwise provided in this Section and in Section
1320.07.
( 2) Signs for permitted uses provided:
( I) All parallel and projecting signs shall not exceed two (2)
square feet for each foot of length of the front building wall or
length of that portion of such wall which is devoted to such
establishment or three hundred seventy-five (375) square
feet, whichever is smaller. Said signs are permitted on a
side or rear wall only if such wall abuts a street, driveway or
parking area. No sign shall be more than twenty-five (25)
feet above the basic grade nor shall be closer than one
hundred (100) feet to a residential area.
( II) Free standing signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot of
sign area for each two (2) feet of lot frontage or three
hundred seventy-five (375) square feet, whichever is smaller.
Not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on a
property unless it fronts on more than one (1) street, in which
case one (1) such sign may be erected on each street
frontage. In addition one (1) free standing sign, indicating
the name of an industrial park and the industries within may
be erected along each highway on which the park fronts.
The location and design of such signs shall be subject to
review and approval by the Planning Commission.
( 3) No sign shall project higher than the roof line. No sign shall be
located beyond the rear or side wall of the main building when the
rear or side property line upon which it is situated abuts a
Residential District.
(b) Off-Premises Signs
( 1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.09(b) at the standards prescribed
therein.
(c) The following requirements shall apply in the case of the
Planned Industrial District:
( 1) One sign indicating the name of the industrial park and the industries
therein may be erected along each highway on which the P-I District
fronts. Such sign may be free standing or attached to a wall or
fence. Plans showing the proposed location and design of such sign
shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
( 2) Identification signs for individual industries shall be permanently
attached to the building and shall preferably be part of the
architectural design of a building. One (1) sign may be placed on
the front, sides, or rear of a building or on all sides, provided the
area conforms with the formula established in (a)(2)(I) above. One
(1) free standing sign may be used only when an industry comprises
a group of buildings. Such sign shall neither extend into any
minimum required yard nor rise above the roof line of adjacent
buildings. The sign shall not exceed the area derived from the
formula established in (a)(2)(II) above.
( 3) A temporary sign not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet
may be erected during construction within the rear half of required
yards facing upon streets. The purpose of such a sign is to identify
the industry which will occupy the lot and the organizations or
persons concerned with its construction. A temporary use permit
shall be obtained from the office of the Bureau of Inspections.
Temporary signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days following
completion of construction.
1
ARTICLE 1350
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
1350.01 STATEMENT OF FINDINGS:
The following findings have been made by the governing body
of the City of Bethlehem:
(a) Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of storm water
resulting from development throughout a watershed increases
flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities
to carry and control storm water, undermines floodplain
management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens
public health and safety.
(b) A comprehensive program of storm water management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health,
safety and welfare and the protection of the people of the
City of Bethlehem and all the people of the Commonwealth,
their resources and the environment.
1350.02 PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the public
health, safety and welfare by minimizing the damages described in
Section 1350.01(a) of this Ordinance by provisions designed to:
(a) Control accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems at their source by regulating activities which cause
such problems.
(b) Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems.
(c) Encourage recharge of groundwaters where appropriate.
(d) Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and water
courses in the City of Bethlehem and the Commonwealth.
(e) Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
(f) Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent storm water
management structures which are constructed in the City of
Bethlehem.
1350.03 STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
2
The City of Bethlehem is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, l978, P.L.
864 (Act l67), the "Storm Water Management Act" and the "Optional
Third Class City Charter Law", Act of July l5, l957 P.L. 90l.
1350.04 APPLICABILITY:
When they affect 10,000 sq.ft. of land, the following
activities shall be subject to these regulations. However, if in
the opinion of the City Engineer, compliance with these
regulations is necessary to prevent the occurence or exacerbation
of storm water or erosion control problems; than activities which
cover less than 10,000 sq. ft. shall also be subject to these
regulations.
(a) Development
(b) Subdivision
(c) Earthmoving.
(d) Agricultural operations
(e) Forest management operations
(f) Nursery operations
(g) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel
(h) Installation of storm water system or appurtenances thereto.
1350.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
(a) Storm Drainage Systems - General
(l) Construct storm drainage systems as necessary to convey
the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or
property.
(2) Construct completely the necessary storm sewer
facilities as approved by the City Engineer to drain the
storm water runoff from the applicant's land, as well as
the collected runoff from development(s) at higher
elevations in the same watershed. Should the land at a
higher elevation be undeveloped, the design of the storm
sewer system local to the applicant shall be designed as
if the land above were fully developed assuming runoff
controls in effect in a tributary area.
3
(3) Construct completely capped storm sewers when, in the
opinion of the City Engineer, the combination of storm
waters from the applicant's tract and undeveloped land
at a higher elevation would not necessitate use of the
sewer line until the land above is developed.
(4)Storm drainage systems shall, among other requirements,
(a) permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses except
as modified by storm water detention facilities or open
channels consistent with this ordinance; (b) provide
positive drainage away from buildings and on-site sewage
disposal systems; and (c) prevent overloading of
downstream drainage systems and watercourses as a result
of increased rate of runoff caused by the proposed
development.
(5)Materials and construction requirements shall meet
specifications and procedures acceptable to the City
Engineer.
(b) Stormwater Discharge to A Deficient Channel:
Should it be evident that an offsite stormwater drainage
channel, into which a developer desires to discharge
postdevelopment stormwater at a flow rate greater than the
predevelopment stormwater flow rate, is deficient either from
a safety, hydraulic, or erosion control standpoint, the
developer shall - as determined by the City Engineer and
consistent with any applicable Act 167 watershed plans -
provide an appropriate detention facility, or provide the
City a monetary compensation according to the following
formula, or upgrade the deficient stormwater channel to the
satisfacton of the City Engineer.
(1) Monetary compensation (in dollars) = (0.0967) X (Area of
additional impervious surfaces in sq.ft.), but not less
than $1,000.00.
(2) Monetary compensation collected herein shall be placed
into a special escrow account of the City for the sole
purpose of providing to finance construction work
necessary to upgrade stormwater drainage systems
throughout the City.
(c) Stormwater Discharge Onto Adjacent Property:
(1)The existing points of concentrated drainage discharge
onto adjacent property shall not be altered without
written approval of the affected property owner(s) and
the City Engineer.
4
(2)Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall be managed such that the peak
diffused flow does not increase in the general direction
of discharge, except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance. If diffused flow is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the
developer must document that there are adequate
downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm
will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas of
existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to
any applicable release rate criteria in the general
direction of existing discharge whether they are
proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused
drainage areas.
(d) Stormwater Drainage Easement:
Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourses other than
permanent streams or, if acceptable to the City Engineer, in
areas of sheet or shallow flow, there shall be provided a
drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of
such watercourse. The width of the easement shall be
adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based
on calculations made in conformance with Section for
the l00-year return period runoff and to provide a freeboard
allowance of one-half (0.5) foot above the design water
surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill, structures, plantings and/or
any other alterations or obstructions which may adversely
affect the flow of storm water within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to
ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required.
(e) Street Drainage:
(1)Storm drainage systems shall, among other requirements,
(a) ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the
line of streets; (b) take surface water from the bottom
of vertical grades, lead water from springs, and avoid
excessive use of cross-gutters at street intersections
and elsewhere; (c) provide for the eventual discharge of
surface water away from the street rights-of-way; and
(d) intercept stormwater runoff along streets at
intervals related to the extent and grade of the area
drained.
(2)Inlets:
A.Inlets shall be designed and located to prevent hazardous
conditions for vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.
5
B. Inlets shall be spaced to collect design flows from
the catchment areas allowing 10% maximum bypass.
In no instance shall inlet spacing be greater than
400 feet.
C.Inlets shall be depressed two inches below the grade of the
gutter or ground surface. Manholes may be
substituted for inlets at locations where inlets
are not required to handle surface runoff.
(3)Flow Across Intersections:
When stormwater flow across intesections is necessary, the
depth of flow across through streets shall not exceed
one inch for a 10-year storm.
(4)Drainage Onto State Highway:
Any drainage facilities required by this Ordinance that are
located on State highway rights-of-way shall be subject
to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(f) Storm Sewer Pipes:
(1)Generally, the minimum diameter of a storm sewer pipe
shall be 15 inches. If considered hydraulically
acceptable by the City Engineer, he may allow a smaller
size storm sewer pipe for onsite drainage.
(2)Storm sewer pipe slopes shall be sufficient to provide a
minimum velocity of 3 feet per second and a maximum
velocity of 15 feet per second for a 1-year storm.
(3)Where outlet velocities exceed five(5) feet per second,
approved energy dissipators and/or outlet protection
shall be designed and installed.
(g) Modification of Natural Drainage Swales:
When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions,
natural drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide
for drainage; open channels -subject to the approval of the
City Engineer may be constructed conforming substantially to
the line and grade of such natural drainage swales. The City
Engineer may require an unexposed drainage system(i.e. storm
sewer pipe), if an open channel places nearby residencies and
their accupants at risks due to the volume and/or velocity of
water flow in an exposed channel. Should a storm sewer pipe
be required, it shall be designed for a 25-year storm event
6
unless other conditions in this ordinance require a greater
capacity. Capacities of open channels shall be calculated
using the Manning equation or other acceptable engineering
equation/method as approved by the City Engineer.
(h) Erosion Control:
Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so
designed and provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse
channels and at all points of discharge. The engineering
design(s) for controlling runoff both during and after
construction shall comply with the DER Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual(February 1985).
(i) Stormwater Volume Control:
Where geology permits, consideration should be given to the
design and use of volume controls for storm water management.
(j) Stormwater Detention
(1) Stormwater detention facilities shall be used whenever
increased runoff from the land development would
overload drainage systems or cause significant increases
in flood levels in any watercourses downstream. This
will be determined by comparing the increase in runoff
caused by the land development with the existing runoff
rates and capacity of downstream drainage systems and
watercourses. Any proposed land development within a
watershed for which there is an approved Act l67
Stormwater Management Plan shall adhere to the
detention/no detention requirements of the Plan. This
ordinance incorporates the basic requirements of all
apporved stormwater management plans under Act l67; and
therefore, any proposed land development within a City
watershed shall adhere to the detention/no detention
requirements of the applicable watershed plan.
A. Watersheds Under An Approved Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan:
Within watershed for which there is an approved Act l67
Stormwater Management Plan, the detention
facilities shall be designed to discharge postdevelopment
peak runoff rates consistent with the
Plan criteria except in the instance of off-site
detention facilities implemented in accordance with
paragraph "C" below. In the event that detention
is not required by the Act 167 plan, the developer
shall still be required to pay a fee equivalent to
the cost of detention as stipulated in Section
7
1350.05(b).
B. Watersheds Not Under An Approved Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan:
Within watersheds for which there is not an approved Act l67
Stormwater Management Plan, the detention
facilities shall be designed to provide the peak
rate of runoff at all points of discharge from the
site, when developed, which will not exceed the
peak rate of runoff at each of those points prior
to development for a one (1), five (5), ten (10),
twenty-five (25), fifty (50), and one hundred (100)
year storm, except in the instance of off-site
detention facilities implemented in accordance with
paragraph "C" below. Further, the City Engineer
may impose more restrictive requirements on release
rates when a valid engineering study indicates that
more restrictive requirements are necessary to
prevent an increase in the peak flow rates at any
point downstream (up to the confluence of the
Lehigh River) from the point of discharge. In
cases where a proposed land development cannot
accomodate a detention facility, and\or if - in the
opinion of the City Engineer - a detention facility
is not feasible nor a significantly useful
stormwater management tool, the developer may at
the discretion of the City Engineer request to pay
a fee equivalent to the cost of detention in lieu
of detention as stipulated in Section 1350.05(b).
C.Regional Detention Facilities:
In certain instances, regional detention facilities to
provide runoff control for multiple development
sites may be implemented in lieu of individual
development site detention basins. Peak runoff
rates of discharge from a regional detention basin
shall be based upon maintaining existing peak
runoff rates for the tributary area, except that
other criteria for discharge may apply for regional
detention facilities located within a watershed
with an approved Act l67 Stormwater Management
Plan. Any developer relying upon regional
detention facilities in lieu of on-site controls
shall pay a fee to the owner of the regional
facility in proportion to the share of total
storage volume required by the development and
provided by the basin. Any proposed regional
detention facility shall have the approval of the
Joint Planning Commission as well as the City
8
Engineer.
2. Provisions of Detention Facilities:
Where detention facilities are included as part of the storm
drainage system, the following provisions will apply:
A. Detention ponds shall be designed so that they
return to normal conditions within approximately
twelve (l2) hours after the termination of the
storm, unless the City Engineer finds that
downstream conditions may warrant other design
criteria for stormwater release.
B. The developer shall demonstrate that such ponds are
designed, protected and located to assure that
public safety is maximized and health problems are
prevented. Certain protective devices and/or
screenings such as fencing and landscaping may be
required at the discretion of the City Engineer
and/or Planning Commission, as applicable. The
depth of the detention facility and the location of
the facility in conjunction with the surrounding
structuresshall be considered when considering the
need for the above improvements.
C. The developer shall verify that the operation of
the detention facilities will not aggravate
potential downstream peaking conditions, unless the
detention facilities have been designed in
accordance with an approved Act l67 Stormwater
Management Plan for the applicable watershed.
D. All storm water detention facilities shall provide
a minimum l.0 foot freeboard above the maximum pool
elevation associated with the 2- through 25-year
runoff events. A designed concrete outlet
structure shall be provided. Also, a designed
emergency spillway shall be provided to pass the
l00-year runoff event with a minimum 0.5 foot
freeboard should the design outlet structure become
completely obstructed. Overflow through the
emergency spillway shall be controlled to prevent
property damage.
E. A subsurface soils investigation satisfactory to
the City Engineer and with special emphasis on
identifying sinkholes shall be performed.
F.If in the opinion of the City Engineer the seasonal high
9
groundwater table is within five feet of the
bottom elevation of the detention pond, then a
valid engineering study shall demonstrate the
actual high groundwater elevation and any impact
that it may have on the performance of the
detention pond.
G.The bottom of the pond shall be sloped toward the outlet
structure a minimum of 1%. The side slopes of the
pond shall be no steeper than 4 units horizontal to
1 unit vertical, unless special provisions are made
which are acceptable to the City Engineer.
H.All construction joints are to be watertight.
I.Unless a geological survey demonstrates the feasibility of
encouraging infiltration in a detention pond, the
detention pond shall provide a 1 foot layer of clay
material with a permeability of 10 -7 cm/sec or
less, verified by standard laboratory tests. The
City shall secure the services of a laboratory
competent in this area of testing and acceptable to
the City Engineer to perform the testing required
to verify compliance with this requirement. The
cost for this testing shall be estimated by the
City and be paid up-front by the developer as part
of the developer's agreement. A maximum of three
permeability tests chosen at random by the City
Engineer, or his authorized representative, shall
be required if and only if all the results from
these tests are acceptable. Additional tests may
be required by the City Engineer should any of the
three original tests yield unacceptable results.
Any additional tests that are necessary to verify
compliance herein shall be paid by the developer.
A minimum of 6 inches of good topsoil shall overlay
the clay liner to ensure the adequate growth of
grass and protection from erosion and desiccation
of the clay liner.
J.Complete details and sections shall be provided for the
outlet structure and only concrete outlet
structures are allowed. A sectional view is also
required for the spillway.
K.Any detention pond intended to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance which requires a Dam Safety Permit
from DER shall be designed consistent with the
provisions of the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act
and the DER Chapter l05 Rules and Regulations.
10
L.Provisions for the maintenance of detention ponds shall
comply with Section of this ordinance.
(k) Calculations of Runoff and Design Storm Frequency
(1) Storm drainage systems required by this Ordinance shall
be designed to provide protection from a twenty-five
(25) to one hundred (l00) year storm as determined by
the City Engineer. For those portions of the City
within watersheds which have approved Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plans, the criteria within the applicable
plan shall be used except that the storm drainage system
shall at least be adequate for a twenty-five year (25)
storm event. A one hundred (l00) year design storm is
required where a storm in excess of this storm will
likely cause damage to existing or future structures or
their contents.
(2) Stormwater runoff from watersheds of twenty (20) or less
acres may be calculated by the rational method as
described in Manual Number 37 of the American Society of
Civil Engineers, except as the watershed size criteria
may be modified by an approved Act l67 Stormwater
Management Plan. The rational method of runoff
calculation is explained in Appendix B.
(3) All calculations using the Rational Method shall use
rainfall intensities consistent with appropriate times
of concentration, return periods, and the Intensity-
Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix C and
as stipulated, in SCS Technical Release Number 55
(TR55,l986). Note, however, that the maximum lengths of
overland flow allowed for sheet flow is l00 feet.
(4)Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall
be based upon the table presented in Appendix C, unless
in the opinion of the City Engineer, a more up-to-date
or conservative set of runoff coefficients are necessary
to prevent the exacerbation of existing downstream
stormwater deficiencies.
(5)Stormwater runoff from watersheds of more than twenty (20)
acres shall be calculated using the soil-cover-complex
method developed by the Soil Conservation Service or
other appropriate method acceptable to the City
Engineer.
(6) All calculations using the soil-cover-complex method
shall use the Soil Conservation Service Type II 24-hour
rainfall distribution. The 24-hour rainfall depths for
the various return periods to be used consistent with
11
this Ordinance are taken from the Penndot Intensity -
Duration - Frequency Field Manual (May l986) for Region
4:
Return Period 24-Hour Rainfall
Depth
1 year
2 year 2.88 inches
5 year
l0 year 4.56 inches
25 year 5.52 inches
50 year
l00 year 7.68 inches
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-24
hour distribution is included in Appendix C.
(7)Runoff Curve Numbers (CN's) to be used in the soil-covercomplex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented
in Appendix C.
(8) The design of the detention facility shall be verified
by routing the proposed post-development hydrograph
through the pond using a storage indication technique.
(9) The Manning equation explained in Appendix B shall be
used in calculating capacities of watercourses and storm
sewers. Culverts shall be designed using standard
engineering methods acceptable to the City Engineer.
Manning 'n' values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C.
(10)Complete detailed drainage calculations and applicable
charts and nomographs certified(i.e. P.E. Stamp) by the
design engineer shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
(l) Improvement Specifications
The City Engineer may supply additional specifications
necessary for the spacing and type of inlets and manholes,
minimum pipe sizes, and materials and construction methods.
SECTION 302. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS
A. Mapping of Storm Water Management Districts - In order
to implement the provisions of the Monocacy Creek and
Nancy Run Storm Water Management Plans the City is
hereby divided into Storm Water Management Districts
consistent with the Monocacy Creek and Nancy Run Release
Rate Maps presented in the Plans. The boundaries of the
12
Storm Water Management Districts are shown on an
official map which is available for inspection at the
City office. A copy of the official map at a reduced
scale is included in Appendix A for general reference.
B. Description of Storm Water Management Districts - Three
types of Storm Water Management District may be
applicable to the municipality, namely Single Release
Rate Districts, Provisional No Detention Districts and
Dual Release Rate Districts as described below.
l. Single Release Rate Districts - There are six
single release rate districts which differ in the
extent to which post-development runoff must be
controlled. The release rates, and districts, are
50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90% and l00%. Within a given
district, the postdevelopment peak rate of storm
runoff must be controlled to the stated percentage
of the predevelopment peak rate of storm runoff in
order to protect downstream watershed areas.
2. Provisional No Detention Districts - These
watershed areas may discharge post-development peak
runoff without detention facilities without
adversely affecting the total watershed peak flow.
In certain instances, however, the "local" runoff
conveyance facilities, which transport runoff from
the site to the main channel, may not have adequate
capacity to safely transport increased peak flows
associated with not providing detention for a
proposed development. In those instances, the
developer shall either use a l00% release rate
control or provide increased capacity of downstream
drainage elements to convey increased peak flows
consistent with Section 303.H. In determining if
adequate capacity exists in the local watershed
drainage network, the developer must assume that
the entire local watershed is developed per current
zoning and that all new development would use the
runoff controls specified by this Ordinance.
Similarly, any capacity improvement must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all
areas tributary to the improvement consistent with
the capacity criteria specified in Section 303.C.
3. Dual Release Rate Districts - The anticipated postdevelopment
runoff from these areas can only be
controlled across the range of return periods from
2 through l00 years by implementing a dual system
of release rates. This system is designated as
30%/l00% release rate criteria. Within this
13
district, the 2-year post-development runoff must
be controlled to 30% of the pre-development 2-year
runoff peak. Further, the l0-year, 25-year and
l00-year post-development runoff must be controlled
to l00% of the pre-development peak.
SECTION 303. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT IMPLEMENTATION
PROVISIONS
A. Any storm water management controls required by this
Ordinance and subject to single release rate criteria
(50% through l00%) shall meet the applicable release
rate criteria for each of the 2-, l0-, 25- and l00-year
return period runoff events consistent with the
calculation methodology specified in Section 304. Storm
water management controls intended to meet the Dual
Release Rate (30%/l00%) criteria shall also be designed
consistent with Section 304.
B. The exact location of the Storm Water Management
District boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using
the two-foot topographic contours provided as part of
the Drainage Plan. The District boundaries as
originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or,
in certain instances, are drawn from the intersection of
the watercourse and a physical feature (such as the
confluence with another watercourse or a potential flow
obstruction e.g. road, culvert, bridge, etc.) to the
topographic divide consistent with topography.
C. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance
with this Ordinance shall use the following criteria for
determining adequacy for accepting increased peak flow
rates:
l. Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able
to convey the increased runoff associated with a
l0-year return period event within their banks at
velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall
be based upon criteria included in the DER Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual (February,
l985) and presented in Appendix C of this
Ordinance.
2. Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able
to convey the increased 25-year return period
runoff peak within their banks or otherwise not
create any hazard to persons or property.
14
3. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other
facilities which must pass or convey flows from the
tributary area must have sufficient capacity to
pass or convey the increased flows associated with
the 25-year return period runoff event, except for
facilities located within a designated floodplain
area which must be capable of passing or conveying
the l00-year return period runoff. Any facilities
which constitute stream enclosures per DER's
Chapter l05 regulations shall be designed to convey
the l00-year return period runoff.
D. For a proposed development site located within only one
release rate category area, the total runoff from the
site shall meet the applicable release rate criteria.
For development sites with multiple points of
concentrated runoff discharge, individual drainage
points may be designed for up to a l00% release rate so
long as the total runoff from the site is controlled to
the applicable release rate.
E. For a proposed development site located within two or
more release rate category areas, the maximum peak rate
of runoff that may be discharged at any point is limited
to the predevelopment peak rate of runoff at the point
multiplied by the applicable release rate. The control
rates shall apply regardless of any grading
modifications which may change the drainage area which
discharges at a given point.
F. For proposed development sites located partially within
a release rate category area and partially within a
provisional no detention area, in no event shall a
significant portion of the site area subject to the
release rate control be drained to the discharge
point(s) located in the no detention area.
G. "No Harm" Option - For any proposed development site not
located in a provisional no detention district, the
developer has the option of using a less restrictive
runoff control (including no detention) if the developer
can prove that "no harm" would be caused by discharging
at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the Plan.
Proof of "no harm" would have to be shown from the
development site through the remainder of the downstream
drainage network to the confluence of the Monocacy Creek
or the Nancy Run, whichever is applicable, with the
Lehigh River. Proof of "no harm" must be shown using
the capacity criteria specified in Section 303.C. if
downstream capacity analysis is a part of the "no harm"
justification.
15
Attempts to prove "no harm" based upon downstream peak
flow versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the
following provisions:
l.The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas
for the design return period storms (2-, l0-, 25-
and l00- year) shall be the values from the
calibrated Penn State Runoff Model for the Monocacy
Creek or Nancy Run Watershed, whichever is
applicable. These flow values would be supplied to
the developer by the municipal engineer upon
request.
2. Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance
system as documented by a developer may be used by
the developer only in proportion to his development
site acreage relative to the total upstream
undeveloped acreage from the identified capacity
(i.e. if his site is l0% of the upstream
undeveloped acreage, he may use up to l0% of the
documented downstream available capacity).
3. Developer-proposed runoff controls which would
generate increased peak flow rates at documented
storm drainage problem areas would, by definition,
be precluded from successful attempts to prove "no
harm", except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with
Section 303.I.
Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted
concurrently to the Joint Planning Commission and the
City Engineer for review by the developer as part of the
Drainage Plan submission per Article IV. Any extra
submission costs resulting from the dual submission and
review shall be borne by the developer. The developer
completely assumes all risks in so much that the
submission of "no harm" requires a rigorous review for
its approval; i.e. approval is not guaranteed.
H. Regional or Sub-Regional Detention Alternatives - For
certain areas within the watershed, it may be more costeffective
to provide on control facility for an entire
subarea, group of subareas, or portion of a subarea
incorporating more than one development site than to
provide an individual control facility for each
development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional or sub-regional runoff control alternatives are
the responsibility of prospective developers. The
design of any regional control basins must incorporate
16
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed.
The peak outflow of a regional basin would be
determined on a case-by-case basis using the hydrologic
model of the watershed consistent with protection of the
downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers
to the calibrated Monocacy Creek version of the Penn
State Runoff Model as developed for the Storm Water
Management Plan.
I. Capacity Improvements - In certain instances, primarily
within the provisional no detention areas, local
drainage conditions may dictate more stringent levels of
runoff control than those based upon protection of the
entire watershed. In these instances, if the developer
could prove that it would be feasible to provide
capacity improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency
in the local drainage network, then the capacity
improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu
of runoff controls on the development site. Any
capacity improvements would be designed based upon
development of all areas tributary to the proposed
improvement and the capacity criteria specified in
Section 303.C. In addition, all new development
upstream of a proposed capacity improvement shall be
assumed to implement the applicable runoff controls
consistent with this Ordinance except that all new
development within the entire subarea(s) within which
the proposed development site is located shall be
assumed to implement the developer's proposed discharge
control, if any.
Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary
to implement any regional or subregional detention
alternatives or to implement a modified "no harm" option
which proposes specific capacity improvements to
document the validity of a less stringent discharge
control which would not create any harm downstream.
J. Waiver of Runoff Control Based on Minimum Additional
Impervious Cover - Any proposed Regulated Activity,
except those defined in Sections l04.I. and l04.J.,
which would create l0,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover would be exempt from meeting
the runoff control provisions of this Ordinance. For
developments which are to take place in stages, the
entire development plan must be used in determining
conformance to this criteria. Additional impervious
cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof,
parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks constructed as part of or for the proposed
development. Any areas which may be designed to
17
initially be semi-pervious (e.g. gravel, crushed stone,
porous pavement, etc.) shall be considered impervious
areas for the purposes of waiver evaluation.
No waiver shall be provided for any Regulated Activities
as defined in Sections l04.I. and l04.J.
ARTICLE IV
DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 401. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
For any of the Regulated Activities of this Ordinance, prior
to the final approval of subdivision and/or land development
plans, or the issuance of any permit, or the commencement of
any land disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider,
developer of his agent shall submit a Drainage Plan for
approval.
SECTION 402. EXEMPTIONS
Any Regulated Activity which would create l0,000 square feet
or less of additional impervious cover is exempt from the
Drainage Plan preparation provisions of this Ordinance. This
criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even
if development is to take place in stages (i.e. the
impervious cover associated with the total development shall
be used to compare to the waiver minimum, not merely the
individual stage impervious cover). Additional impervious
cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking
or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks
constructed as part of or for the proposed Regulated
Activity. Any areas designed to initially be gravel, crushed
stone, porous pavement, etc. shall be assumed to be
impervious for the purposes of comparison to the waiver
criteria.
SECTION 403. DRAINAGE PLAN CONTENTS
The following items shall be included in the Drainage Plan:
A. General
General description of proposed permanent storm water
controls. All existing drainage features which are to
be incorporated in the design shall be so identified.
If the developement is to occur in stages, a general
18
drainage plan for the entire development shall be
presented with the first stage and appropriate
development stages for the drainage system shall be
indicated.
B. Maps(s) of the project area showing:
l. The location of the project relative to highways,
municipalities or other identifiable landmarks.
2. Mapping of the watershed area or areas including
existing and proposed contours in which the
proposed development is located. Existing and
proposed contours shall be shown at at intervals of
two (2) feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater
than l5%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
3. Calculations of runoff before and after development
for all pionts of runoff concentration.
4.Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
4.Other physical features including existing drainage
swales and areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved.
5. Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers
and water lines.
6. An overlay showing soil types and boundaries.
7. Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative
cover.
8. Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and
buildings.
9. Final contours at intervals of two (2) feet. In
areas of steep slopes (greater than l5%), five-foot
contour intervals may be used.
l0. Storm Water Management District boundaries
applicable to the site.
C. Storm Water Management Controls
l. All storm water management controls must be shown
on a map described, including:
a. Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage
19
pits, beds or trenches. When these structures
are used, the locations of septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
b. Other control devices or methods such as rooftop
storage, semi-pervious paving materials,
grass swales, parking lot ponding, vegetated
strips, detention or retention ponds, storm
sewers, etc..
2. All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in
the design of the control device or method must be
shown.
D. Maintenance Program - A maintenance program for all
storm water management control facilities must be
included. This program must include the proposed
ownership of the control facilities, the maintenance
requirements for the facilities, and the financial
responsibilities for the required maintenance.
SECTION 404. PLAN SUBMISSION
A. For Regulated Activities specified in Section l04.A. and
l04.B.:
l. The Drainage Plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the municipal secretary (or other
appropriate person) as part of the Preliminary Plan
submission for the subdivision or land development.
2. Three (3) copies of the Drainage Plan shall be
submitted.
3. Distribution of the Drainage Plan will be as
follows:
a) One (l) copy of the municipal governing body.
b) One (l) copy to the municipal engineer.
c) One (l) copy to the Joint Planning Commission.
B. For Regulated Activities specified in Sections l04.E.
and l04.F., the Drainage Plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the City building permit officer as part of
the building permit application. The building permit
officer will then refer the Drainage plan to the City
Engineer for review.
C. For Regulated Activities specified in Section l04.I. and
20
l04.J.:
l. The Drainage Plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the Joint Planning Commission for
coordination with the DER permit application
process under Chapter l05 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter l06 (Flood Plain Management)
of DER's Rules and Regulations.
2. One (l) copy of the Drainage Plan shall be
submitted.
SECTION 405. DRAINAGE PLAN REVIEW
A. The City Engineer shall review the Drainage Plan for
consistency with the adopted Monocacy Creek and Nancy
Run Storm Water Management Plans as embodied by this
ordinance and against any additional storm drainage
provisions contained in the City subdivision and land
development or zoning ordinance, as applicable.
B. The Joint Planning Commission shall provide an advisory
review of the Drainage Plan for consistency with the
Monocacy Creek and Nancy Run Storm Water Management
Plans.
C. For Regulated Activities specified in Section l04.A. and
l04.B., the JPC shall provide written comments to the
City, within a time frame consistent with established
procedures under Act 247, as to whether the Drainage
Plan has been found to be consistent with the Storm
Water Management Plan.
D. For Regulated Activities specified in Sections l04.I.
and l04.J., the JPC shall notify DER whether the
Drainage Plan is consistent with the Storm Water
Management Plan and forward a copy of the review letter
to the City and developer.
E. The City shall not approve any subdivision or land
development (Regulated Activities l04.A. and l04.B.) or
building permit application (Regulated Activities l04.E.
and l04.F.) if the Drainage Plan has been found to be
inconsistent with the Storm Water Management Plan as
determined by the City Engineer.
SECTION 406. MODIFICATION OF PLANS
A modification to a submitted Drainage Plan for a proposed
development site which involves a change in control methods
21
or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign
of control measures, or which is necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the Drainage Plan (as
determined by the City Engineer) shall require a resubmission
of the modified Drainage Plan consistent with Section 404
subject to review per Section 405 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 407. HARDSHIP WAIVER PROCEDURE
The City may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged
that the provisions of this (Act l67) Ordinance inflict
unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request
shall be in writing on an application form promulgated by the
City and accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee
schedule adopted by the City. A copy of the completed
application form shall be provided to each of the following:
City Planning Commission, City Engineer, City Solicitor, and
the Joint Planning Commission. The application shall fully
document the nature of the alleged hardship.
The City may grant a waiver provided that all of the
following findings are made in a given case:
l. That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity of lot size or shape,
or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that
the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and
not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this Ordinance in the Storm Water
Management District in which the property is located;
2. That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property
can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, including the "no harm"
provision, and that the authorization of a waiver is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property;
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by
the applicant; and
4. That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the
minimum waiver that will afford relief and will
represent the least modification possible of the
regulation in issue.
In granting any waiver, the City may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
22
implement the purposes of Act l67 and this Ordinance.
ARTICLE V
INSPECTIONS
SECTION 501. SCHEDULE OF INSPECTIONS
A. The City Engineer or his designee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent storm water
control facilities and the completed installation.
B. If at any stage of the work the City Engineer determines
that the permanent storm water control facilities are
not being installed in accordance with the approved
development plan, the City shall revoke any existing
permits until a revised development plan is submitted
and approved as required by Section 406.
ARTICLE VI
FEES AND EXPENSES
SECTION 601. GENERAL
A fee shall be established by the City to defer municipal
costs for Drainage Plan review and processing.
SECTION 602. EXPENSES COVERED BY FEES
The fees required by this Ordinance shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the Drainage Plan by the City Engineer or
his representative.
B. The site inspection and testing.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements
during construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and
improvements required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to enforce any permit
provisions, regulated by this Ordinance, correct
violations, and assure the completion of stipulated
remedial actions.
23
ARTICLE VII
MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION 701. MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
The maintenance responsibilities for permanent storm water
runoff control facilities shall be determined based upon the
type of ownership of the property which is controlled by the
facilities.
A. Single Entity Ownership - In all cases where the
permanent storm water runoff control facilities are
designed to manage runoff from property in a single
entity ownership as defined below, the maintenance
responsibility for the storm water control facilities
shall be with the single entity owner. The single
entity owner shall enter into an agreement with the City
which specifies that the owner or future owner will
properly maintain the facilities consistent with
accepted practice as determined by the City Engineer.
The agreement shall provide for regular inspections by
the City and contain such provisions as necessary to
ensure timely correction of any maintenance deficiencies
by the single entity owner. A single entity shall be
defined as an individual, association, public or private
corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any
other legal entity empowered to own real estate.
B. Multiple Ownership - In cases where the property
controlled by the permanent storm water control
facilities shall be in multiple ownership (i.e. many
individual owners of various portions of the property),
the developer shall dedicate the permanent storm water
control facilities to the City for maintenance. The
developer shall then provide a one time fee to the City
to provide for maintenance of the pond for perpetuity.
This fee shall be based on a reasonable estimate of the
projected costs to maintain the pond, so that these
projected costs can be completely paid by the interest
earned on the one time fee. This fee shall be placed
into a special escrow account to be used, at the
approval of the City Engineer, solely for stormwater
management purposes.
In certain multiple ownership situations, the City may
benefit by transferring the maintenance responsibility
to an individual or group of individuals residing within
the controlled area. These individuals may have the
permanent storm water control facilities adjacent to
their lots or otherwise have an interest in the property
24
maintenance of the facilities. In these instances, the
City and the individual(s) may enter into a formal
agreement for the maintenance of the facilities. The
City shall maintain ownership of the facilities and be
responsible for periodic inspections.
SECTION 702. RIGHT-OF-WAY
Upon presentation of the proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable
times upon any property within the municipality to
investigate or ascertain whether proper maintenance is being
provided for any storm water management facilities for which
the municipality is not directly responsible for maintenance
as provided in Section 70l.
ARTICLE 1360
Airport Zoning Ordinance
1360.01 Title.
1360.02 Purpose.
1360.03 Definitions.
1360.04 Airport Zones.
1360.05 Airport Zone Height Limitations.
1360.06 Use Restriction.
1360.07 Nonconforming Uses.
1360.08 Permits.
1360.09 Enforcement.
1360.10 Board of Adjustment.
1360.11 Appeals.
1360.12 Judicial Review.
1360.13 Conflicting Regulations.
1360.14 Severability
1360.15 Effective Date.
1360.99 Penalties.
CROSS REFERENCES
Airport Zoning Act (April 17, 1945, P.L. 237) Zoning Ordinance - Art. 1325
1360.01 TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Airport
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem. (Ord. 2826 §1. Passed 3/2/82.)
1360.02 PURPOSE.
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Authority conferred by the Airport
Zoning Act (April 17, 1945, P.L. 237, as amended). It is hereby found that an
obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton Airport, and property or occupants of land in its
vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach
minimums of Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton Airport; and that an obstruction may
reduce the size of areas available for landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft,
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton
Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
ARTICLE 1360 2
(a) that the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of
being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by Allentown-
Bethlehem-Easton Airport:
(b) that it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and
general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard
to air navigation be prevented; and
(c) that the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation.
It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of
hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of
hazards to air navigation, or marking and lighting of obstructions are public
purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and
acquire land or interests in land. (Ord. 2826. Passed 3/2/82.)
1360.03 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings herein indicated, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Airport" means Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton Airport, located in
Hanover Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
(b) "Airport Elevation" is 394.3 feet above mean sea level.
(Ord. 3285. Passed 9/19/89.)
(c) "Approach Surface" is a surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary
surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth
in Section 1360.05 of this Article. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
(d) "Approach, Transitional, Horizontal, and Conical Zones"- These zones
are set forth in Section 1360.04 of this Article.
(e) "Board or Board of Adjustment" means the Board of Adjustment created
under Section 1360.10 hereof.
ARTICLE 1360 3
(f) "Conical Surface" is a surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.
(g) "Hazard to Air Navigation" is an obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable
airspace.
(h) "Height" - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this Article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
(i) "Horizontal Surface" is a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the
horizontal zone.
(j) "Larger Than Utility Runway" is a runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds
maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.
(k) "Nonconforming Use" means any structure, object of natural growth, or
use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Article or an
amendment thereto and which is in existence as of the effective date of this Article
or of such amendment hereto, as the case may be.
(1) "Municipality" means the City of Bethlehem, Lehigh-Northampton
Counties, Pennsylvania.
(m) "Nonprecision Instrument Runway" is a runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
(n) "Obstruction" is any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 1360.05 of this
Article.
(o) "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or government entity; it includes a trustee, a
receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
ARTICLE 1360 4
(p) "Precision Instrument Runway" means a runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a
Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan
or any other planning document.
(q) "Primary Surface" means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface
is set forth in Section 1360.04 of this Article. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
(r) "Runway" is a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
(s) "Structure" is an object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines.
(t) "Transitional Surfaces" - These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of
seven (7') feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary
and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which
project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the end of the approach surface and at 90
degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
(u) "Tree" means any object of natural growth.
(v) "Utility Runway', is a runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and
less.
(w) "Visual Runway" is a runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
(x) "Zoning Officer" means that person appointed by the municipality to
issue zoning permits who shall be charged with the duty of administering and
enforcing this Article. (Ord. 2826 §2. Passed 3/2/82.)
ARTICLE 1360 5
1360.04 AIRPORT ZONES.
In order to carry out the provisions of this Article, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the
approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces
as they apply to Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton Airport. Such zones are shown on
the Airport Zoning Map consisting of one sheet (Sheet 2 of 2, S-5766), prepared by
G. Edwin Pidcock Co., Consulting Engineers, Allentown, PA. (Note: The map is
on file in the offices of the Zoning Officer and the City Clerk. It may be amended
from time to time.) An area located in more than one of the following zones is
considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The
various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(a) Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone - The inner edge of this approach
zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The
approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of
the centerline of the runway.
(b) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a
horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(c) Transitional Zones - The transitional zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
(d) Horizontal Zone - The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of
5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or visual and 10,000 feet for all
others from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and
connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal
zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
(e) Conical Zone - The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom
a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. (Ord. 2826 §3. Passed 3/2/82.)
ARTICLE 1360 6
1360.05 AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by
this Article to a height in excess of the applicable height herein established for
such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the
zones in question as follows:
(a) Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone - Slopes twenty (20') feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the
extended runway centerline.
(b) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone - Slopes fifty (50') feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as
the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway centerline; then slopes upward forty (40') feet horizontally for
each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the
extended runway centerline.
(c) Transitional Zones - Slopes seven (7') feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the
approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation
which is 403 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits sloping seven (7') feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision
instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are
established height limits sloping seven (7') feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and
extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the
extended runway centerline.
(d) Horizontal Zone - Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or
at a height of 553 feet above mean sea level.
(e) Conical Zone - Slopes twenty (20') feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
ARTICLE 1360 7
(f) Excepted Height Limitations - Nothing in this Article shall be construed
as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any
tree to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land.
1360.06 USE RESTRICTION.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, no use may be made of
land or water within any zone established by this Article in such a manner as to
create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
1360.07 NONCONFORMING USES.
(a) Regulations Not Retroactive - The regulations prescribed in this Article
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or
alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations at the effective
date of this Article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming
use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which
was begun prior to the effective date of this Article, and is diligently prosecuted.
(b) Marking and Lighting - Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
Section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport
obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at
the expense of the property owner.
1360.08 PERMITS.
(a) Future Uses - Except as specifically provided in l, 2 and 3 hereunder, no
material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or
otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created
unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application
for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with
sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use,
ARTICLE 1360 8
structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use
consistent with the provisions of this Article shall be granted unless a variance has
been approved in accordance with subsection 1360.08 (d).
1. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy-five (75') feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
2. In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but at
a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each
end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than seventy-five (75') feet of vertical
height above the ground, except when such tree or
structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
3. In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five
(75') feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features, would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such transition zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions should be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or
growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this Article
except as set forth in subsection 1360.05 (f).
(b) Existing Uses - No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the
effective date of this Article or any amendments thereto or than it is when the
application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a
permit shall be granted.
ARTICLE 1360 9
(c) Nonconforming Uses or Abandoned or Destroyed - In general, the
Zoning Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed,
no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
(d) Variances - Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with
the regulations prescribed in this Article, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for
a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be
accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to
the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, and relief granted will not be contrary
to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial
justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this Article. Additionally, no
application for variance to the requirements of this Article may be considered by
the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the
Airport Manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the
Airport Manager does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt,
the Board of Adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application. Any
variance granted may be made subject to any reasonable conditions that the Board
may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Article.
(e) Obstruction Marking and Lighting - Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Article and be
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the
structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner's expense,
such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the Board of
Adjustment, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the
airport at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain the necessary markings
and lights.
1360.09 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made
to the Zoning Officer upon a form published for that purpose. Applications
required by this Article to be submitted to the Zoning Officer shall be promptly
ARTICLE 1360 10
considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the Board of
Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Officer.
(b) In addition to other available remedies, the municipality may institute in
any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
any violation of this Article, or of any order or ruling made in connection with its
administration or enforcement.
1360.10 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
(a) There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment which shall be the Zoning
Hearing Board of the municipality which shall have and exercise the following
powers: (1) to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement of this Article; (2) to
hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Article upon which such
Board of Adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; and (3) to
hear and decide applications for variances.
(b) The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in
harmony with the provisions of this Article. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment
shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson,
the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be public. The Board of
Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact,
and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be a
public record.
(c) The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions
from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement,
decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this
Article.
(d) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Zoning Officer, or decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this Article.
ARTICLE 1360 11
1360.11 APPEALS.
(a) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Zoning Officer, made in the administration of the Article, may appeal to the Board
of Adjustment.
(b) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the Zoning Officer
and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken.
(c) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the
notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate a stay would in the opinion of the Zoning Officer cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of
the Board of Adjustment or notice to the Zoning Officer and on due cause shown.
(d) The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals,
give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by
attorney. The Board shall schedule, advertise and conduct the hearing in the
manner and procedure as outlined in the zoning ordinance of the municipality for
the conducting of other similar hearings before the Board, which procedure is
herein incorporated by reference to the extent that it does not conflict with the
provisions of this Article.
(e) The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
Article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
1360.12 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment, may appeal within thirty (30) days after the decision is filed
in the Office of the Board, to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh or
Northampton County, according to the provisions of the Act of Assembly by virtue
of which this Article was adopted.
ARTICLE 1360 12
1360.13 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this Article and any other regulations applicable to the same area,
whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, and the use
of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail.
1360.14 SEVERABILITY.
If any of the provisions of this Article or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of the Article which can be given effect without the
invalid provisions or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Article are
declared to be severable.
1360.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall take effect five (5) days after the date of enactment.
1360.99 PENALTIES.
Each violation of this Article or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a summary offense and be punishable by
the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $50.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $150.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or
both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $300.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85.)
ARTICLE 1501
FIRE SAFETY AND CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTION FEES
1501.01 Authority.
1501.02 Permits Required.
1501.03 Inspection.
1501.04 Adoption.
1501.05 Modifications to 2009 International Fire Code.
CROSS-REFERENCES
2009 International Fire Code - International Code Council.
Codes Board of Appeals - See Article 150 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
DOT 49 CFR Parts 100-185 - United States Department of Transportation regulations.
Optional Third Class City Charter Law - See Act of July 15, 1957, P.L. 901, as amended.
1501.01 AUTHORITY.
The City of Bethlehem Fire Department, Bureau of Inspections is hereby charged with
the enforcement of this article.
1501.02 PERMITS REQUIRED.
Permits required by the International Fire Code (current edition) shall be obtained from
the Fire Code Official. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all
times and shall be readily available for inspection by the Fire Code Official.
A fee for each permit shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule as is set forth
from time to time by resolution of Council of the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. Permit fees
shall include one (1) inspection and one (1) re-inspection for the purpose of code violation
clearance when the occupancy is unable to clear the violation at the time of the initial inspection.
An additional inspection fee will be charged for all subsequent re-inspections in accordance with
the fee schedule as is set forth from time to time by resolution of the Council of the City of
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
1501.03 INSPECTION.
The Fire Code Official shall be allowed to inspect all commercial structures and premises
no more than once per calendar year for the purposes of ascertaining, and causing to be
corrected, any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with
firefighting operations, or endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of the
International Fire Code (current edition) or any other ordinance affecting fire safety. In the event
an inspection reveals one or more deficiencies to exist, the Fire Code Official shall be permitted
to return to the premises as many times as needed in any calendar year to ensure compliance with
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1501 2
1501.04 ADOPTION.
The 2009 International Fire Code (hereafter “IFC”) published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted and made part of this ordinance, subject to the modifications
implemented hereinafter and/or by subsequent ordinance(s) of the City of Bethlehem.
1501.05 MODIFICATIONS TO 2009 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
(a) The following subsections are deleted from the IFC relating to required operational permits:
105.6.2 Amusement Buildings
105.6.3 Aviation Facilities
105.6.4 Carnivals and Fairs
105.6.5 Cellulose Nitrate Film
105.6.11 Cutting and welding
105.6.17 Floor Finishing
105.6.22 High Piled Storage
105.6.24 Industrial Ovens
105.6.25 Lumber Yards
105.6.27 LP Gas
105.6.30 Remove Exception: Recreational Fires
105.6.34 Places of Assembly
105.6.35 Private Fire Hydrants
105.6.38 Refrigeration Equipment
105.6.39 Repair Garages
105.6.43 Tents and temporary Membrane Structures
105.6.46 Wood Products
(b) § 105.6.15 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
105.6.15 Fire hydrants and valves. Approval from the Bethlehem Water Authority or its
designee is required to use or operate fire hydrants or valves intended for fire suppression
purposes which are installed on water systems and accessible to a fire apparatus access
road that is open to or generally used by the public.
Exception: A permit is not required for authorized employees of the water
company that supplies the system or the fire department to use or operate fire
hydrants or valves.
(c) § 105.6.16 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
105.6.16 Flammable and combustible liquids. An operational permit is required:
1. [reserved].
2. [reserved].
ARTICLE 1501 3
3. To store, handle or use Class II or Class IlIA liquids in excess of 25 gallons (95 L)
in a building or in excess of 60 gallons (227 L) outside a building, except for fuel
oil used in connection with oil-burning equipment.
4. [reserved].
5. [reserved].
6. To operate equipment, tanks, distilleries and similar facilities where flammable
and combustible liquids are produced, processed, stored, dispensed or used.
7. To place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) an underground,
protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank.
8. [reserved].
9. [reserved].
10. [reserved].
11. [reserved].
(d) § 105.6.35 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
105.6.35 Private fire hydrants. Approval from the Bethlehem Water Authority and the
Fire Code Official is required for the removal from service of private fire hydrants.
Exception: A permit is not required for private industry with trained maintenance
personnel, private fire brigade or fire departments to maintain, test and use private
hydrants.
(e) § 105.7.7 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
105.7.7 Flammable and combustible liquids. A construction permit is required:
1. [reserved].
2. To install, construct or alter tanks, distilleries and similar facilities where
flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, stored, dispensed or
used
3. To install, alter, remove, abandon or otherwise dispose of a flammable or
combustible liquid tank.
(f) The following subsections are deleted:
105.7.9 Industrial Ovens
105.7.10 LP-Gas
ARTICLE 1501 4
(g) § 105.7.11 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
105.7.11 Private Fire Hydrants. A construction permit is required for the removal or
modification of private fire hydrants.
(h) The following subsection is deleted:
105.7.14 Temporary membrane structures and tents
(i) The following subsection is added:
105.7.15 Photovoltaic systems. A construction permit is required to install, modify, or
remove a photovoltaic system.
(j) § 107.6 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
107.6 Overcrowding. Overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved
capacity of a building or a portion thereof shall not be allowed. The fire code official,
upon finding any overcrowding conditions or obstructions in aisles, passageways or other
means of egress, or upon finding any condition which constitutes a life safety hazard,
shall be authorized to cause the event to be stopped and/or order the immediate
evacuation of any building that is deemed unsafe due to the hazardous condition until
such condition or obstruction is corrected.
(k) § 108.1 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
108.1 Board of Appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code. The Board of Appeals identified in Article 150 of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and/or occasionally known as the “Codes
Board of Appeals” shall have exclusive jurisdiction, subject to any right of further appeal
therefrom.
(l) § 109.3 of the IFC shall be amended to read as follows:
109.3 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or
do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code
official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of
violating a fire prevention ordinance of the City of Bethlehem, punishable under the
Optional Third Class City Charter Law as follows:
(a) a fine not exceeding one per month on a property and limited to no more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000) for the first two continual and uncorrected violations
and not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) for the third and any subsequent
continual and uncorrected violation of the same subsection of a building
ARTICLE 1501 5
ordinance, housing ordinance, property maintenance ordinance, fire prevention
ordinance, electrical ordinance or plumbing ordinance on the same property;
(b) In the event the specific conduct is found to pose a threat to the public’s health,
safety or property, then penalties may be provided for as follows:
(1) the maximum penalty may be pursued for each citation issued at a rate not
to exceed one citation per five calendar days for a continual and
uncorrected violation of the same subsection of such ordinance on the
same property; and
(2) the penalty shall be no less than five hundred dollars ($500) and no more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000) for the first two continual and
uncorrected violations of the same subsection of such ordinance on the
same property and no less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and not
exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for the third and any subsequent
continual and uncorrected violation of the same subsection of such
ordinance on the same property, or imprisonment for any term not
exceeding ninety days, or both.
109.3.1 Abatement of violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein
described, the fire code official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent
unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or
occupancy of a structure on or about any premises.
(m) The definition of the term “approved” found in IFC § 202, relating to General Definitions, is
amended to read as follows:
Approved. Acceptable to the fire code official, as evidenced by his/her written approval.
(n) The definition of the term “fire code official” found in IFC § 202, relating to General
Definitions, shall be amended to read as follows:
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The fire chief or other designated authority, including the Fire
Marshal of the City of Bethlehem, charged with the administration and enforcement of
the code, or a duly authorized representative. The terms “Fire Marshal of the City of
Bethlehem” and “Fire Code Official” shall be interchangeable in this and any other
ordinance or resolution of the City of Bethlehem.
(o) The definition of the term “open burning” found in IFC § 302, is amended to read as follows:
OPEN BURNING. The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted
directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed
chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudgepots and similar devices
associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames, or use of
portable outdoor fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be
regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts,
ARTICLE 1501 6
stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of
exhaust gas are open.
(p) §307.4 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15,240 mm)
from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to
within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure.
Exceptions:
1. [reserved].
2. The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7,620 mm)
where approved
(q) §307.4.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
307.4.2 Recreational fires. Recreational fires are prohibited.
(r) §307.4.3 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Where approved, portable outdoor fireplaces shall be
used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within
25 feet (7,620 mm) of a structure or within 15 feet (7,572 mm) of combustible material.
(s) §307.5 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor
fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished, a dedicated fire watch
person must remain on the premises for a minimum of one hour after extinguishment. A
minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum
4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand,
water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
(t) §308.1.6.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
308.1.6.2 Portable fueled open-flame devices. Portable open-flame devices fueled by
flammable or combustible gases or liquids shall be enclosed or installed in such a manner
as to prevent the flame from contacting combustible material. All devices shall have an
appropriate UL listing.
ARTICLE 1501 7
(u) § 308.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
308.2 Permits required. Permits shall be obtained from the fire code official in
accordance with Section 105.6 prior to engaging in the following activities involving
open flame, fire and burning:
1. [reserved].
2. Use of open flame, fire or burning in connection with Group A or E occupancies.
3. Use or operation of torches and other devices, machines or processes liable to start or
cause fire in or upon wildfire risk areas.
(v) The following subsection is deleted:
311.5 Placards
(w) § 315.3 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
315.3 Outside storage. Outside storage of combustible materials shall not be located
within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a property line.
Exceptions:
1. The separation distance is allowed to be reduced to 3 feet (914 mm) for
storage not exceeding 3 feet (914 mm) in height.
2. The separation distance is allowed to be reduced when the fire code official
determines that no hazard to the adjoining property exists.
(x) Add the following subsection to the IFC:
401.3.4 Resetting of fire alarm systems. Where a building fire alarm system activates for
other than tests or maintenance, owners or occupants shall not reset the system until the
fire department arrives and verifies the location of the activated device(s).
(y) Add the following subsection to the IFC:
505.1.1 Only addresses approved and verified by the Department of Public Works will be
acceptable.
(z) § 507.3 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
507.3 Fire flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and
facilities shall be determined by an approved method determined by Department of Water
and Sewer Resources.
ARTICLE 1501 8
507.3.1 Fire flow testing. The fire code official, Department of Water and Sewer
Resources or its designees shall be notified prior to conducting fire flow testing.
Fire Flow tests shall be witnessed by the fire code official, Department of Water
and Sewer Resources or its designees and approved documentation of the test and
results shall be provided to the Department of Water and Sewer Resources.
(aa) § 507.4 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
507.4 Water supply test. The fire code official and Department of Water and Sewer
Resources or its designees shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply
tests shall be witnessed by the fire code official and Department of Water and Sewer
Resources or its designees or approved documentation of the test shall be provided to
Department of Water and Sewer Resources prior to final approval of the water supply
system.
507.4.1 The property owner is responsible for installation and maintenance of
water supply for construction projects until the water system is accepted/approved
by the Department of Water and Sewer Resources, and responsibility for the
system is formally turned over to the Department of Water and Sewer Resources.
(bb) § 507.5.1 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed
or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 400 feet (122 m) from a hydrant on
a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the
facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by
the fire code official and the Department of Water and Sewer Resources
Exceptions:
1. For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall not
be greater than 500 feet (152.4 m).
2. For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the
distance requirement shall not be greater than 500 feet (152.4 m).
(cc) The following subsection is added:
605.11 Photovoltaic systems. The use, placement, wiring and hazards associated with
Photovoltaic systems shall be regulated in the manner prescribed by the International Fire
Code of 2012.
ARTICLE 1501 9
(dd) § 901.6.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the
referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years
and shall be provided by the company performing the inspection(s) along with the
requisite filing fee per inspection to the Office of the Fire Marshal, unless an alternate
designee is specified by Resolution approved by the City Council of the City of
Bethlehem.
(ee) § 903.4.2 of the IFC is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:
903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible devices shall be connected to every automatic
sprinkler system. Such sprinkler waterflow alarm devices shall be activated by waterflow
equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the
system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved
location. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler
system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. In automatic sprinkler systems where
multiple sprinkler risers are required, and the risers are located in separate areas within
the building, an outside visible alarm notification appliance shall be required for each
riser. Such appliance shall be a white strobe (minimum 95 candela strobe rating) placed
in an approved location on the exterior wall, as close as practicable, to each sprinkler
riser. The strobe will activate when the water flow alarm for its respective riser is
activated.
(ff) The following subsection is added:
905.3.8 Building Area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 sq ft in area per story, class I
automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the
building’s interior is more than 250 feet horizontally and vertically from the nearest
approved point of fire department vehicle access.
(gg) § 906.1 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
906.1 Where required, portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in the following
locations.
1. In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-l, R-2, R-4 and S
occupancies without exception.
(hh) § 2403.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
2403.2 Approval required. Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of
400 square feet (37 m2), or where any warming, heating, or open flame device is operated
shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a
permit and approval from the fire code official.
ARTICLE 1501 10
(ii) § 2404.15.4 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
2404.15.4 Operations. Operations such as warming of foods, cooking demonstrations and
similar operations that use solid/gel flammables, or other similar devices which do not
pose an ignition hazard, shall be approved.
(jj) § 2404.15.5 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
2404.15.5 Cooking tents. Tents with sidewalls or drops where cooking is performed shall
be separated from other tents or membrane structures by a minimum of 20 feet (6096
mm).
(kk) §3301.1 of the IFC is amended read as follows:
3301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the possession, manufacture,
storage, handling, sale and use of explosives, explosive materials, fireworks and small
arms ammunition.
Exceptions:
1. The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard or National Guard.
2. Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia.
3. The possession, storage and use of small arms ammunition when packaged in
accordance with DOT packaging requirements.
4. The possession, storage and use of not more than 1 pound (0.454 kg) of
commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of
smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small
arms ammunition for personal consumption.
5. The use of explosive materials by federal, state and local regulatory, law
enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities.
6. Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than
50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive materials.
7. The possession, storage and use of blank industrial-power load cartridges
when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging regulations.
8. Transportation in accordance with DOT 49 CFR Parts 100-185.
9. Items preempted by laws or regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States.
ARTICLE 1501 11
(ll) § 3301.1.3 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
3301.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of
fireworks are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 3304.
2. Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as allowed in Section 3305.
3. The use of fireworks for fireworks displays as allowed in Section 3308.
4. The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of specific types of fireworks
where allowed by applicable laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the United States.
(mm) § 3404.2.9.6.1 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
3404.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and
II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in the following City of
Bethlehem Zoning Districts: RR, RS, R-RC, RG, RT, RR-F, and RR-T.
(nn) § 3406.2.4.4 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
3506.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I
and II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited in the following City of Bethlehem
Zoning Districts: RR, RS, R-RC, RG, RT, RR-F, and RR-T.
(oo) § 3506.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
3506.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers
outside of buildings is prohibited in the following City of Bethlehem Zoning Districts:
RR, RS, R-RC, RG, RT, RR-F, and RR-T.
(pp) § 3804.2 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
3804.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. There shall be no storage of
liquefied petroleum gas in the following City of Bethlehem Zoning Districts: RR, RS,
R-RC, RG, RT, RR-F, and RR-T. In all other Zoning Districts of the City of Bethlehem,
the storage of liquefied petroleum gas in anyone installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L).
ARTICLE 1501 12
(qq) The following subsection is added to the IFC:
3308.3.1 Stand By Required. Fire Department Stand By is required for all approved
fireworks displays. No approved fireworks display shall be initiated without the approval
of the required Stand By officer in charge.
(rr) Appendix C, § C105.1 of the IFC is amended to read as follows:
CI05.1 Hydrant spacing. The average spacing between fire hydrants shall not exceed that
listed in Table C105.1, unless approved otherwise by the City of Bethlehem Engineering
Bureau and fire code official.
Exception: The fire chief is authorized to accept a deficiency of up to 10 percent
where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required fire hydrant
service. Regardless of the average spacing, fire hydrants shall be located such that
all points on streets and access roads adjacent to a building are within the
distances listed in Table C105.1.
(ss) Appendix K – Mobile Cooking Operation is hereby added to the IFC and shall read as follows:
K101 Mobile cooking operations. All mobile cooking operations shall be conducted in
accordance with Appendix B to NFPA Standard 96 (2016 edition) and Chapter 50 of
NFPA Standard 1 (20yy edition).
(Ord. 2018-17. Passed 7/17/2018)
EDITOR’S NOTES:
This Article, previously entitled Fire Prevention Code, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
4254, passed on June 15, 2004 and incorporated in new Article 1701, Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code.
This Article was restated and re-enacted by Ordinance 2018-17, passed July 17, 2018.
ARTICLE 1701
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code
1701.01 Adoption.
1701.02 Additions and Modifications.
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption by reference - See 3rd Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S. §§ 141A01 - 141A05
Zoning-building permit - See ZON. Art. 1324
Table of Building Regulations - See ZON. Appx. A
Structures unfit for human occupancy - See BLD. Art. 1733
Registration, Sale and Transfer of Real Estate - See ADM. Art. 119
1701.01 ADOPTION.
That certain documents, viz, the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (PA
UCC), Act No. 45-1999, as amended, be adopted as the official Codes of the City of
Bethlehem, in accordance with the provisions of the Third Class City Code, 11 Pa.C.S.
§§ 141A01 - 141A05, with the changes and amendments noted hereinafter, for the
erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures of the City of
Bethlehem providing for the issuance of permits and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, and terms of the PA UCC, as amended, are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as is fully set forth in this ordinance, with the changes
and amendments noted hereinafter. (Ord. 2018-25. Passed 11/20/2018)
1701.02 ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
Additions and deletions to be made to the PA UCC are as follows:
UCC 403.1(b)(3); Change 1000 square feet to read 200 square feet, in accordance
with section 303(b)(1) of the Act, delete sections 403.1(b)(8), 403.1(b)(9), 403.1(b)(10).
UCC 403.3(a): Delete subject paragraph and substitute the following:
UCC 403.3(a) Appointment
The Chief Code Official shall be appointed by the head of the Department to
which the Bureau of Code Enforcement is administratively assigned. At a minimum the
Chief Code Official shall have a “Certified Building Official” certification and an
“Accessibility Inspector/Plan Examiner” certification through the International Code
ARTICLE 1701 2
Council in addition to a “Building Code Official” certification through the State of
Pennsylvania. After appointment, he shall not be removed from office except in
compliance with the City of Bethlehem Personnel Manual, as amended.
UCC 403.3(b)(1); The Fire Marshal of the City of Bethlehem Fire Department
and his designees shall be responsible for the enforcement of the International Fire Code.
The Fire Marshal’s designees shall include Fire Inspectors, Fire Officers, Hazardous
Materials Officers, and Police Officers.
Additions and deletions to be made to 403.21(a) of the referenced PA UCC are as follows:
Whenever [name of Jurisdiction] appears, insert “City of Bethlehem”.
403.21(a)(1) amendments to the International Building Code
Add IBC 202.0 General Definitions
Day and Night Average Sound Level - The 24 hour energy average of the Aweighted
sound pressure level, with the levels during the period 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.
the following day increased by 10 dBA before averaging.
Add IBC 720.08 Installation of Sound Insulation
Any new residential structure affected by vehicular, industrial or aircraft noise
shall be designed so that the interior sound levels do not exceed a day-night average
sound level of forty-five (45) decibels (calculated with the windows and doors closed).
This may be accomplished by the acoustical insulation of the structure as specified in the
U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration Publication FHWATS-
77-202 available from the City Planner. (Ord. 2018-25. Passed 11/20/2018)
IBC 903.4.4 Alarms. Approved audible devices shall be connected to every
automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler waterflow alarm devices shall be activated by
waterflow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed
in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an
approved location. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic
sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. In automatic sprinkler
systems where multiple sprinkler risers are required, and the risers are located in separate
areas within the building, an outside visible alarm notification appliance shall be required
for each riser. Such appliance shall be a white strobe (minimum 95 candela strobe rating)
placed in an approved location on the exterior wall, as close as practicable, to each
sprinkler riser. The strobe will activate when the water flow alarm for its respective riser
is activated. (Ord. 2014-21. Passed 8/5/2014; Ord. 2018-25. Passed 11/20/2018)
ARTICLE 1701 3
Add IBC 3107.2 Bonds and Liability Insurance
No person shall erect, install, remove or rehang any projecting sign for which a
permit is required under the provisions of the Basic Code until there shall have been filed
with the City Solicitor's office, a bond in the sum of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) as
herein required, or a Certificate of Liability Insurance coverage, adequate in the opinion
of the City Solicitor.
Add IBC 3303.8 Extermination
The owner or contractor must present a letter from an exterminating company to
the building inspector that the building has been exterminated or does not require
extermination for rodents or insects prior to issuing razing permit. (Ord. 2018-25. Passed
11/20/2018)
Add IBC 3307.2 Party Wall Maintenance
In the case of an existing party wall or an existing exposed wall which is
structurally sound and which is not intended to be used by the owner of the building
being demolished and further that the surface of the said wall is to remain exposed, then
the owner of the building being demolished shall preserve, at his own expense, the party
or exposed wall, by ensuring that the exposed surfaces shall be made permanently
waterproof by the application of stucco, brickote, gunite or other approved
noncombustible materials.
Add IBC 3307.3 Party Wall Repair or Replacement
If a home is gutted for remodeling or, if a fire occurs and the party wall is
damaged and needs to be replaced, it shall be replaced in accordance with the
requirements of this code.
3412.2 Insert “January 1, 1946”.
403.21(a)(5) Amendments to the International Plumbing Code
302 Exclusion of Materials Detrimental to the Sewer System
303.1 Detrimental or Dangerous Material
Delete subsection and substitute the following:
Controlled by Article 921
ARTICLE 1701 4
302.2 Industrial Wastes
Delete and substitute the following:
Controlled by Article 921 and Article 923.
305.4.1 Sewer Depth – Insert Thirty-six Inches (36”).
413.3 Commercial Foodwaste grinder outlets - Delete subsection and substitute the
following:
Commercial food waste grinder waste outlets are not permitted in the City of
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
701.2 Sewer Required - Add subsection.
701.2.1. Public Systems Available
A public water supply system and/or public sewer system shall be deemed
available to premises used for human occupancy if such premises abut along a street,
alley, or easement, of the public water supply or sewer system and a connection
conforming with the standards set forth in this Code may be made thereto.
903.1 Roof Extension – Insert Twelve Inches (12”).
1002.6 Building Traps - Delete and substitute the following.
1002.6 Building Traps
An approved house trap shall be installed in each house drain located below the
cellar floor and just inside the foundation wall. There shall be an air inlet for fresh air
entering the house drain just inside the water seal of the trap.
Size of house traps: the house trap shall not be less in size than the pipe it taps and in no
case less than four (4) inches. Air inlets shall be four (4) inches in size for five (5) inch
and six (6) inch drains, six (6) inches for eight (8) inch drains, and not less than eight (8)
inches for all drains larger than eight (8) inches. All house traps shall be of the double
hub pattern and shall in all cases be located and installed below the cellar floor.
403.21(a)(6) Amendments to the International Residential Code
Insert the following in Table R301.2(1):
Ground snow Load – 30 lbs.
Wind Speed – 90
ARTICLE 1701 5
Topographic effects - no
Seismic Design Category – B
Weathering – severe
Frost line depth – 30”
Termite – moderate
Winter design temp – 9 degrees
Ice shield underlayment required – yes
Flood hazards – October 25, 1970; May 6, 2001
Air freezing index – 1000
Mean annual temperature – 50 degrees
P2603.5.1 Insert ’36 inches’ in both locations.
403.21(a)(7) Amendments to the International Fire Code
403.21(a)(7) Add section 806.1.1
Amend Section 5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility: Remove “$100,000” and replace with
$1,000,000”.
(Ord. 4146. Passed 10/1/2002; Ord. 4254. Passed 6/15/2004; Ord. 4420. Passed 3/6/2007;
Ord. 2010-3. Passed 3/16/2010; Ord. 2018-25. Passed 11/20/2018)
NOTE: Article 1701, International Building Code, of the Codified Ordinances, was
deleted in its entirety and replaced with this new Article 1701, Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code.
ARTICLE 1701 6
ARTICLE 1701
International Building Code
1701.01 Adoption.
1701.02 Additions and Modifications; Fees; Penalty. (ICC 113.4)
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption by reference - See 3rd Class Charter Law §608(a)
[53 P.S. §41608(a)]; 3rd Class §2403(67) [53 P.S. §37403(67)]
Zoning-building permit – See ZON. Art. 1324
Table of Building Regulations – See ZON. Appx. A
Structures unfit for human occupancy – See BLD. Art. 1733
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and replaced with new Article
1701, Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code (Ord. 4254. Passed
6/15/2004)
ARTICLE 1702
Fees for the Enforcement of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
Act No. 45-1999
1702.01 Schedule of Fees.
CROSS REFERENCES
Registration, Sale and Transfer of Real Estate - See ADM. Art. 119
1702.01 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
Delete Section 401.2.a of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and insert the
following:
(a) Building Permit Fees
(1) Type 1, 2, & 3 Construction
For inspection of each building classified as Type 1, 2 & 3 construction, the fee
shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for areas up to and including five
hundred (500) square feet. For areas in excess of five hundred (500) square feet of
floor area the fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), plus fifteen cents
($0.15) per square foot after 500 Square feet of floor area.
(2) Type 4 & 5 Construction (Frame - Section 605.0 and 606.0)
For the inspection of each building classified as type 4 and 5 construction the fee
shall be one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) up to and including five
hundred (500) square feet of floor area. For areas in excess of five hundred (500)
square feet of floor areas the fee shall be one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00)
plus twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot after 500 Square feet of floor area.
(3) Computation of Floor Area
In computing fees, a story higher than eighteen (18) feet and not more than thirty
(30) feet shall be considered two (2) stories; a story higher than thirty (30) feet and
no more than forty (40) feet shall be considered three (3) stories; except for one (1)
story industrial uses (use Group F). The square foot area shall be based on outside
dimensions of the structure. All floor area shall be calculated on the square foot
basis except those areas with ceiling heights under five (5) feet, or crawl spaces.
ARTICLE 1702 2
(4) For the inspection of buildings for which application is made for repairs or
alterations, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first five thousand dollars
($5,000) of estimated cost of construction. For estimated construction costs which
exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), the fee charged shall be 1% up to $500,000
cost of work plus .2% of cost of work over $500,000.00.
(5) The building official shall have the right to verify or correct the estimated value of
any proposed building, structure, addition or alteration.
(6) Demolition
The permit fee for all buildings or structures shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the first two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area, plus ten
dollars ($10.00) for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area
or fraction thereof.
(7) Moving Buildings
A permit shall be granted for the moving of a building upon payment of a fee of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a dwelling or larger building and a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be added for each day a street, road, alley, or lane
is occupied by a building or moving equipment. In addition, thereto, a permit shall
be secured for the structure at the new location in accord with the permit fee
schedule established for new construction.
(8) Roof Replacement
For replacement of roofing material of residential single-family dwellings and
appurtenant structures the permit fee shall be $35.00.
For all other roofing permits the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first two
thousand (2,000) square feet and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional one
thousand (1,000) square feet of roof area.
(9) Swimming Pools
For private above grade pools $25.00. For all other pools, 1% of estimated
construction costs.
See section (h) regarding State fee added to all permits.
See section (i) regarding additional reinspection fees.
ARTICLE 1702 3
(b) Electrical Fees
(1) Heating, Air Conditioners, Ranges, Water Heaters and Similar Equipment
Per single unit $40.00
Each additional unit $10.00
(2) Large Scale Industrial and Institutional - Yearly Permit Fees
Large-scale industries and institutions that have a Master Electrician on their staff
shall pay a yearly fee of $250.00. This fee shall cover all of the maintenance work
performed in that year. All new construction shall be covered under the fee
schedule listed above.
(3) Non-Residential Work
Fee for installation of Electrical Systems in all other use groups, buildings new and
remodeled, including Emergency Alarm Device, Smoke detectors, Computer
wiring, or Phone Systems is as follows: 1% up to $30,000.00 cost of work plus
.5% of cost of work over $30,000.00 with the minimum fee of $75.00.
(4) Nursing Homes
Three (3) year State required minimum per hour or part thereof - $50.00
(5) Public Pools, & Spas
Three (3) year inspection - State required $100.00
(6) Residential
Fee for installation of Electrical Systems in a new single family dwelling, the fee
per dwelling unit will be: $100.00
Service change not over 200 amp. $40.00
Each additional meter $10.00
Service change not over 400 amp. $75.00
Minor alterations (one to four devices) $40.00
Alterations, Additions, or Rewire Entire House
Five (5) or more devices, including service $75.00
ARTICLE 1702 4
(7) Swimming Pools - Private
Above ground pool $40.00
Permanent pool $65.00
See section (h) regarding State fee added to all permits.
See section (i) regarding additional reinspection fees.
(c) Schedule of Fire Code Fees
Unless altered by subsequent Resolution approved by the City Council of the City of Bethlehem,
the following schedule of fees shall apply:
Flammable/Combustible Above or Underground Tanks (New)
Tanks above 500 gallons $150.00/Tank plus state fee
Tanks below 500 gallons $100.00/Tank plus state fee
Flammable/Combustible Tank (Alterations) $100.00/Tank plus state fee
Underground Tank Removal $150.00/Tank plus state fee
Over 2000 gallons $225.00/Tank
Hazard Materials/Chemical Use $75.00/Material Type/Control Area plus state fee
Flammable/Combustible Liquid Use/Storage $75.00 plus state fee
Compressed/ Liquid Gas Use/Storage Tank $75.00/Tank plus state fee
Flammable/ Combination Above or Underground Tanks (includes operational permit)*
Tanks 501 to 2000 $150.00/Tank
Tanks 500 gallons or less $100.00/Tank
Tanks above 2000 $350.00/Tank
Flammable/ Combustible Above Ground Alterations $75.00/Tank plus state fee
Stationary Per Tank Removal Above 2000 Gallons $100.00/Tank plus state fee
Stationary Per Tank Removal 2000 Gallons and Below $75.00/Tank plus state fee
Non-Medical Helicopter Landings within City $50.00 plus state fee
Helicopter Use (Construction, etc.) $150.00/hour plus state fee
Annual mobile cooking vendor (truck/trailer)* $100
Cooking Vendor* $25.00/hr. Administrative/Review Fee
Open flame cooking inspection* $25
Tents 400 square feet or larger $50.00 plus state fee
Fire Department Operational Permit for existing commercial occupancies with a change of
commercial occupant $75.00
Fire Department Administrative Fee $25.00
Construction Permits and Fire Department Operational Permits for new or existing
commercial occupancies and commercial occupancies with a change of commercial
occupant: Permit fees shall include one (1) inspection and one (1) re-inspection. All
ARTICLE 1702 5
subsequent re-inspections shall be billed at the rate of $75.00 per hour with one (1)
minimum to be billed in ¼ hour increments thereafter.
Fire Systems Construction permit fees shall cover Fire Department Operational Permit for
new occupancies.
All permit fees are not inclusive of any required roster duty fees as deemed necessary by
the Fire Marshall, and are not inclusive of any state fees where applicable. All Fire
Department Construction Permit fees will include/cover the operational permit fee for the
occupancies.
* All operational and construction permits required in the 2009 International Fire Code
will have a fee of $50.00 with the exceptions of these permits.
Exception: Interior home heating oil tanks.
Exemptions: Tanks exempted by Pennsylvania Propane and LP Gas Law
Fire Code Violations
Penalties: Penalties shall be imposed to the maximum extent possible under Third Class City
Code, specifically Section 141A04(c).
(Ord. 2017-51. Passed 12/19/2017.)
(d) Mechanical Permit Fees
For use groups R-3 - R-4 structure the cost will be $40.00 for installation or replacement
of the first device and $10.00 for each device thereafter.
Fee for installation of fireplace, wood burning stove or coal stove shall be $30.00
Fee for installation of Mechanical System in all other use groups, buildings new and
remodeled is as follows: 1% up to $30,000.00 cost of work plus .5% of cost of work over
$30,000.00 with a minimum fee of $75.00.
See section (h) regarding State fee added to all permits.
See section (i) regarding additional reinspection fees.
(e) Plumbing Fees
Minimum permit fee for any construction is forty dollars ($40.00) which includes three (3)
fixtures or waste discharge devises plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional fixture or
waste discharge device.
ARTICLE 1702 6
For the purpose of this Section, plumbing appliances and plumbing appurtenance shall
also be construed to be a fixture.
1 to 3 fixtures or devices $40.00
each additional $10.00
sanitary sewer - new, replacement, repair $40.00
water service – new, replacement $30.00
storm sewer connection $30.00
replace or alteration of drainage or vent piping - $10.00 each fixture
water heaters $20.00
Non-Residential Work
Fee for installation of Plumbing Systems in all other use groups, buildings new and
remodeled, is as follows: 1% up to $30,000.00 cost of work plus .5% of cost of work over
$30,000.00 with the minimum fee of $75.00.
See section (h) regarding State fee added to all permits.
See section (i) regarding additional reinspection fees.
(f) Zoning Permit Fees
Change of Use $60.00
Fences $30.00
Home office use $30.00
New Use $60.00
Parking Lots
0-$5,000.00 $50.00
Over $5,000 $50.00 + .1% of cost thereafter
Sheds and Accessory Buildings for Residential
Up to 100 square feet $15.00
101 to 200 square feet $30.00
201 to 300 square feet $50.00
301 to 600 square feet $150.00
601 feet and over $200.00
Signs
0-100 square feet $50.00
101-200 square feet $75.00
Over 201 square feet $150.00
Portable curb sign $50.00
ARTICLE 1702 7
(g) Refunds
Twenty percent (20%) of the total permit fee will be retained by the City of Bethlehem if
the permit is revoked or withdrawn or expires.
(h) Training Fee
Add Four Dollars ($4.00) to every permit issued to cover state-imposed training fee.
(i) Reinspection Fees (other than fire code fees)
After the first re-inspection a fee of $50.00 per additional inspection visit will be required
prior to additional inspections.
(Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/1985; Ord. 3242. Passed 2/7/1989; Ord. 4255. Passed 6/15/2004; Ord.
4421. Passed 3/6/2007; Ord. 2010-4. Passed 3/16/2010; Ord. 2017-51. Passed 12/19/2017.)
NOTE: Article 1702, Certificates of Use and Occupancy, of the Codified Ordinances, was
deleted in its entirety and replaced with this new Article 1702, Fees for the Enforcement of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Act No. 45-1999.
ARTICLE 1702 8
ARTICLE 1702
Certificates of Use and Occupancy
1702.01 Definitions.
1702.02 General Regulations.
1702.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Registration, Sale and Transfer of Real Estate - See ADM. Art. 119
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in new Article 1701,
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code. (Ord. 4254. Passed 6/15/2004)
ARTICLE 1703
Requirements and Qualifications to Obtain Licensing
to Perform Electrical Work Within the
City of Bethlehem
1703.01 Definitions.
1703.02 Applicants’ Qualifications, Applications and Examinations.
1703.03 Geographical Requirement.
1703.04 Licenses and Fees.
1703.05 Change in Registration.
1703.06 Proof of Responsibility.
1703.07 Suspensions or Revocations.
1703.08 Non-Licensed Work.
1703.09 False Statements.
1703.10 Reciprocity.
1703.11 Escrow.
1703.12 License Board.
1703.13 Owner Performance.
1703.14 Designation of Telecommunication Installation Companies.
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption by reference - See 3rd Class Charter Law §608(a)
[53 P.S. §41608(a)]; 3rd Class §2403(67) [53 P.S. §37403(67)]
Electrical system - See BLDG. Art. 1733
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code – See Article 1701
1703.00 Scope
This section shall regulate the business of installing, altering, or
repairing wiring and appliances for electric light, heat, and power
within the City of Bethlehem, and to provide for the licensing of
all persons who engage in such business. The purpose of this
licensing procedure is to foster the safety of those who reside,
work or visit in the City of Bethlehem. This licensing procedure
shall not be construed in such a manner as to provide artificial and
unnecessary barriers to the conduct of electrical work by firms
located both inside and outside of the City limits.
Telecommunication installations, outside of this scope shall be
covered by Section 1703.14 of this Ordinance.
1703.01 Definitions
For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Master Electrician shall mean any person, or employee of a
ARTICLE 1703 2
proprietorship, partnership, or corporation who, within the City
of Bethlehem, engages in or carries on the business of
installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining, or
repairing electrical wiring, apparatus, fixtures, devices,
appliances, or equipment utilized or designated for the
utilization of electricity for light, heat, or power purposes or
for signaling systems, and who carries on such business as an
independent contractor or employee of a proprietorship,
partnership or corporation and who has the final determination
and the full responsibility for the manner in which the work is
done, for the materials used and for the selection, supervision
and control of Journeyman Electricians and apprentices employed
on the work engaged in by said person, proprietorship,
partnership, or corporation.
(b) Master Electrician's License shall mean a license issued to a
Master Electrician as herein defined, who, by passing the
required examination and tests, has qualified as a competent
person to be a Master Electrician.
(c) Residential Electrician shall mean any person, or an employee
of a proprietorship, partnership or corporation who, within
the City of Bethlehem, engages in or carries on the business
of installing, erecting, altering, extending, maintaining or
repairing electrical wiring, apparatus, fixtures, devices,
appliances or equipment utilized or designated for the
utilization of electricity for light, heat or power purposes,
or signaling systems, and who carries on such business as an
independent contractor, or employee of a proprietorship,
partnership, or corporation and who has the final
determination and the full responsibility for the manner in
which the work is done, and for the materials used and for
the selection supervision and control of any workers engaged
by said person, proprietorship, partnership or corporation.
Such licensed electrician shall be restricted to residential
electrical work in one (1) and two (2) family dwelling and
dwelling units. Work may not be performed in non-residential
buildings nor in mixed-use buildings where a single
electrical service is utilized for the entire building.
Residential electricians are restricted to the installation
of 600 amp single phase services or less and in buildings of
not more than three (3) stories.
(Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
(d) Residential Electrician's License shall mean a license
issued to a Residential Electrician as herein defined, who,
by passing the required examination and tests, has qualified
as a competent person to be a Residential Electrician. At
least one licensed Residential Electrician is required per
job. (Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
ARTICLE 1703 3
(e) Journeyman Electrician shall mean any person who shall have
passed the Journeyman Electrician's examination and qualified
and registered in accordance with the terms of this article
and under the rules and regulations of the said Examining
Board, and one who is the holder of a Journeyman
Electrician's License and is employed as defined in the
definition of Master Electrician.
(f) Journeyman Electrician's License shall mean a license issued
to a Journeyman Electrician as herein defined, who, by passing
the required examination and tests, has qualified as a
competent person to be a Journeyman Electrician. At least one
licensed Journeyman is required per job.
(Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
(g) Special Electrician shall mean any person, who installs,
alters or repairs electrical wiring, appliances for heat,
light, power, and or signaling systems in or on buildings or
lots in the City, and who is an employee of a proprietorship,
partnership or corporation which owns, leases, or manages a
building, buildings, or parts thereon situated in the City of
Bethlehem. The Special Electrician so employed shall be
authorized to determine the method of doing the electrical
work the materials to be used and the persons to be employed
on such work.
(h) Special Electrician's License shall mean a license issued to
a Special Electrician, as herein defined whom, by passing the
required examination and tests has qualified as a competent
person to be a Special Electrician.
(i) Electrical Appliance Installer shall mean any person, or
employee of a proprietorship, partnership or corporation who,
within the City of Bethlehem engages in or carries on the
business of installing and/or repairing electrical equipment,
air conditioning, signs, or equipment utilized or designated
for the utilization of electricity for heat, power, or
lighting purposes, and who has the final determination and
the full responsibility for the manner in which the work is
done, for the material used and for the selection,
supervision, and control of any persons employed on the work
engaged in by said proprietorship, partnership or
corporation.
Such licensed installer shall be limited to the installation
only of, circuit and control wiring and connection to motors
rated not in excess of five (5) horsepower, heating equipment
loads not in excess of ten (10) KW and sign equipment loads
not in excess of two and one-half (2-1/2) KW. When necessary
ARTICLE 1703 4
to alter or increase service board equipment, service
feeders, or distribution to accommodate any additional light,
heat, or power loads, such changes shall be performed by a
registered Master Electrician or Residential Electrician, as
appropriate.
(j) Electrical Appliance Installer's License shall mean a license
issued to an Electrical Appliance Installer, who, by passing
the required examinations and tests has qualified as a
competent person to be an Electrical Appliance Installer.
(k) Items covered defined - "Materials, "Electrical" or
"Electrical Work", "Electrical materials", "Electrical
Appliances" and "Electrical Fixtures" shall mean and include
all electrical apparatus, electrical appliances, electric
wiring, electrical fixtures, and all electrical supplies of
whatever kind or nature used as a part of any installation
for the transmission or consumption of electrical energy,
including the electrical installation and apparatus used in a
connection with and adjunctive to heating, cooking plumbing,
ventilating and refrigerating equipment, display and
advertising signs and water heaters, provided, however, said
terms shall not include incandescent lamps, domestic
electrical appliances severable from the freehold without
material damage thereto.
(l) Public Services Corporation - This code shall not apply to the
following: electrical equipment used in connection with
railroads, television receiving, telephone communication
which is P.U.C. regulated, radio broadcasting, elevators, and
dumbwaiters and electric stairs, nor shall this code apply to
electrical equipment used in connection with lighting and
power companies as shown in NFPA 70-2002 (2002 National
Electrical Code).
1703.02 Applicants' Qualifications, Applications and Examinations
(a) Applicants' Qualifications: Every applicant for a Master or
Residential Electrician's license shall be over the age of
twenty-one (21) years. An applicant for a Master
Electrician's license or a Journeyman Electrician's License,
at the time of application, shall have had a least four (4)
years practical experience in the installation, alteration,
and repair of wiring and electrical construction for electric
light, heat, and power in or on buildings. An applicant for
a Residential Electrician's License or a Special
Electrician's License at the time of application, shall have
had not less than two (2) years practical experience. An
applicant for an Electrical Installer's License at the time
of application shall have had not less than one (1) year
ARTICLE 1703 5
practical experience.
(b) Applications: Every application for a license shall be made
in writing in such form and shall furnish such information as
the Electricians Examining Board may, from time to time,
require.
Applications must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to
the date of examinations as hereinafter provided.
(c) Examinations: Written, or written and practical
examinations shall be prepared by the Electricians Examining
Board and/or International Code Council (ICC) and
administered by it to applicants to test each applicant's
knowledge of the provisions of this Code and the work covered
thereby and no license shall be issued unless the applicant
attains a passing mark in such examination.
(Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
1703.03 Geographical Requirement
No restriction based on location shall be made on applicants for
Master, Residential, Journeyman, or Special Licenses who reside,
or whose business is located, or who are employed by a business
with its headquarters located outside the City of Bethlehem.
1703.04 Licenses and Fees
(a) Application Fee: At the time of filing application for an
examination, each applicant shall pay a fee. The application
fee will be based on the cost of administering the exam and
will be assessed at the time of the examination.
(b) License Fees: Before any license will be issued to an
approved applicant, the applicant shall pay a fee as per the
Fee Schedule Section 1703.04(g).
(c) No license shall be transferable.
(d) License Term: Each license shall be issued for the calendar
year during which it is issued and the full fee shall be
payable irrespective of the date of issue.
Each license shall continue in force only so long as the
employee continues to be associated with the license holder
same proprietorship, partnership or corporation.
(e) License Renewal: Any license issued hereunder may be renewed
without examination, provided application or renewal is
accompanied by the renewal fee prescribed hereinafter. Where
ARTICLE 1703 6
an applicant can show good and sufficient cause for his or
her inability to renew his or her license before January 1st
of any year, the Director of Community and Economic
Development may within thirty (30) days thereafter, permit
the issuance without examination of a license upon payment of
the prescribed fee for such new license within said thirty
(30) days.
(1) All master and residential licensees shall be required
to provide written evidence that they have
satisfactorily completed 30 hours of continuing
education in electrical code compliance and an
additional 6 hours of safety continuing education
within the three years prior to the license renewal
date.
For the purposes of the license renewals that become
effective for the 36 months following the passage of
this ordinance the license renewal requirement shall
be limited to 0 credits within 0-12 months of the date
of the ordinance, 12 credits within 13-24 months of
the ordinance and the full 36 credits within 25-36
months of the ordinance and all renewals thereafter.
(2) All Journeyman shall be required to provide written
evidence that they have satisfactorily completed 24
hours of Electricians Examining Board approved
continuing education, of which at least 6 hours shall
be safety continuing education and the remaining hours
shall be electrical code compliance, continuing
education, within a three (3) year period.
(Ord. 4471 – 2/5/08; Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12; Ord. 2012-42 – 12/20/12.)
(f) Renewal Fees: The fees as required herein are to be
established in accordance with the requirements as per Fee
Schedule Section 1703.04(g).
(g) Electricians License Fee
The yearly electricians license fee, renewable January 1 through January 31
each year, shall be:
$75.00 Master Electrician License;
$65.00 Residential Electrician License;
$50.00 Journeyman Electrician License;
$40.00 Special Electrician License;
$40.00 Electrician Appliance Installer License;
ARTICLE 1703 7
$40.00 Telecommunications Installer (no test required).
1703.05 Change in Registration:
(a) An application for a change of license from Master
Electrician to a Residential, Special or Journeyman
Electrician shall be granted without examination.
(b) An application for a change of license from Residential
Electrician to Special or Journeyman Electrician shall be
granted without examination.
(c) An application for a change of license from Residential,
Special or Journeyman Electrician to Master Electrician shall
be granted only upon compliance by the applicant with all
applicable provisions of this code.
1703.06 Proof of Responsibility
At the time of issuance of all permits, the applicant shall
furnish a certificate evidencing proof of Workmen's Compensation,
Bodily Injury and Property Damage Insurance applicable to the
applicant, unless such evidence is currently on file in the Bureau
of Inspections.
1703.07 Suspensions or Revocations
Every holder of a license, upon retiring from the electrical
business or upon the occurrence of any other cause for suspension
or revocation of such license, shall notify the Director of
Community and Economic Development in writing of such fact, at the
same time enclosing the license certificate and identification
card. The Director of Community and Economic Development may, by
an order in writing, suspend or revoke any license issued by him
after a hearing on notice before the Electricians Examining Board
and, upon good cause shown, including but not limited to the
following: permitting unauthorized or fraudulent use of the
license by another, failure to file applications for certificates
performing work which fails to meet the Electrical Code,
fraudulent dealing, or misrepresentation.
1703.08 Non-Licensed Work
No person not the holder of an appropriate license, nor a
proprietorship, partnership or corporation not employing a holder
of an appropriate license shall install, alter, or repair any
wiring or electrical equipment for electric light, heat, or power
in or on any building. No person, proprietorship, partnership or
corporation shall cause any such work to be done by any person not
the holder of such license, nor by any proprietorship, partnership
ARTICLE 1703 8
or corporation not employing a holder of such license as herein
defined. For the purpose of all work discussed and regulated by
this article, “ under the supervision of a person holding a
license” shall be deemed satisfied by the employment and
supervision of at least one Journeyman Electrician. No person,
not the holder of such license nor proprietorship, partnership or
corporation not employing a holder of such license shall falsely
represent that he or it holds such license or shall use in any
advertising the words "Master Electrician", "Residential
Electrician" or the words "Licensed Electrician" or the words
"electrical contractor" or any words of similar meaning or import
on any sign, card, letterhead, or in any manner.
(Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
1703.09 False Statements
Any person who, with intent to defraud or deceive, knowingly
makes, causes, procures to be made, or aids and assists in the
making of a false statement in an application for a license, or
the renewal of a license, in an application for a license, or the
renewal of a license, in an application for a permit or
certificate of electrical inspection and approval, in any
application provided for in this title, in any proof or instrument
in writing in connection therewith, or who shall in any
examination hereunder, deceive or substitute, shall be in
violation of this article.
1703.10 Reciprocity
The Director of Community and Economic Development will accept as
Master Electricians valid licenses from other municipalities that
also recognize a Bethlehem Master Electricians License without
formal testing and in addition all other classifications listed in
this Code, provided that said municipality has a testing process,
provided such licensees comply with all other applicable
provisions of this Code, including payment of the applicable
permit fee.
1703.11 Escrow
The holder of any valid license as herein defined may, upon
written request to the Electricians Examining Board, have the
Director of Community and Economic Development hold said license
in escrow for a period of up to five (5) years, during which time
the licensee may not perform any work which would, under the
provisions of this Code, require the issuance of a license. Upon
proper application for renewal of the license being held in
escrow, applicant shall be granted same without examination
provided the Electricians Examining Board is satisfied as to the
applicant's fitness to engage in the work covered by said license.
ARTICLE 1703 9
1703.12 License Board
(a) Membership of Board: There shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of City Council, an Examining
Board to be known as the Electricians Examining Board, to
determine the fitness of applicants for licenses and to
investigate and report on all proposed suspensions or
revocations of licenses, and the Mayor may, for cause shown,
remove any member thereof and shall fill any vacancy
therein. Said Board shall consist of two (2) Master
Electricians, one (1) Residential Electrician, the City
Electrical Inspector, one (1) electrical engineer fully
employed by local industry and two (2) citizens-at-large.
With the exception of the Master Electrician and Residential
Electrician categories, Board membership shall not include
representation from the regulated industry.
(b) Terms
The terms of the members of the Electricians Examining Board shall
be as follows:
(1) Three (3) members of the Board shall be appointed originally
for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for a term of
two (2) years, and two (2) members for a term of three (3)
years.
(2) As the terms of office of each of the original member of the
Board expires, their successors shall be appointed for a
term of three (3) years.
(c) Organization
The members of the Electricians Examining Board shall within
thirty (30) days from their appointment, meet specially and
organize and shall elect from their members a Chairman. They
shall also elect a Secretary who need not be a member of the
Board. The Board shall meet three (3) times per year, after
public notice each and every year, for the purpose of
considering and disposing of all applications for licenses,
providing, however, that when any of the days appointed for a
meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, the Board may hold
special meetings as frequently as is necessary for the
propriety and efficient discharge of its business. Such
meetings shall be held upon forty-eight (48) hours written
notice to each member of the Board, stating the purpose of
such special meeting. Four (4) members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and all
business. (Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
ARTICLE 1703 10
(d) Rules and Regulations
The Electricians Examining Board shall formulate its own
rules and regulations for all examinations. Such rules and
regulations shall become effective immediately upon the
adoption by the Board and the approval of the City Council
of the City of Bethlehem.
(e) Duties
The Electricians Examining Board shall investigate all
applicants for licenses and shall report to the Director of
Community and Economic Development the results of all
examinations which it shall administer to applicants. It
shall investigate and hear all written complaints against
holders of such licenses and designations and report to the
Director of Community and Economic Development its findings
and recommendations. It shall keep minutes of its
proceedings and hearings and records of its investigations
and examinations of applicants for licenses.
(f) Appeals from decisions of the Board shall be made to the
Board of Appeals
1703.13 Owner Performance
Any permit required by the Ordinance may be issued to a bona fide owner,
occupant of a single family dwelling, which is to be occupied exclusively for
living purposes by the owner, to do any work regulated by this Code on the
said dwelling and on the condition that the said owner personally purchase
all material and perform all labor in connection herewith.
(Ord. 2012-7 – 3/6/12)
1703.14 Designation of Telecommunication Installation Companies
(a) Scope.
This section shall regulate the business of installing
telecommunications equipment including telephone systems,
signaling systems, computer systems, communication links, fiber
optics, alarm systems or any system designed to carry information
rather than electricity for the purposes of heat, power or light
and to provide for the designation of those companies which are
allowed to perform this work in the City of Bethlehem. The
purpose of this designation procedure is to foster the safety of
those who reside, work or visit the City of Bethlehem. This
designation procedure shall not be construed in such a manner as
to provide artificial and unnecessary barriers to the conduct of
telecommunication work by firms located both inside and outside of
ARTICLE 1703 11
the City limits.
(b) Exemption
Public Service Corporations - This section shall not apply to P.U.C.
regulated telephone and electric power companies.
(c) Application for Designation
(1) Applications: Every application for designation shall be
made in writing in such form and shall furnish such
information as the Electricians Examining Board may, from
time to time, require. No examination shall be required.
(2) Proof of Responsibility: At the time of issuance of all
permits, the applicant shall furnish a certificate evidencing
proof of Workmen's Compensation, Bodily Injury, and Property
Damage Insurance applicable to the applicant unless such
evidence is currently on file in the Bureau of Inspections.
(3) Geographical Requirement: No restriction based on location
shall be made on applicants who reside, or whose business is
located with its headquarters located outside of the City of
Bethlehem.
(d) Designation and Fees
(1) Designation Fees
Before any designation will be issued to an applicant's
business, the applicant shall pay a fee. The fee as required
herein is to be established in accordance with the
requirements of the Fee Schedule Section 1703.04(g).
(2) Designation Term
Each designation shall be issued for the calendar year during
which it is issued and the full fee shall be payable
irrespective of the date of issue.
(3) Transferability
Designations are not transferable.
(4) Suspension or Revocation of Designation
The Director of Community and Economic Development may, by
written notice, suspend or revoke any designation issued by
him after a hearing on notice before the Electricians
Examining Board and, upon good cause shown, including but not
ARTICLE 1703 12
limited to the following: permitting unauthorized or
fraudulent use of the designation by another, failure to file
application for permits, performing work which fails to meet
the Electrical Code and other applicable codes, fraudulent
dealing, or misrepresentation.
(5) False Statements
Any person who, with intent to defraud or deceive, knowingly
makes, causes, procures to be made, or aids and assists in
the making of a false statement in an application for a
designation, or the renewal of a designation, in an
application for a permit or certificate of inspection and
approval, in any application provided for in this title, in
any proof or instrument in writing in connection therewith,
or who shall in any application, hereunder, deceive or
substitute, shall be in violation of this article.
(e) Permits
Permits shall be required for all permanent installation of
telecommunication equipment, except in one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings. Permits shall only be issued to designated companies
or homeowners.
(f) Non-Permitted Work
No person, partnership or corporation shall cause any such work to
be done by non-designated companies.
(Ord. 4147 – Passed 10/1/02; Ord. 4256 – Passed 6/15/04)
Editor’s Note: The correct reference to Section 1703.04(g) was made in
Sections 1703.04(b), 1703.04(f), and 1703.14(d)(1) instead of the previously
incorrect reference to Fee Schedule 104 (7).
NOTE: Article 1703, National Electrical Code (1996), of the Codified
Ordinances, was deleted in its entirety and replaced with this new Article
1703, Requirements and Qualifications to Obtain Licensing to Perform
Electrical Work Within the City of Bethlehem.
ARTICLE 1703 13
ARTICLE 1703
ICC Electrical Code
1703.01 Adoption.
1703.02 Additions and Modifications; Fees; Penalties (1003.1).
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption by reference - See 3rd Class Charter Law §608(a)
[53 P.S. §41608(a)]; 3rd Class §2403(67) [53 P.S. §37403(67)]
Swimming pool wiring - See BLDG. Art. 1711
Electrical system - See BLDG. Art. 1733
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in new
Article 1701, Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(Ord. 4254 – Passed 6/15/04)
ARTICLE 1705
Requirements and Qualifications to Obtain Licensing
to Perform Plumbing Work Within the
City of Bethlehem
1705.01 Plumbers Examining Board.
1705.02 Definitions.
1705.03 Reciprocity
1705.04 Owner Performance.
1705.05 Fees.
CROSS REFERENCES
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code – See BLDG. Art. 1701
Mechanical food waste disposals - See BLDG. Art. 1717
Plumbing or plumbing fixtures - See BLDG. Art. 1733
Required plumbing facilities in rooming houses - See BLDG. Art. 1735
1705.01 PLUMBERS EXAMINING BOARD
(a)Membership
There is hereby established a Plumbers Examining Board (hereinafter
referred to as the Board) to consist of five (5) members. One member shall be
a registered master plumber with at least five (5) years of experience as a
plumbing contractor. One member shall be a journeyman plumber with at least
five (5) years experience as a journeyman. One member shall be a registered
professional engineer with at least five (5) years experience in the field of
plumbing design. One member shall be a layman who is a voting taxpayer in the
City of Bethlehem. One member shall be a plumbing inspector who shall act as
secretary to the Board and shall vote only in the event of a tie.
(b)Terms
Each member, except the plumbing inspector, shall be appointed by the
Mayor for a term of four (4) years except at the formation of the Board when
appointments shall be made for 1,2,3 and 4 years respectively so that only one
(1) member is appointed annually thereafter.
Upon the death or resignation of a member the Mayor shall appoint a
successor, equally qualified to fill the unexpired term.
Article 1705 2
Members may be reappointed to the Board for additional terms.
(c)Organization
The Board shall meet and organize within thirty (30) days after the
passage of this Ordinance and shall elect a Chairman who shall conduct
meetings of the Board. Thereafter, the Board shall meet at such intervals as
may be necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but not less than
twice in any one calendar year.
At the first meeting in any calendar year the Board shall reorganize and
elect a chairman to serve for the ensuing year. Members of the Board shall be
paid a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each attendance or meeting held
in connection with official business of the Board.
(d)Duties
It shall be the duty of the Board to establish standards and procedures
for the qualification, examination and licensing of Master and Journeyman
plumbers and approve appropriate licenses to each person who meets the
qualifications thereof, and successfully passes the examination given by the
Board.
The Plumber’s Examining Board shall schedule an Annual date for
examinations for licenses.
Examination shall be based upon the rules and regulations contained in
this Code, the basic laws of hydraulics as applied to the plumbing industry,
and the knowledge of mathematics as applied to a practical utilization of the
foregoing requirements.
It shall be the duty of the Board to supervise enforcement and
interpretation of this Code by the Plumbing Inspector and to suggest
amendments or revisions of this Code, as it deems necessary.
It shall be the duty of the Board to receive complaints from persons who
are aggrieved by decisions of the Plumbing Inspector, to set a date for a
formal hearing of the complaint and to rule upon the matter, provided such
ruling is within a reasonable interpretation of this Code.
Appeals from decisions of the Board shall be made to the Board of
Appeals.
1705.02 DEFINITIONS
(a) Master Plumber
A master plumber is a person who regularly engages in and works at the
plumbing trade, who employs and directs journeyman plumbers and apprentice
plumbers, and who is entitled to secure permits for the installation or repair
of plumbing.
Article 1705 3
(b) Journeyman Plumber
A journeyman plumber is a person who regularly engages in and works at
the plumbing trade and is employed and supervised by a licensed Master Plumber.
(c) Apprentice Plumber
An apprentice plumber is a person who is learning the plumbing trade and
is employed and supervised by a licensed Master Plumber.
1705.03 RECIPROCITY
Master Plumbers, registered in First, Second or Third Class Cities of
Pennsylvania, but not registered in the City of Bethlehem who desire to engage
in plumbing within the City, shall without examination secure the necessary
plumbing permit before engaging upon said work.
1705.04OWNER PERFORMANCE
(a) Single Family Dwellings. Any permit required by the Ordinance may
be issued to a bona fide owner, occupant of a single family dwelling, which is
to be occupied exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by
this Code on the said dwelling and on the condition that the said owner
personally purchase all material and perform all labor in connection herewith.
1705.05FEES
(a) Examination Fees:
Master’s Exam Fee $50.00
Journeyman’s Exam Fee $30.00
Special Exam Tests $250.00
(b) License Fees:
Master Plumber (annual) $75.00
Journeyman (annual) $50.00
(Ord. 4148 – Passed 10/1/02; Ord. 4257 – Passed 6/15/04)
NOTE: Article 1705, International Plumbing Code (1995), of the Codified
Ordinances, was deleted in its entirety and replaced with this new Article
1705, Requirements and Qualifications to Obtain Licensing to Perform Plumbing
Work Within the City of Bethlehem.
Article 1705 4
ARTICLE 1705
International Plumbing Code
1705.01 Adoption.
1705.02 Additions, Deletions, and Modifications; Fees; Penalty. (IPC
108.4)
CROSS REFERENCES
International Building Code - See BLDG. Art. 1701
ICC Electrical Code - See BLDG. Art. 1703
Mechanical food waste disposals - See BLDG. Art. 1717
Plumbing or plumbing fixtures - See BLDG. Art. 1733
Required plumbing facilities in rooming houses -
See BLDG. Art. 1735
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in new
Article 1701, Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(Ord. 4254 – Passed 6/15/04)
ARTICLE 1706
International Mechanical Code
1706.01 Adoption.
1706.02 Additions and Modifications; Fees; Penalties. (M-108.4)
CROSS REFERENCES
Adoption by reference - See 3rd Class Charter Law §608(a)
[53 P.S. §41608(a)]; 3rd Class §2403(67) [53 P.S.
§37403(67)]
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and
incorporated in new Article 1701, Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code. (Ord. 4254 – Passed 6/15/04)
ARTICLE 1711
Swimming Pools
1711.01 Definitions
1711.02 Compliance Required
1711.03 Permit And Fee; Plans And Specifications To Be Approved
1711.04 Construction Requirements
1711.05 Filtration Systems Required; Approval
1711.06 Inspections
1711.07 Other Legislation To Remain Effective (Repealed)
1711.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Water rates - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 913 Drainage - See S.U. & P.S. 921
NOTE: This Article was deleted in its entirety and incorporated in new
Article 1701, Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
(Ord. 4254 – Passed 6/15/04)
ARTICLE 1713
Historic Bethlehem
1713.01 Purpose; Establishment
1713.02 Boundaries
1713.03 Certification; Recording
1713.04 Board Of Historical Architectural Review
1713.05 Powers And Duties Of Board
1713.06 Interest Of Board Member Precludes Action
1713.07 Finding Required For Facade Improvements
1713.08 Certificate Of Appropriateness Required
1713.09 Application For Building Permit
1713.10 Meeting To Consider Application
1713.11 Board To Consider Architectural Appropriateness
1713.12 Board May Suggest Plan Changes To Conform
1713.13 Report By Board To Council; Recommendations
1713.14 Council Approval Or Disapproval; Procedure
1713.15 Building Permit Denial; Appeal
1713.16 Building Inspector; Power To Enforce
1713.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Historic areas, sites and buildings - See 53 P.S. §8001 et seq.
1713.01 PURPOSE; ESTABLISHMENT.
In accordance with the provisions of Act 167, approved June 13,
1961, of the General Assembly, and to protect the portions of the City which
recall the rich architectural and cultural heritage of our City and State, to
awaken in our people an interest in our historic past and to promote the
general welfare, education and culture of our City, there is created in the
City a district to be known as "Historic Bethlehem" located in Wards Six
and Seven in the County of Northampton and Wards Ten and Eleven in the
County of Lehigh, within the City. (Ord. 1728 §1. Passed 12/27/61.)
ARTICLE 1713 2
1713.02 BOUNDARIES.
The limits of Historic Bethlehem are defined as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center line of the Lehigh River in the
division line between the County of Lehigh and the County of Northampton
at the intersection thereof and the westerly line of the Hill-to-Hill Bridge, to
a point in the northerly street line of Spring Street, a street fifty feet in width;
thence westwardly, along said northerly street line of Spring Street, to a
point in West Street at the intersection of said northerly street line of Spring
Street and the extension southwardly of the easterly street line of Mitman
Street, a street twenty feet in width; thence northwardly in West Street,
along said extension southwardly of said easterly street line of Mitman
Street and along said easterly street line of Mitman Street and its extension
northwardly to the southerly street line of West Broad Street; thence
eastwardly, along said southerly street line of West Broad Street and along
the southerly line of the Broad Street Bridge and again along the southerly
line of West Broad Street, to the westerly street line of Guetter Street, a
street twenty feet in width; thence southwardly, along said westerly street
line of Guetter Street, to the southerly street line of West Walnut Street;
thence eastwardly, along said southerly street line of West Walnut Street, to
a point 150 feet, more or less, measured westwardly from and perpendicular
to the westerly street line of North New Street; thence southwardly, parallel
to and 150 feet, more or less, measured westwardly from said westerly street
line of North New Street, twenty-four feet, more or less, to the northerly line
of a tract of land now or formerly of the Bell Telephone Company of
Pennsylvania; thence eastwardly, along the northerly line of said lastmentioned
tract of land and its extension eastwardly, to the easterly street
line of said North New Street; thence northwardly, along said easterly street
line of North New Street, twenty-four feet, more or less, to the southerly line
of East Walnut Street, a street twenty feet in width; thence eastwardly, along
said southerly street line of East Walnut Street, to the westerly street line of
Linden Street, a street seventy feet in width; thence southwardly, along said
westerly street line of Linden Street and its extension southwardly, to said
center line of the Lehigh River; thence westwardly, along said center line of
the Lehigh River, to the point or place of beginning. (Ord. 1728 §2. Passed
12/27/61.)
ARTICLE 1713 3
1713.03 CERTIFICATION; RECORDING.
The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission has certified
by resolution to the historical significance of the district within the limits
defined in Section 1713.02, and the Mayor of the City has received such
certification and placed it among the municipal records of the City. (Ord.
1728 §3. Passed 12/27/61.)
1713.04 BOARD OF HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
A Board of Historical Architectural Review is hereby established to
be composed of nine residents of the City appointed by Council, one of
whom shall be a registered architect, one a licensed real estate broker, one
the Building Inspector of the City of Bethlehem and six additional persons
with a knowledge of and interest in the preservation of the historic district.
At least three members of the Board shall reside within the historic district.
The initial terms of the first nine members of the Board shall be as follows:
three shall serve until the first Monday of January, 1963; three until the first
Monday of January, 1964; and three until the first Monday of January, 1965.
Their successors shall serve for a term of five years. Any member of the
Board appointed in his capacity as a registered architect, a licensed real
estate broker or as the Building Inspector of the City of Bethlehem who
ceases to be so engaged shall be automatically considered vacant. An
appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term. (Ord. 2532 §1. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
The Board shall give counsel to Council regarding the advisability of
issuing any certificates required to be issued pursuant to the Act of June 13,
1961, and this article. For this purpose the Board may make and alter rules
and regulations for their own organization and procedure, consistent with the
ordinances of the City and the laws of the Commonwealth. A majority of the
Board shall constitute a quorum, and action taken at any meeting shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of the Board. The members of the
Board shall serve without compensation, and shall make an annual report of
their transactions to Council. The Board may, pursuant to appropriations by
Council, employ secretarial assistance, pay their salaries and wages and
incur other necessary expenses. (Ord. 1728 §5. Passed 12/27/61.)
ARTICLE 1713 4
1713.06 INTEREST OF BOARD MEMBER PRECLUDES
ACTION.
No member of the Board shall be permitted to take part in the
discussion or vote on the issuance of any certificate of appropriateness for
any property in which such member of the Board has any interest, direct or
indirect. (Ord. 2532 §2. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.07 FINDING REQUIRED FOR FACADE IMPROVEMENTS.
The Board shall have the responsibility for reviewing proposals for
facade improvements of all building facades within the Historic District. In
connection with buildings fronting on Main Street between Broad Street and
Church Street, a written determination shall be made as to conformity of
such proposals with the concepts embodied in the Bethlehem Main Street
Restoration and Revitalization Study. Prior to consideration of an
application for modification to an existing facade, the Board shall make a
finding as to the extent to which restoration is feasible for the individual
facade. This finding shall set forth the following:
(a) The building's architectural merit, whether representative of a
common style or standing as a unique expression of design.
(b) The proportion of extant, original fabric which can be stabilized
and preserved.
(c) The structure's overall importance to the streetscape.
(d) Significant historical associations of the building.
(e) The economic feasibility of restoration. (Ord. 2532 §3. Passed
10/5/76.)
1713.08 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED.
No erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or
razing of a building or public improvement in the historic district shall be
permitted until Council has issued a certificate of appropriateness. Such
certificate shall not be limited to work requiring a building permit according
to the presently enacted Building Codes of the City, but shall include all
work affecting general design, arrangement, texture, material and color
ARTICLE 1713 5
which can be seen from a public street or way, including installations or
other public improvements. This includes, but is not limited to the
following: painting; sandblasting; stucco or other applied textures;
replacement or major repair of windows, cornices, trim and other
nonstructural elements; and other work affecting the visual appearance of
the structure as defined in this section. (Ord. 2532 §4. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.09 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
Upon receipt of an application for a building permit for work to be
done in the historic district, the Building Inspector shall act in accordance
with the procedures presently being followed in that office, except as those
procedures are necessarily modified by the following requirements:
(a) He shall forward to the office of the Board of Historical
Architectural Review a copy of the application for a building
permit, together with a copy of the plot plan and the building
plans and specifications filed by the applicant.
(b) He shall maintain in his office a record of all such applications
and of his handling and final disposition of them, which shall be
in addition to and appropriately cross referenced to his other
records.
(c) He shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of
additional copies of material required to be attached to an
application for a building permit to permit compliance with the
foregoing. (Ord. 1728 §7. Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §5.
Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.10 MEETING TO CONSIDER APPLICATION.
Upon receipt by the Board of a notice that an application for a
building permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
demolition or razing of a building or buildings in the historic district has
been filed in the office of the Building Inspector, the Board shall schedule a
meeting to consider the counsel which the Board will give to Council. The
person applying for the permit shall be advised of the time and place of the
meeting and invited to appear to explain his reasons therefor. The Board
may invite such other persons as it desires to attend its meeting. Ord. 1728
§8. Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §5. Passed 10/5/76.)
ARTICLE 1713 6
1713.11 BOARD TO CONSIDER ARCHITECTURAL
APPROPRIATENESS.
In determining the counsel to be present to Council concerning the
issuing of a certificate of appropriateness of authorizing a permit for the
erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of all or
a part of any building within the historic district, the Board shall consider the
following matters:
(a) The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district.
(b) The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can
be seen from a public street or way only.
(c) The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of
the building or structure and the relation of such factors to
similar features of buildings or structures in the district.
(Ord. 1728 §9. Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §5. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.12 BOARD MAY SUGGEST PLAN CHANGES TO
CONFORM.
If the Board, on the basis of the information received at the meeting
and from its general background and knowledge, decides to counsel against
the granting of a certificate of appropriateness, it shall indicate to the
applicant for a building permit the changes in plans and specifications, if
any, which, in the opinion of the Board, would protect the distinctive
historical character of the historic district. The Board shall withhold its
report to Council for a period of five days following its decision to allow the
applicant to decide whether or not to make the suggested changes in his
plans and specifications. If the applicant determines that he will make the
suggested changes, he shall so advise the Board which shall counsel Council
accordingly. (Ord. 1728 §10. Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §5. Passed
10/5/76.)
1713.13 REPORT BY BOARD TO COUNCIL; RECOMMENDATIONS.
The Board, after the hearing provided for in Section 1713.10, and
after the making of any changes in the plans and specifications as provided
ARTICLE 1713 7
in Section 1713.12, shall submit to Council, in writing, its counsel
concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness of authorizing a
permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or
razing of all or a part of any building within the historic district. The written
report shall set out the following matters:
(a) The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done.
(b) The exterior changes to be made or the exterior character of the
structure to be erected.
(c) A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior
characteristics.
(d) The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district.
(e) The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can
be seen from a public street or way only.
(f) The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of
the building or structure and the relation of such factors to
similar features of buildings or structures in the district.
(g) The opinion of the Board (including any dissent) as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed as it will preserve or destroy
the historic aspect and nature of the district.
(h) The specific counsel of the Board as to the issuance by Council
or its refusal to issue a certificate of appropriateness.
(Ord. 1728 §11. Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §6. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.14 COUNCIL APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL; PROCEDURE.
Upon receipt of the written counsel of the Board as provided in
Section 1713.13, Council shall consider at a regular or special meeting the
question of issuing to the Building Inspector a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing a permit for the work covered by the application. The applicant
shall be advised by the City Clerk of the time and place of the meeting at
which his application will be considered and shall have the right to attend
and be heard as to his reasons for filing the same.
ARTICLE 1713 8
In determining whether or not to certify to the appropriateness of the
proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or
razing of all or a part of any building within the historic district, Council
shall consider the same factors as the Board of Historical Architectural
Review set forth in Section 1713.11 and the report of the Board. If Council
approves the application, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing the Building Inspector to issue a permit for the work covered. If
Council disapproves, it shall do so in writing, and copies shall be given to
the applicant and to the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.
The disapproval shall indicate what changes in the plans and specifications
would meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical character
of the district. (Ord. 1728 §12. Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §7. Passed
10/5/76.)
1713.15 BUILDING PERMIT DENIAL; APPEAL.
Upon receipt of the written disapproval of Council, the Building
Inspector shall disapprove the application for a building permit and so advise
the applicant. The applicant may appeal from the disapproval as provided by
law and the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1728 §13. Passed 12/27/61; Ord.
2532 §8. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.16 BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWER TO ENFORCE.
The Building Inspector shall have the power to institute any
proceedings at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this article
in the same manner as in his enforcement of the Building Code as presently
enacted and as the same may from time to time be amended. (Ord. 1728 §14.
Passed 12/27/61; Ord. 2532 §8. Passed 10/5/76.)
1713.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
ARTICLE 1713 9
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242-
Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 1714
Historic Conservation District
South Bethlehem and Mount Airy
1714.01 Legal Authorization
1714.02 Short Title
1714.03 Purposes
1714.04 Definitions
1714.05 Delineation of Historic Conservation District
1714.06 Historic Conservation Membership
1714.07 Powers and Duties of the Historic Conservation
Commission
1714.08 Powers and Duties of City Council
1714.09 Activities Requiring Certificates of
Appropriateness
1714.10 Design Guidelines
1714.1l Application Review Procedure
1714.12 Unreasonable Economic Hardship
1714.13 Notice of Violation
1714.14 Enforcement
1714.15 Penalty
1714.01 Legal Authorization
This District is created pursuant to the following
Pennsylvania legislation:
a. Article I, Section 27, of the Pennsylvania
Constitution, which states:
The people have a right to clean air, pure water,
and to the preservation of the natural, scenic,
historic and aesthetic values of the environment.
Pennsylvania's public natural resources are the
common property of all the people, including
generations yet to come. As trustees of these
resources, the Commonwealth shall conserve and
maintain them for the benefit of all the people.
b. Act of June 13, 1961, Public Law 282, No. 167,
as amended, which states:
(1) For the purpose of protecting those historic
areas within our great Commonwealth, which
have a distinctive character recalling the
ARTICLE 1714 2
rich architectural and historical heritage
Pennsylvania, and of making them a source of
inspiration to our people by awakening
interest in our historic past, and to
promote the general welfare, education and
culture of the communities in which these
distinctive historical areas are located,
all counties, cities except cities of the
first class, boroughs, incorporated towns
and townships, are hereby authorized to
create and define, by ordinance, a historic
district or districts within the geographic
limits of such political subdivision; and
(2) Any governing body in determining whether or
not to certify to the appropriateness of the
erection, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, demolition or razing of any
building, in whole or in part, shall
consider the effect which the proposed
change will have upon the general historic
and architectural nature of the district.
The governing body shall pass upon the
appropriateness of exterior architectural
features which can be seen from a public
street or way, only, and shall consider the
general design, arrangement, texture,
material and color of the building or
structure and the relation of such factors
to similar features of buildings and
structures in the district.
1714.02 Short Title
The ordinance shall be known as the Historic
Conservation District Ordinance.
1714.03 Purposes
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Bethlehem
to promote, protect, enhance, and preserve historic
resources and traditional community character for the
educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the
public through the preservation, protection and regulation
of buildings and areas of historic interest or importance
within the City; to safeguard the heritage of the City by
preserving and regulating districts which reflect elements
ARTICLE 1714 3
of its cultural, social, economic, political, and
architectural history; to preserve and enhance the
environmental quality of neighborhoods; to foster economic
development; to strengthen the City's economy by the
stimulation of tourism; to establish and improve property
values; to foster civic pride in the beauty and
accomplishments of the City's past; and to preserve and
protect the cultural, historical and architectural assets
of the City which have been determined to be of local,
state or national significance.
1714.04 Definitions
a. For the purpose of this Ordinance, all words used
in the present tense include the future tense. All words
in the plural number include the singular number, and all
words in the singular number include the plural number,
unless the natural construction of the word clearly
indicates otherwise. The masculine gender includes the
feminine and neuter genders, and the feminine gender
includes the masculine and neuter genders. The word "shall"
is mandatory. The word "used" includes "designated,
intended, built or arranged to be used." Words not defined
below shall have the meanings given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
b. Accessory Structure - A structure located on the
same lot which is customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal building or structure.
c. A1ley, Common - A right-of-way intended to be
used for vehicular and/or pedestrian access primarily to
the rear yards of two or more lots and not owned or
accepted for dedication by the City of Bethlehem.
d. Alteration - Any visual or physical change to a
building, including the repair, replacement, or addition of
any exterior structural, decorative or accessory element or
feature, but excluding demolition, new construction,
reconstruction or removal of any character-defining
architectural elements of any building or part thereof.
e. Appurtenance - A subordinate component or
structural feature, such as a porch, attached and affixed
with the intent of permanence to a principal structure.
f. Building - A structure, enclosed and isolated by
ARTICLE 1714 4
exterior walls and roof and permanently affixed to the land,
that is used for residential, commercial, institutional,
industrial, or public purposes, including principal and
accessory buildings, regardless of whether designed for
human use or occupancy.
g. Building Permit - An approval document signed by
the Building Official or Inspector Codes Administrator
authorizing the construction, alteration, reconstruction,
repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all or part of
any building.
h. Building Permit Application - The request filed
by a property owner, equitable owner or developer with the
Building Official/Inspector or Codes Administrator seeking
authorization to erect, alter, reconstruct, repair,
restore, demolish, or raze all or part of any building.
i. Building Official - A municipal employee of or
individual retained by the City designated as the
individual who enforces compliance of the City of
Bethlehem Building Code and issues permits for the
erection, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration,
demolition or razing of all or part of any building or
structure within the municipality.
j. Certificate of Appropriateness - The approval
statement signed by the City Council which certifies to the
historical appropriateness of a particular request for
the erection, alteration, reconstruction, repair,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or part of any
building or structure within a historic or conservation
district.
k. Completed Application - An application for a
certificate of appropriateness that conforms to submittal
requirements for Historic Conservation Commission review.
l. Demolition - The dismantling, tearing down or
razing of all or part of any building or structure,
including the permanent removal of character-defining
architectural elements, such as porches and porticos.
m. Erection - Construction, assembling, or
installation of a building or structure on the ground or on
a building or structure.
ARTICLE 1714 5
n. Historic Conservation District - That geographic
area of the City of Bethlehem identified and delineated by
the City Council, pursuant to Section 2, PA Act 167-1961,
as amended, in order to protect and enhance Bethlehem's
physical attractiveness and historic quality, in accordance
with the City's Comprehensive Plan; to preserve the overall
character of older built-up areas and neighborhoods,
without the emphasis placed on preserving historical
architectural detailing of buildings, as exists in the
Central Bethlehem Historic District; and to preserve for
future generations significant buildings and structures
reflective of Bethlehem's historic development and past
architectural styles.
o. Historic Conservation Commission - The official
review board appointed by City Council pursuant to Section
3 of Act 167-1961, as amended, authorizing the appointment
of a Board of Historic Architectural Review, which is
charged with the responsibility to recommend to City
Council, following deliberations at public meetings, the
approval, with conditions or denial of Certificates of
Appropriateness for regulated activities.
p. Historic Preservation Specialist - A municipal
employee or individual retained by the City meeting the
professional and educational qualifications of 36 CFR 61,
as required by the Certified Local Government Program, and
designated as the individual responsible for advising the
Historic Commission and applicants/property owners
regarding regulated activities within the Historic
Conservation District.
q. Historic Conservation District - That geographic
area of the City of Bethlehem created by Bethlehem
Ordinance No. 3952, as amended by Ordinance No. 3972, and
further amended by Ordinance No. 4432, wherein any and all
changes to buildings, structures, or appurtenances visible
from a public way are subject to review and approval by
City Council. (Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
r. Maintenance - work that does not alter the
exterior fabric or features of a building or structure and
has no material effect on the historic, archaeological, or
architectural or cultural significance to a building or
structure.
ARTICLE 1714 6
s. New Construction - Construction which is
characterized by the introduction of new elements,
buildings, structures or additions to existing buildings
and structures.
t. Plot Plan - A drawing or map, drawn to scale,
showing existing and proposed structures and other
improvements.
u. Preservation - Actions taken to prevent or keep a
structure from decay or degradation.
v. Principal Structure - Building(s) or structure(s)
in which is conducted the principal, or primary use(s) of
a lot.
w. Public Way - A street that has been dedicated to
and accepted by the City of Bethlehem and has been placed
on the Official City (Street) Plan.
x. Reconstruction - The act or process of
reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail
of a vanished building, structure, or object, or a part
thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time but
not necessarily of original material.
y. Regulated Activity - Any activity requiring
review and recommendation by the Historic Conservation
Commission and approval by City Council for the issuance of
a Certificate of Appropriateness in the Historic
Conservation District.
z. Repair - The process of rehabilitation which
warrants additional work beyond maintenance. Repair
includes, but is not limited to, patching, piecing in,
splicing, consolidating or otherwise reinforcing materials.
aa. Replacement - To install new materials or
components in place of existing materials or components,
such as removing existing windows or doors and installing
new windows or doors, regardless of whether the same
material and design or a different material or design.
bb. Restoration - The process of accurately
recovering the form and details of a property as it
appeared at a specific period of time by means of removal
of later work and the replacement of work missing from the
ARTICLE 1714 7
period.
cc. Setback - The distance from a property line of a
lot or parcel to the principal or secondary facade of a
building or edge of a structure.
dd. Structure - Any man-made object, including
buildings, having an ascertainable stationary location,
whether or not affixed to the land or to an existing
building or structure, excluding paved areas. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, a sign greater than 200 square
feet in area, whether it is free standing or affixed to a
building or other structure, advertising services or
products unrelated to the use of the property or building
where it is located shall be considered a structure.
ee. Use - The specific purpose for which land,
structure, building, or a unit within a structure or
building is arranged, designed, intended, occupied or
maintained.
1714.05 Delineation of Historic Conservation District
a. The City of Bethlehem Conservation District shall
consist of the geographic area included in the CB, CG, and
RG Zoning Districts in Wards 2, 3, 4, and 5 of the City of
Bethlehem, and the Historic Conservation District, at the
time of the adoption of this Ordinance, as shown on the
map, dated March 25, 1999, revised August 26, 1999, in
accordance with approval of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission (PHMC), and further revised November 16,
1999, attached hereto, marked as Exhibit "A" and on
Description of Land, marked as Exhibit "B", made a part
hereof. (Ord. 3972 - Passed 11/16/99; Ord. 3989 Passed
2/1/00.)
b. The City of Bethlehem Conservation District shall
be enlarged to include the geographic area of the Mount
Airy National Register Historic District, at the time of
adoption of this ordinance, as shown on the map, in
accordance with approval of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission (PHMC), and on Description of Land marked
as Exhibit “C”, attached hereto and made a part hereof.
c. The official Historic Conservation District Map
shall be located in the Planning and Zoning Office and made
available for public inspection.
ARTICLE 1714 8
(Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
1714.06 Historic Conservation Membership
a. A Historic Commission is hereby established and
is composed of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor of
the City of Bethlehem and confirmed by Bethlehem City
Council. One member shall be a registered architect, one
member a licensed real estate broker, one member a building
inspector, and the remaining six (6) members shall be
persons with knowledge of and interest in historic
preservation and neighborhood conservation/revitalization,
with a minimum of two (2) members as appointed residing
within South Side Bethlehem; and additionally, with a
minimum of two (2) members as appointed maintaining
business interests within South Side Bethlehem; and
additionally, with a minimum of two (2) members as
appointed residing within Mount Airy. (Ord. 3972 - Passed
11/16/99; Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07.)
b. The term of each member shall be three years, or
until his successor is appointed, except that the terms of
the members first appointed pursuant to this Ordinance
shall be so fixed that no more than three members shall be
reappointed or replaced during any one calendar year. (Ord.
4007 - Passed 5/2/00)
c. The position of any member appointed in his
capacity of architect, broker, inspector or resident who
ceases to fulfill this requirement of membership shall be
automatically considered vacant. An appointment to fill a
vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term.
d. A majority of the appointed members shall
constitute a quorum, and action taken at any meeting shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of the
Commission members present at the meeting. Except that, if
one or more positions are vacant at the time of official
action, a quorum shall be no less than five (5) people;
and, in the case of an even number of members present
because of vacancy or absence, a tie vote shall indicate
denial. (Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
e. It shall be the duty of each Commission member to
publicly announce any conflict of interest in connection
ARTICLE 1714 9
with any application or other official action before the
Commission. When a conflict of interest has been
identified, the member shall not participate in the
discussion, deliberation or voting on the matter, and
shall, if requested by a majority of the Commission,
temporarily absent himself from the meeting.
f. Any Commission member may be removed for
misconduct or wrongdoing, unlawful execution of this
Ordinance, or failure to perform his responsibilities
pursuant to Ordinance, or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the City Council, but not before he has
been given the opportunity of a hearing to defend to any
alleged infractions of this Ordinance.
1714.07 Powers and Duties of the Historic Conservation
Commission
a. Advisory Role, Mandatory - The Historic
Conservation Commission shall have the following
responsibilities:
(i) review applications for regulated activities
listed in Section 9 of this Ordinance;
(ii) consider the financial feasibility of its
recommendations based on cost estimates and other
financial documentation provided by the applicant when
necessary;
(iii) submit written recommendations to City
Council regarding the advisability of issuing any
Certificate of Appropriateness prior to the issuance
of a building permit by the Building Official.
(1) Recommendations Regarding Certificates of
Appropriateness - The Commission shall base its
recommendations of approval, conditional
approval, or denial to City Council on the
following:
(i) the appropriateness of exterior
architectural features which can be seen
from a public street or way, including the
general design, arrangement, texture, and
materials of the building or structure and
the relation of such factors to similar
ARTICLE 1714 10
features of buildings and structures of the
period of significance in the Districts;
(ii) the effect which the proposed change will
have upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the District;
(iii)in the case of new construction,
compatibility with the design guidelines
listed in Section 10 of this Ordinance and
other design guidelines specifically created
for these conservation districts in
conjunction with the Commission;
(iv) the written determination of appropriateness
by the Historic Preservation Specialist; and
(v) the applicant's justification for the
proposed activity, including financial
feasibility and cost estimates when
necessary, as set forth in Section 9.
Recommendations to Council may include
conditions of approval that modify an
applicant's initial application if the
applicant agrees to the recommended
modifications.
(Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
(2) Recommendations Against Issuance of Certificates
of Appropriateness - If the Commission decides to
recommend against the granting of a Certificate
of Appropriateness, it shall indicate to the
applicant those changes, if any, which would
result in a positive recommendation. The
Commission shall withhold its report to Council
if the applicant agrees to return to the
Commission at a future regularly scheduled
meeting with revised plans for its consideration.
b. Compensation - Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
c. Meetings - The Historic Conservation Commission shall
meet at scheduled public meetings, and if determined
necessary, at special meetings, advertised in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law.
ARTICLE 1714 11
1714.08 Powers and Duties of City Council
a. The City Council shall certify to the
appropriateness of the proposed erection,
reconstruction, or demolition of any building, in
whole or in part, within the Historic Conservation
District.
b. The City Council shall consider the
recommendations of the Historic Conservation
Commission for all applications for the erection,
reconstruction, or demolition of any building, in
whole or in part, within the Historic
Conservation District.
c. The City Council shall vote to approve, to
approve with conditions, to table for further
consideration or to deny any application for the
erection, reconstruction, or demolition of any
building, in whole or in part, within the
Historic Conservation District.
d. The City Council, in determining whether or not
to certify to the appropriateness of the
erection, reconstruction, or demolition of any
building, in whole or in part, shall consider the
effect which the proposed change will have upon
the general historic and architectural nature of
the District.
e. The City Council shall act upon the
appropriateness of exterior architectural
features which can be seen from a public street
or way, and shall consider the general design,
arrangement, texture, and material of the
building or structure and the relation of such
factors to similar features of buildings and
structures in the District. (Ord. 4432 – Passed
5/16/07)
f. Upon approval of the proposed activity, the City
Council shall issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness authorizing the issuance of a
building permit for the approved activity to the
Building Official.
ARTICLE 1714 12
g. Disapproval of the City Council shall be in
writing, stating reasons therefor, and copy of
the disapproval shall be given to the applicant,
the Building Official, the Historic Conservation
Commission, and to the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission.
1714.09 Activities Requiring Certificates of
Appropriateness
a. Demolition
(1) Any activity visible from the public way
within the Historic Conservation District
requiring the issuance of a demolition
permit by the Building Official in
accordance with the City Building Code,
shall require the issuance of a Certificate
of Appropriateness by City Council; except
that demolition of accessory structures with
footprints less than 100 feet shall be
exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance. (Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
(2) Applications for demolition permits shall be
accompanied by the following: (a)
photographs of the building, structure, or
part thereof proposed for demolition; (b)
photographic evidence and written
description of the deteriorated condition of
the building or structure; (c) reason(s) for
the demolition; (d) explanation why
rehabilitation, reuse, plan alteration, or
stabilization with the intent to market and
sell the property is not feasible or
desirable; (e) proposed future use of the
lot or part thereof occupied by the building
or structure proposed for demolition and
timeline for implementation of proposed
future use; and (f) statement on disposition
of architectural features/ building
materials.
b. Construction
(1) Any construction, reconstruction, or major
alterations of principal structures or
ARTICLE 1714 13
appurtenances visible from a public way
within the Historic Conservation District
shall require a Certificate of
Appropriateness, provided that, (i)
maintenance or repair of a building or
structure or part thereof shall not require
review, and (ii) the following construction,
reconstruction, or major alterations of
appurtenances or accessory structures or
elements shall be exempt from the provisions
of this Ordinance:
(a) Accessory structures in the rear or
side yard, including but not limited to
the following: storage sheds, gazebos,
detached decks, hot tub enclosures, and
animal shelters.
(b) Appurtenances and accessory elements of
a decorative or ancillary nature,
including but not limited to banners
and flags, downspouts and gutters,
flower boxes, heating or cooling units,
light fixtures, and mailboxes.
(Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
(2) Applications for Certificates of
Appropriateness for construction,
reconstruction or assembling of structures
and appurtenances, except those listed as
exempt above, shall be accompanied by the
following: (i) architectural drawings with
appropriate notes indicating conformity with
the design guidelines listed below in
Section 10; (ii) colored photographs of the
lot or structure where the construction,
reconstruction or assembling is to occur and
streetscapes adjacent to and directly across
the public street from the proposed
construction activity; and (iii)reason(s)
for any deviations from design guidelines
listed in Section 10, including financial
feasibility and documented cost estimates or
alternatives, if appropriate.
ARTICLE 1714 14
1714.10 Design Guidelines
a. The general design, arrangement, texture, and
material of a new building or structure and
the relation of such factors to similar features
of buildings or structures in the Historic
Conservation District shall be detailed in the
application. Consideration shall be given but not
limited to the following:
(1) Size, Scale, Proportion - New construction
should relate to the dominant proportions,
size and scale of period buildings (1895 to
1950) in the district. For example, long,
low buildings are inappropriate amid taller
structures.
(2) Rhythm and Patterns - Design elements of
principal facades should reflect and
maintain neighborhood patterns of period
buildings (1895 to 1950), including but not
limited to the following: prevalent number
of bays; door and window placement; floorto-
floor and cornice heights; spacing
between windows and doors and between
windows and cornices or rooflines; and
dimensions of the facade's base and cornice.
Where the use of the structure prevents
maintaining the prevalent rhythms and
patterns, the design shall incorporate
detailing to suggest them.
(3) Window and Door Openings - The size and
design of window and door openings should be
similar to those of period buildings (1895
to 1950) in the immediate neighborhood.
(4) Materials and Textures - Building materials,
textures and treatments should be compatible
with those of period buildings (1895 to
1950) in the immediate neighborhood.
Traditional materials common in the Historic
Conservation District, such as brick, wood
and stone, are preferred.
(5) Architectural Details - New construction
should include details and appurtenances
ARTICLE 1714 15
reflecting the character defining features
of neighborhood buildings of period
significance (1895 to 1950), such as
porches, porticos, cornices, lintels,
arches, quoins, and chimneys.
(6) Shape and Massing - New construction should
incorporate massing, building shapes, and
roof shapes that are present in period
buildings (1895 to 1950).
(7) Streetscapes - New construction shall
reflect prevailing setbacks, and physical
elements which define streetscapes, such as
brick walls, wrought iron fences, building
facades or combinations of these which form
visual continuity and cohesiveness with the
period buildings (1895 to 1950).
(Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
1714.11 Application Review Procedure
a. The applicant shall submit a completed
application for a permit for any regulated
activity to the Building Official no later than
the deadline posted in the office of the Building
Official.
b. Following the submission deadline, the Historic
Preservation Specialist shall review each
application, field inspect the property, consult
with the applicant, if necessary, and prepare a
written determination of appropriateness for the
Historic Commission and applicant.
c. At the time of application, the owner of record
or his/her representative shall be advised of the
time and place of the Commission meeting when
his/her application will be considered and shall
be advised that his/her or said representative's
attendance at the meeting is required. (Ord. 4432
– Passed 5/16/07)
d. The Historic Commission shall render a decision and
recommendation on any application no later than 60
days after the filing of a complete application.
ARTICLE 1714 16
e. Upon the Commission's rendering a decision, the
Historic Preservation Specialist shall submit the
Commission's recommendation, referencing the
appropriate Secretary of the Interior's Standards
with which the proposed activity complies, to the
Council in time for action at its next regularly
scheduled meeting.
f. If the City Council approves the application,
with any conditions recommended by the
Commission, it shall issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness authorizing the Building Official
to issue a building permit for the work covered
pursuant to those conditions.
g. If the City Council disapproves, a written
reason(s) shall be given to the Building
Official, the applicant, and to the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission. The disapproval
shall indicate what changes in the plans and
specifications would meet the conditions for
protecting (i) the distinctive historic character
of the District, and (ii) the architectural
integrity of the building or structure.
h. Upon receipt of a written disapproval of the City
Council, the Building Official shall disapprove
the application for a building permit and so
advise the applicant. The applicant may appeal
this disapproval to the County Court of Common
Pleas within the time specified by law.
i. In either case of approval or disapproval, the
City Council shall notify the applicant of its
decision within thirty (30) days of its meeting
at which the application was considered.
1714.12 Unreasonable Economic Hardship
a. When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is
made in reference to demolition due to the effect
of this Ordinance, the owner of record must
present evidence sufficient to prove that as a
result of the Commission's action, he is unable
to obtain a reasonable return or a reasonable
beneficial use from the property. The owner of
ARTICLE 1714 17
record shall submit by affidavit to the
Commission some or all of the information below,
at the discretion of the Commission, which shall
include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Form of ownership or operation of the
property, whether sole proprietorship, forprofit
or nonprofit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture or other.
(2) Date property was acquired by current owner.
(3) Name and address of previous owner.
(4) Purchase price.
(5) Current equity in the property.
(6) All appraisals and/or market value analyses
obtained within the previous two years by
the owner or applicant in connection with
purchase, offering for sale, financing or
ownership of the property, or for other
purposes. If none were previously prepared,
a current appraisal or market value analysis
shall be submitted.
b. The Commission may require that an applicant
furnish additional information relevant to its
determination of unreasonable economic hardship.
c. The Commission may request and consider studies
and economic analyses relating to the property in
question.
d. Should the Commission determine that the owner's
present return is not reasonable, it must
consider whether there are other uses currently
allowed that would provide a reasonable return
and whether such a return could be obtained
through investment in the property for
rehabilitation purposes. The Commission may
choose to recommend to the City Council and City
Administration that special economic incentives
be developed to assist the owner in maintaining
the property and obtaining a suitable economic
return or achieving a reasonable beneficial use.
ARTICLE 1714 18
e. Should the applicant prove to the satisfaction of
the Commission that he will suffer an
unreasonable economic hardship if a Certificate
of Appropriateness is not approved, and should
the Commission be unable to develop with the City
Council and Administration a solution which can
relieve the owner's economic hardship, the
Commission may recommend a Certificate of
Appropriateness for demolition.
1714.13 Notice of Violation
The Building Official shall serve notice of violation
on the property owner of record for any unauthorized
regulated activity and for any demolition by neglect as
well as for work done contrary to the work authorized by
the Certificate of Appropriateness.
1714.14 Enforcement
The Building Official or his designated representative
shall have the power to institute any proceedings at law or
in equity necessary for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
If an existing building or structure has been demolished in
violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, no building
permit for new construction on that lot shall be issued for
two years from the date of notice of violation.
1714.15 Penalty
Any person, property owner, occupant, firm or
contractor violating any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100) and not more than
three hundred dollars ($300) for the first offense, and not
less than three hundred dollars ($300) and not more than
six hundred dollars ($600) for each and every offense
thereafter, together with costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not
more than ninety days. Each day of violation as to any
section of this article shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 3952 - Passed 4/20/99.)
ARTICLE 1714 19
ARTICLE 1714 - EXHIBIT B
DESCRIPTION OF LAND
DESIGNATED AS
HISTORIC CONSERVATION DISTRICT
The City of Bethlehem Conservation District shall
consist of the geographic area included in the CB, CG, and
RG Zoning Districts in Wards 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the City of
Bethlehem, County of Northampton, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, as
shown on the map, dated March 25, 1999, revised August 26,
1999, in accordance with approval of the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission (PHMC), and further revised
November 16, 1999, bounded and described as follows:
Beginning at a point, said point being the
intersection of the centerline of the Hill to Hill Bridge
with the centerline of the West Third Street Ramp, said
point also being the true point of beginning, thence in a
northerly direction along the centerline of the Hill to
Hill Bridge to a point, said point being the intersection
of the centerline of the Hill to Hill Bridge with the
extension of the north property line of #240 Union Station
Plaza, thence in an easterly direction along the northern
property line of #240 Union Station Plaza to a point, said
point being the intersection of the northern property line
of #240 Union Station Plaza with the eastern property line
of #240 Union Station Plaza, thence in a southwest
direction along the eastern property line of #240 Union
Station Plaza to a point, said point being the extension of
the eastern property line of #240 Union Station Plaza with
the south street line of West Second Street, thence in a
southeastern direction along the south street line of West
Second Street to a point, said point being the intersection
of the south street line of West Second Street with the
extension of the west street line of Brodhead Avenue,
thence in a southern direction along the extension of the
west street line of Brodhead Avenue to a point, said point
being the intersection of the extension of the west street
line of Brodhead Avenue with the centerline of the existing
railroad tracks, thence in a southeasterly direction along
the centerline of the existing railroad tracks to a point,
said point being the intersection of the centerline of the
existing railroad tracks with the centerline of West Third
Street, thence in a easterly direction along the centerline
ARTICLE 1714 20
of West Third Street to a point, said point being the
intersection of the centerline of West Third Street and the
extension of the west property line of Banana Factory
parking lot, thence in a northerly direction along the west
property line of the Banana Factory parking lot to a point,
said point being the intersection of the extension of the
west property line of the Banana Factory parking lot with
the centerline of West Second Street, thence in a easterly
direction along the centerline of West Second Street to a
point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of East Second Street and the centerline of Columbia
Street, thence in a easterly direction along the centerline
of Columbia Street to a point, said point being the
intersection of the centerline of Columbia Street with the
centerline of Polk Street, thence in a southerly direction
along the centerline of Polk Street to a point, said point
being the intersection of the centerline of Polk Street
with the centerline of the existing railroad tracks, thence
in a easterly direction along the centerline of existing
railroad tracks to a point, said point being the
intersection of the centerline of the existing railroad
tracks with the centerline of Fillmore Street, thence in a
southerly direction along the centerline of Fillmore Street
to a point, said point being the intersection of the
centerline of Fillmore Street with the centerline of Evans
Street, thence in a easterly direction along the centerline
of Evans Street to a point, said point being the
intersection of the centerline of Evans Street and the
centerline of Pierce Street, thence in a southerly
direction along the centerline of Pierce Street to a point,
said point being the intersection of the centerline of
Pierce Street with the centerline of Evans Street, thence
in a easterly direction along the centerline of Evans
Street to a point, said point being the intersection of the
centerline of Evans Street with the centerline of Monroe
Street, thence in a southerly direction along the
centerline of Monroe Street to a point, said point being
the intersection of the centerline of Monroe Street with
the centerline of Mechanic Street, thence in a easterly
direction along the centerline of Mechanic Street to a
point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of Mechanic Street with the centerline of Hayes Street,
thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of
Hayes Street to a point, said point being the intersection
of the centerline of Hayes Street with the centerline of
East Morton Street, thence in a westerly direction along
the centerline of East Morton Street to a point, said point
ARTICLE 1714 21
being the intersection of the centerline of East Morton
Street and the centerline of Webster Street, thence in a
southerly direction along the centerline of Webster Street
to a point, said point being the intersection of the
centerline of Webster Street with the centerline of East
Morton Street, thence in a westerly direction along the
centerline of East Morton Street to a point, said point
being the intersection of the centerline of West Morton
Street with the centerline of Brodhead Avenue, thence in a
northerly direction along the centerline of Brodhead Avenue
to a point, said point being the intersection of the
centerline of Brodhead Avenue with the extension of the
once common property line between City of Bethlehem Ward 2
Block 10 Assessment Lot 5 and Ward 2 Block 10 Assessment
Lot 6, thence in a westerly direction along said once
common property line between City of Bethlehem Ward 2 Block
10 Assessment Lot 5 and Ward 2 Block 10 Assessment Lot 6 to
a point, said point being the intersection of the once
common property line between City of Bethlehem Ward 2
Block 10 Assessment Lot 5 and Ward 2 Block 10 Assessment
Lot 6 with the centerline of Birkel Avenue, thence in a
northerly direction along the centerline of Birkel Avenue
to a point, said point being the intersection of the
centerline of Birkel Avenue with the centerline of West
Fourth Street, thence in a westerly direction along the
centerline of West Fourth Street to a point, said point
being the intersection of the centerline of West Fourth
Street with the centerline of Broadway, thence in a
southwesterly direction along the centerline of Broadway to
a point, said point being the intersection of the
centerline of Broadway with the centerline of Wyandotte
Street, thence in a northeasterly direction along the
centerline of Wyandotte Street to a point, said point being
the intersection of the centerline of Wyandotte Street with
the centerline of West Third Street, thence in a northerly
direction along the centerline of Wyandotte Street to a
point, said point being the intersection of the centerline
of the West Third Street Ramp with the centerline of the
Hill to Hill Bridge, said point being the place of
beginning.
(Ord. 3952 - Passed 4/20/99; Ord. 3972 - Passed 11/16/99;
Ord. 3989 - Passed 2/1/00)
ARTICLE 1714 22
ARTICLE 1714 - EXHIBIT C
MOUNT AIRY BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION
Beginning at a point on the southeast corner of Eighth
and Prospect Avenue, thence east 210.5 feet along the south
side of Prospect Avenue to the northeast corner of property
at 821 Prospect Avenue, thence southwest 196.75 feet along
the east property line to a point on the north side of
Franklin Alley, thence west along the north side of
Franklin Alley 166.75 feet to the southeast corner of
Eighth Avenue approximately 65 feet, thence west across
Eight Avenue 144.35 feet to the southwest corner of
property at 903 Prospect Avenue, thence following rear
property lines south 2 feet, west 39.65 feet, north 44.35
feet, west 74 feet, south 2 feet, and west 126.5 feet to a
point on the west side of Ninth Avenue, thence south
approximately 12 feet along the west side of Ninth Avenue,
thence west 188.5 feet to a point on the west side of Tenth
Avenue, thence south 67 feet along the west side of Tenth
Avenue to the northwest corner of Tenth Avenue and Franklin
Alley thence west 105.1 feet to the southeast corner of
property at 359 Tenth Avenue.
Thence north 173 feet to the northwest corner of
property at 359 Tenth Avenue, thence west 30 feet, thence
north approximately 166 feet to a point on the south side
of Prospect Avenue, thence west along the south side of
Prospect Avenue approximately 286 feet to a point at the
southwest corner of Eleventh and Prospect Avenues. Thence
south 875.06 feet along the west side of Eleventh Avenue to
the northeast corner of Eleventh Avenue and Spring Street,
thence west along Spring Street 509.32 feet to the
southwest corner of property at 1317 Prospect Avenue,
thence north 390 feet, thence west 230 feet to a point on
the east side of Thirteenth Avenue, thence north along the
east side of Thirteenth Avenue 227.82 feet, thence west 281
feet to the southwest corner of property at 375 Thirteenth
Avenue, thence following property lines south 37.67 feet,
west 116.04 feet and south 220 feet to a point on the north
side of Calypso Avenue, thence west 358 feet along the
north side of Calypso Avenue to the northeast corner of
Calypso and Fifteenth Avenue.
Thence north along the east side of Fifteenth Avenue
515 feet to the southeast corner of Fifteenth and Prospect
Avenues, thence east 755 feet along the south side of
Prospect Avenue to the southeast corner of Thirteenth and
ARTICLE 1714 23
Prospect Avenues, thence north 185 feet along the east side
of Thirteenth Avenue to the southeast corner of Thirteenth
Avenue and West Market Street, thence east 1779.62 feet
along the south side of West Market Street to the southwest
corner of Eighth Avenue and West Market Street; thence
south 299.5 feet along the west side of Eighth Avenue to
the Point of Beginning.
(Ord. 4432 – Passed 5/16/07)
ARTICLE 1715
Vaults and Openings
1715.01 Duty To Safeguard; Registration; Maintenance Permits
1715.02 Construction Permit Required
1715.03 Inspection; Alterations; Responsibility For Accidents
1715.04 Fee; Conditions Of Permit
1715.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Excavations - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 903
1715.01 DUTY TO SAFEGUARD; REGISTRATION;
MAINTENANCE PERMITS.
The owners of property in front of which there exist vaults or
openings in or under the sidewalks or highways of the City, and which have
been or are now used for private purposes, are required to maintain, at their
expense, such vaults and openings in a manner which will safeguard life and
property. Each property owner is required to register with the Building
Inspector the location of any vault or opening in front of his property which
is under the sidewalk or highways, and obtain a permit for the maintenance
of the same. (1946 Code C.28 §34)
1715.02 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
No vaults or openings to be used for private purposes shall be
constructed under the walks or highways of the City, unless the property
owner is first granted a permit. (1946 Code C.28 §35)
1715.03 INSPECTION; ALTERATIONS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR
ACCIDENTS.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect all vaults or
openings in or under the sidewalks listed in his office, as well as any unlisted
vault called to his attention, once a year. The property owner is required to
ARTICLE 1715 2
make such alterations or additions as in the judgment of the Building
Inspector are necessary to protect life and property. Nothing herein
contained is to be construed as an acceptance by the City of any
responsibility for accidents or damage to property arising from the failure of
the property owner to maintain any vault or opening in front of his property,
through the failure of the Building Inspector to notify the property owner of
the existing danger. (1946 Code C.28 §36)
1715.04 FEE; CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
Before a permit shall be issued for the construction or maintenance of
vaults and openings in, under or upon public property for private use, the
applicant shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). The permit shall be granted
only upon approval of plans by the Building Inspector. (1946 Code C. 28
Section 37)
1715.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242
Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 1717
Mechanical Food Waste Disposals
1717.01 Permit Required
1717.02 Fee
1717.03 Operation
1717.04 Restricted To Dwellings
1717.05 Prohibited Locations
1717.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Sanitary sewers - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 921
Collection and disposal of solid wastes - See S.U. & P.S. Art. 931
Commercial grinders prohibited - See BLDG. Art. 1705, BOCA §P-1213.3
1717.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No mechanical food waste disposal or garbage grinding device,
equipment or machinery, where the ground mass is to be discharged into any
of the City's sanitary sewer system, shall be installed and used in any
premises within the City until the owner thereof shall have first filed written
application in the office of the City Plumbing Inspector and shall have
issued to him by the Plumbing Inspector a permit for such installation and
use. (Ord. 1434 §1. Passed 9/18/56.)
1717.02 FEE.
Each owner of any mechanical food waste disposal or garbage
grinding device, equipment or machinery shall pay a fee of two dollars
($2.00) to the City Treasurer at the time of the filing of his application for
the installation and use of such mechanical equipment. (Ord. 1434 §2.
Passed 9/18/56.)
ARTICLE 1717 2
1717.03 OPERATION.
Each such mechanical food waste disposal or garbage grinding device,
equipment or machinery shall be equipped with reverse action motor of not
more than one-third horsepower and shall be so constructed that, when in
use for the purposes for which it is intended, it shall produce a finely,
properly divided mass and be properly flushed with a sufficient quantity of
water at all times to cause such mass to flow freely into and through the
City's sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1434 §3. Passed 9/18/56.)
1717.04 RESTRICTED TO DWELLINGS.
The installation and use of any mechanical food waste disposal or
garbage grinding device, equipment or machinery is limited and restricted to
the installation and use by a single-family unit. (Ord. 1434 §4. Passed
9/18/56.)
1717.05 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
The City Plumbing Inspector is expressly prohibited from issuing a
permit for the installation and use of any mechanical food waste disposal or
garbage grinding device, equipment or machinery in hotels, restaurants,
stores, commercial enterprises, establishments or institutions of any kind.
(Ord. 1434 §5. Passed 9/18/56.)
1717.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242-
Passed 2/7/89)
ARTICLE 1718
Security Gates, Grilles and Solid Shutters
On Storefronts/Businesses
1718.01 Security gates, grilles and shutters on storefronts,
office buildings and other buildings and/or structures
used for commercial purposes.
1718.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
1718.01 SECURITY GATES, GRILLES AND SHUTTERS ON
STOREFRONTS, OFFICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER BUILDINGS
AND/OR STRUCTURES USED FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
(a) Security devices involving gates, grilles or solid
shutters designed to limit or block access to the
front or sides of storefronts, office buildings or of
buildings or structures used for commercial purposes,
are prohibited throughout the City of Bethlehem.
(b) All security devices involving gates, grilles or solid
shutters lawfully in existence on the effective date
of this ordinance, shall be maintained in good repair,
painted a uniform color and be free from graffiti. Any
security device involving gates, grilles or solid
shutters exhibiting substantial conditions of
deterioration including either rusted finishes,
peeling paint, accumulated grime, graffiti, bent,
broken or distorted surfaces, if not repaired within
ten (10) days after written notice from the City,
shall be considered beyond repair, and shall be
removed by the owner of the property at his or her own
expense upon direction by the City. For purposes of
this section,"substantial conditions" shall be
considered to be twenty (20%) percent or more of the
surface material of the security gate, grille or solid
shutter.
(c) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to
prohibit the usage of security gates, grilles or solid
shutters in the interior spaces of any shopping mall,
storefronts, office buildings or of buildings or
ARTICLE 1718 2
structures used for commercial purposes provided that
said security gates, grilles or solid shutters are not
visible from the exterior of said premises.
1718.02 PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall
be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days
imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days
imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of
$1,000.00, or ninety days imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 4011 - Passed 6/6/00)
ARTICLE 1719
GROUNDS AND PROCEDURES FOR DENYING SELECTED PERMITS AND
AUTHORIZATIONS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING PROPERTY REVITALIZATION
1719.00 Findings and purpose.
1719.01 Definitions.
1719.02 Applications for Municipal Approvals.
1719.03 Right to Deny Permit or Approval; Revocation.
1719.04 Notice of Denial.
1719.05 Form of Letter of compliance; reliance.
1719.06 Special rules.
1719.07 Appeal rights preserved.
1719.08 In personam actions; attachment of all property authorized.
CROSS REFERENCES
Historic Bethlehem, Article 1713, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
Historic Conservation District South Bethlehem and Mount Airy, Article 1714, Codified
Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
Pennsylvania Neighborhood Blight Reclamation and Revitalization Act, 53 PS § 6101 et seq
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 PS §10101 et seq
Real Estate Tax Sale Law, 72 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 5860.101 et seq
Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law, 53 PS § 7101 et seq
Unsworn falsification to authorities, 18 PaCS §4904
Municipal Permit Denial, 53 PaCS § 6131
Practice and Procedure of Local Agencies, 2 PaCS, Chapter 5, Subchapter B
Judicial Review of Local Agency Action, 2 PaCS, Chapter 7 Subchapter B
Actions Against Owner of Property with Serious Code Violations, 53 PaCS §§ 6111-6112
1719.00 Findings and purpose. Consistent with the Pennsylvania Neighborhood Blight
Reclamation and Revitalization Act, 53 PS § 6101 et seq, the City Council of the City
of Bethlehem does hereby find and declare as follows:
(1) There are deteriorated properties located in all municipalities of this Commonwealth,
including the City of Bethlehem, as a result of neglect by their owners in violation of
applicable State and municipal codes.
ARTICLE 1719 2
(2) These deteriorated properties create public nuisances which have an impact on crime
and the quality of life of our residents and require significant expenditures of public
funds in order to abate and correct the nuisances.
(3) In order to address these situations, it is appropriate for the City of Bethlehem to deny
certain governmental permits and approvals in order:
(i) To prohibit property owners from further extending their financial commitments so
as to render themselves unable to abate or correct the code, statutory and
regulatory violations or tax delinquencies.
(ii) To reduce the likelihood that other municipalities will have to address the owners’
neglect and resulting deteriorated properties.
(iii) To sanction the owners for not adhering to their legal obligations to the
Commonwealth and its municipalities, as well as to tenants, adjoining property
owners and neighborhoods.
1719.01 Definitions. The following words and phrases in this ordinance are defined as follows:
A. “Applicant” shall mean the owner of the subject real property as determined by the
current deed recorded in the Office of Recorder of Deeds for the county in which the
real property is located or any person acting under the direction or with the permission
of the owner.
B. “Board” shall mean the Zoning Hearing Board, City Planning Commission, any other
body granted jurisdiction to render decisions in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 PS §10101 et seq, and any appropriate board(s) of the
City having jurisdiction to grant approvals, or hear appeals from denials of, permits
pertaining to building, housing, property maintenance, fire, health or other public safety
ordinance or code of the City related to the use or maintenance of real property. The
term “board” shall not include the Board of Historical Architectural Review acting in
accordance with Article 1713 or the Historic Conservation Commission acting in
accordance with Article 1714 of the Codified Ordinances.
C. “Code” or “municipal code” shall mean a building, housing, property maintenance, fire,
health or other public safety ordinance, related to the use or maintenance of real
property, enacted by a municipality. The term does not include a subdivision and land
development ordinance or a zoning ordinance enacted by a municipality.
D. “Delinquent” with respect to taxes shall mean amounts which remain unpaid after
December 31 of each calendar year for all taxing districts in the manner governed by the
Real Estate Tax Sale Law, 72 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 5860.101 et seq. With respect to water or
sewer, this term shall mean amounts which remain unpaid after 20 days from the date
billed in accordance with Articles 913.03(a) and 927.06 of the Codified Ordinances,
unless provided otherwise by law. This term with respect to tax, water, sewer or refuse
shall also include any unpaid penalties, interest, and costs due in the manner authorized
ARTICLE 1719 3
by the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law, 53 PS § 7101 et seq, regardless of whether
or not liens have been filed.
E. “Public nuisance” shall mean any property which, because of its physical condition or
use, is regarded as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared by the
appropriate official a public nuisance in accordance with a municipal code.
F. “Property” shall mean any vacant or improved real property situate in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. “Serious violation” A violation of a State law or a code that poses an imminent threat to
the health and safety of a dwelling occupant, occupants in surrounding structures or a
passersby.
H. “Substantial step” shall mean an affirmative action as determined by a property code
official or officer of the court on the part of a property owner or managing agent to
remedy a serious violation of a State law or municipal code, including, but not limited
to, physical improvements or repairs to the property, which affirmative action is subject
to appeal in accordance with applicable law.
1719.02 Applications for Municipal Approvals. All applications to any City bureau or board for
any building and/or occupancy permit or approval, i.e. other than a decision on the
substantive validity of a zoning ordinance or map or curative amendment, shall be
amended to require the following verified information in writing from an applicant
subject to the penalties set forth in 18 PaCS §4904:
A. Owner information. If the owner is an individual or a combination of individuals or
partnership, the name of all known owners and their respective home addresses shall be
provided. If the owner is a trust, corporation, limited liability partnership, limited
liability company, or similar entity, its registered office and principal place of business,
type of entity, in what state it was formed, and whether the entity has qualified to do
business as a foreign entity in Pennsylvania by filing with the Corporation Bureau of the
Pennsylvania Department of State under title 15 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes shall be provided. The home address of at least one responsible trustee, officer,
member, or limited partner shall be also be included.
B. Property disclosure. The owner shall provide a list of all properties in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania owned by owner which meet one or more of the
following conditions:
1. upon which there is a final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or refuse collection
delinquency on account of the actions of the owner and no such taxes or charges
are under appeal or otherwise contested through a court or administrative process.
To the extent any property was the subject in the past 12 months of any appeal or
contest, the applicant shall identify the nature of the appeal or contest, the court or
administrative body before whom the matter was considered and the date and
disposition rendered by the court of administrative body; and/or
ARTICLE 1719 4
2. upon which there is a serious violation of State law or a code and the owner has
taken no substantial steps to correct the violation within six months following
notification of the violation and for which fines or other penalties or a judgment to
abate or correct were imposed by a magisterial district judge or municipal court,
or a judgment at law or in equity was imposed by a court of common pleas. To
the extent any property was the subject in the past 12 months of any appeal or
contest, the applicant shall identify the nature of the appeal or contest, the court
before whom the matter was considered and the date and disposition rendered by
the court.
1719.03 Right to Deny Permit or Approval; Revocation. Pursuant to 53 PaCS § 6131, any City
employee or board with authority to issue any building and/or occupancy permit or
approval, i.e. other than a decision on the substantive validity of a zoning ordinance or
map or the acceptance of a curative amendment, may, in the following circumstances,
deny issuing such municipal permit or approval if the applicant is the owner of real
property in any municipality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
A. upon which there is a final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or refuse collection
delinquency on account of the actions of the owner and no such taxes or charges are
under appeal or otherwise contested through a court or administrative process. The
denial of a permit or approval on this ground is not authorized, however, if the
delinquency amounts due for taxes, water, sewer or refuse collection charges are under
appeal or otherwise contested through a pending court or administrative process; or
B. upon which there is a serious violation of State law or a code and the owner has taken
no substantial steps to correct the violation within six months following notification of
the violation and for which fines or other penalties or a judgment to abate or correct
were imposed by a magisterial district judge or municipal court, or a judgment at law or
in equity was imposed by a court of common pleas. The denial of a permit or approval
on this ground is not authorized, however, if the property owner provides proof to the
relevant City employee or board with authority to issue the requested permit or approval
that the judgment, order or decree is subject to a stay or supersedeas by an order of a
court of competent jurisdiction or automatically allowed by statute or rule of court and
such stay or supersedeas remains in effect.
C. The City shall not deny a municipal permit to an applicant if the municipal permit is
necessary to correct a violation of State law or a City ordinance or code relating to
building, housing, property maintenance, fire, health or public safety in connection with
the use or maintenance of real property in the City.
D. The City may, in addition to any other ground for revocation authorized by law or
ordinance, revoke a permit or approval in the event the City ascertains that the
information provided to the City during the application process or board hearing was
materially incomplete, inaccurate, and/or misleading.
ARTICLE 1719 5
1719.04 Notice of Denial. If a municipal permit or approval is denied under this ordinance, then
such City employee or board shall promptly communicate the denial in writing to the
applicant and, for each parcel cited as a basis for the denial, set forth the basis of the
denial, the street address, municipality, and county in which the property is located and,
if applicable, the court and docket number. The denial shall also state that the applicant
may request a letter of compliance from the appropriate State agency, municipality or
school district which hosts the property upon which the denial is based in a form
specified by such entity.
1719.05 Form of Letter of compliance; reliance.
A. All municipal permits denied in accordance with this ordinance may be withheld until
an applicant obtains a letter from the appropriate State agency, municipality or school
district indicating the following:
1. the property in question has no final and unappealable tax, water, sewer or refuse
delinquencies;
2. the property in question is now in compliance with State law and municipal codes
relating to building, housing, property maintenance, fire, health or other public
safety ordinance, related to the use or maintenance of real property, enacted by a
municipality; or
3. the owner of the property has presented, and the appropriate State agency or
municipality has accepted, a plan to begin remediation of a serious violation of
State law or a code. Acceptance of the plan may be contingent on:
(a) beginning the remediation plan within no fewer than 30 days following
acceptance of the plan or sooner, if mutually agreeable to both the property
owner and the municipality.
(a) completing the remediation plan within no fewer than 90 days following
commencement of the plan or sooner, if mutually agreeable to both the
property owner and the municipality.
B. In the event that the appropriate State agency, municipality or school district fails to
issue a letter indicating tax, water, sewer, refuse, State law or code compliance or
noncompliance, as the case may be, within 45 days of the request, the property in
question shall be deemed to be in compliance for the purpose of this section. The
applicant shall bear the burden of proving to the City that the request was made on the
form specified, if any, by and to the appropriate State agency, municipality or school
district at least 45 days prior to the application to the City for a municipal permit or
approval.
C. Letters of compliance authorized under this section shall be verified by the appropriate
City employee(s) before issuing a municipal permit or approval to the applicant.
ARTICLE 1719 6
1719.06 Special rules.
A. In the case where an application for municipal permit is made jointly by two or more
persons, or where the owner consists of a person in combination with one or more
another person, trust, corporation, limited liability partnership, limited liability
company, or similar entity, and at least one of the joint applicants or owners owns
property meeting the requirements of Section 2.B of this ordinance, the disclosure
required by Section 2 will be made for each joint applicant or owner. The City’s rights
to deny and/or revoke a municipal permit or approval under Section 3 of this ordinance
may be exercised if any of the joint applicants or owners are the owners of property in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania meeting the requirements of Section 3.A or 3.B. In
such instances, however, the City may give the joint applicants or owners the
opportunity to make payments to resolve any delinquencies, correct code violations,
and/or enter into a remediation agreement with the City under Section 5.A.3 of this
ordinance, following which, if such payments are made and/or the remediation plan is
successfully completed, the City shall issue the municipal permit or approval.
B. Where property is inherited by will or intestacy, the City shall give the devisee or heir
the opportunity, in order to avoid subjecting the devisee’s or heir’s other properties to
denial of permits and approvals, to make payments to resolve any delinquencies, correct
code violations, and/or enter into a remediation agreement with the City under Section
5.A.3 of this ordinance, following which, if such payments are made and/or the
remediation plan is successfully completed, the City shall issue the municipal permit or
approval.
C. Municipal permits or approvals may be denied by a board in accordance with the
requirements of this section to the extent that approval of the municipal permit is within
the jurisdiction of the board.
D. In any proceeding before a board other than the governing body of the municipality, the
municipality may appear to present evidence that the applicant is subject to a denial by
the board in accordance with this section.
1719.07 Appeal rights preserved. The denial of a municipal permit or approval under this
ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of 2 PaCS Chapter 5 Subchapter B (relating
to practice and procedure of local agencies) and Chapter 7 Subchapter B (relating to
judicial review of local agency action) and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 PS §10101 et seq.
1719.08 In personam actions; attachment of all property authorized. Pursuant to 53 PaCS §§
6111-6112, for real properties upon which serious violation of a code exists for six
months following the receipt of an order to correct the violation and such order is not
the subject of a pending appeal to a board or court of competent jurisdiction, or the
owner has not corrected a condition which causes the property to be regarded as a
public nuisance, the City may initiate an in personam action at law or equity to recover
ARTICLE 1719 7
an amount equal to any penalties previously imposed against the owner and any costs of
remediation lawfully incurred by or on behalf of the City to remedy any code violation.
The initiation of any in personam action shall not bar successive in personam actions
for penalties imposed or costs of remediation incurred subsequent to the filing of any
personam action. In the event such in personam action(s) results in a judgment, decree
or order is entered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City may proceed to enforce
such judgment, decree or order by seeking attachment of and execution against any
assets of the owner wherever they may be found.
1719.09 Preservation of Remedies. Nothing in this ordinance limit, abridge, or alter the remedies
or penalties available to the City existing at common law or by statute.
Editor’s Note: Article 1719 was established by Ordinance 2019-19, passed in City Council on
6/18/2019, and signed by the Mayor on 6/19/2019.
ARTICLE 1731
Inspections
1731.01 Inspections Required.
1731.02 Fees.
1731.03 Registration.
1731.99 Violations and penalty.
1731.01 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
(a) All properties being offered for sale shall be
inspected under Article 119 titled Registration, Sale
and Transfer of Real Estate and be subject to Section
119.07 titled Rules and Regulations where applicable.
In addition, all properties being offered for sale
shall be subject to Section 119.04(b), titled Duties of
Title Holder and Seller, including the requirement that
every seller or his agent to, within a reasonable time
of offering for sale or listing for sale, but no later
than ten (10) business days from the date on which the
building or structure is offered or listed for sale,
contact the Housing Inspections Officer for the City of
Bethlehem to schedule an inspection of the building or
structure.
(b) Every dwelling, commercial unit and structure that is a
rental, shall be inspected for purposes of ascertaining
compliance with City codes, each time the unit becomes
vacant.
(c) All fraternities and sororities must be inspected
annually.
Possession by the owner of a renewed certificate of
occupancy is required to maintain occupancy and use of
a dwelling unit.
The Department of Community and Economic Development
shall establish rules and regulations to implement this
requirement and violations of such rules and
regulations shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance. The rules and regulations shall be as
follows:
ARTICLE 1731 2
a) Where such properties are intended to be
demolished and a valid demolition permit
conforming to the Building Code of the City of
Bethlehem has been obtained, the provisions set
forth in this Article shall not be applicable.
b) When such properties are being refinanced by the
current owner, the certificate set forth in this
Article shall not be required.
c) "Agreement of Sale" means any agreement or written
statement which provides the title to any property
shall therefore be transferred from one owner to
another owner. Additionally, written leases which
provide that the lessee of the property acquire
title after a predetermined number of payments or
a predetermined period of time, the Certificate
set forth in this Article shall be required.
d) The Certificate of Occupancy report shall be valid
for one (1) year from the date of the original
inspection or until such time as the property has
become vacant, in the case of a rental dwelling,
whichever time period is greater.
e) Where the inspection is incident to the property
being sold or leased, the Department of Community
and Economic Development will not be responsible
for violations that occur between the inspection
and settlement date and/or rental period.
f) Transfer of ownership – Prior to transfer of
ownership, the current owner of any dwelling unit
or structure shall first furnish the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any
compliance order or notice of violation issued by
the code official and shall furnish to the code
official a signed statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the
receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility
without condition for making the corrections or
repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation. All violations shall be
abated within 90 days of transfer. If said
property is occupied as a rental property,
violations must be abated within 30 days. The
only exception to the time limits would be if
special arrangements are agreed upon with the code
official.
ARTICLE 1731 3
Failure and/or refusal by the owner or his/her designated
agent to secure the necessary certificate of occupancy, or failure
and/or refusal to provide access for inspection upon reasonable
notice, and/or any other violation of Article 1731 shall also be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2010-29 – Passed 12/21/10)
1731.02 FEES.
Fees for inspections shall be assessed against property
owners and shall be determined as follows:
(a) Inspections made pursuant to the requirements of
Article 119 to be paid by the owner:
$150.00 per dwelling unit
$200.00 per commercial unit
(b) Inspections of rental properties under 1731.01(b)
above:
$ 100.00 per dwelling unit
(c) Reinspections to verify correction of violations,
second or additional reinspections:
$ 75.00 per second reinspection;
$100.00 per third reinspection;
$125.00 additional reinspections.
(d) For each commercial rental property containing 2,000 sq.
ft. or less of floor area, the fee shall be $200.00.
For commercial rental property containing more than
2,000 sq. ft. the fee shall be $200.00 plus $100.00 for
every additional 2,000 sq. ft. The owner/operator of a
commercial rental property must acquire a certificate of
occupancy each time that rental property space is
vacant.
(e) Fraternities and sororities shall be $150.00 plus
$10.00 for each bedroom.
(f) The City may double the inspection fee for anyone
selling or renting a dwelling without obtaining an
inspection for a certificate of occupancy.
All inspection fees shall be paid prior to the inspection
regardless of the number of units. Failure to pay inspection
fees shall be deemed a failure and/or refusal to comply with the
ARTICLE 1731 4
provisions contained herein, and will be subject to the penalty
contained in 1731.99. (Ord. 3646 - Passed 11/1/94; Ord. 4236 –
Passed 12/16/03; Ord. 4341 – Passed 9/20/05; Ord. 2010-29 –
Passed 12/21/10; Ord. 2014-48-Passed 12/16/14.)
1731.03 REGISTRATION.
(a) All property owners who have housing rental units in
the City of Bethlehem shall be required to have the units
registered with the Bureau of Inspections of the Department of
Community and Economic Development.
(b) The registration form shall list the name, address and
telephone number of the property owner, the location of the
rental property, and the number of units that are provided.
(c) Failure to register the units with the Bureau of
Inspections within ninety days from the date of the passage of
the Ordinance or within thirty days following the purchase or
conversion of a structure to a rental property shall constitute a
violation of this ordinance. (Ord. 3546. Passed 4/20/93.)
1731.99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm or corporation which violates the
provisions of this Article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(a) A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or a term of imprisonment not exceeding ninety days or both.
(Ord. 3290-Passed 10/17/89; Ord. 2014-48-Passed 12/16/14.)
ARTICLE 1732
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY
1732.01 Purpose and Intent
1732.02 Definitions
1732.03 Applicability
1732.04 Establishment of a Registry
1732.05 Registration of Abandoned Real Property
1732.06 Maintenance Requirements
1732.07 Security Requirements
1732.08 Public Nuisance
1732.09 Inspections for Violations
1732.10 Additional Authority
1732.11 Opposing, Obstructing Enforcement Officer; Penalty
1732.12 Immunity of Enforcement Officer
1732.13 Amendments
1732.14 Severability
1732.15 Effective Date
1732.99 Fees and Penalties
1732.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of the City to establish a process to address the deterioration and
blight of City neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount of abandoned, foreclosed or
distressed real property located within the City, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the
number of abandoned properties located within the City. It is the City’s further intent to
establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and foreclosed
properties.
1732.02 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Abandoned Real Property – means any real property located in the City,
whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis
pendens filed against it by a lender holding a mortgage on the property,
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by a lender, is subject to an
ARTICLE 1732 2
application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor’s lien sale, or has been
transferred to a lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The designation
of a property as “abandoned” shall remain in place until such time as the property
is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure action has been dismissed,
and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
Accessible Property/Structure – means a property that IS accessible through
a comprised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is unsecured
and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.
Applicable Codes – means to include, but not be limited to, the City’s Zoning
Code, the City’s International Property Maintenance Code, Solid Waste
Ordinance, Residential and Commercial Recycling Ordinance, and the
Pennsylvania Building and Fire Codes.
Blighted Property – means:
a) Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls,
or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage trespassing; or
b) Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the maintenance
of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in value of the
neighboring properties; or
c) Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the City Codes; or
d) Properties that endanger the public’s health, safety, or welfare because the
properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated, or
violate minimum health and safety standards or lacks maintenance as
required by the applicable codes.
Enforcement Officer – means any natural person, entity, firm, association, foundation,
institution, partnership, co-partnership, corporation or unincorporated association. This
term shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
Owner – means any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership interest
whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also apply to any person,
legal entity or agent responsible for the construction, maintenance or operation of the
property involved.
Property Management Company – means a local property manager, property maintenance
ARTICLE 1732 3
company or similar entity responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property.
Vacant – means any building or structure that is not legally occupied.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter.
1732.03 APPLICABILITY
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or
provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy available to the City above and beyond
any other State, County or Local provisions for the same.
1732.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1732.05 the City or designee shall establish a registry cataloging
each Abandoned Property within the City, containing the information required by this Article.
1732.05 REGISTRATION OF ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY
a) Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the City of
Bethlehem shall perform an inspection of the property to determine vacancy or
occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days
of the inspection, register the property with the Bureau of Housing, or designee, on
forms or website access provided by the City, and indicate whether the property is
vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether it is
found to be vacant or occupied.
b) If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the
mortgagee or his designee monthly until (1) the mortgagor or other party remedies the
default, or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is
deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection,
update the property registration to a vacancy status on forms provided by the City.
c) Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the mortgagee and
the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee and the server, a direct contact
name and telephone number for both parties, facsimile number and e-mail address for
both parties, the PIN or tax number, and the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact
phone number of the property management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property.
ARTICLE 1732 4
d) All registration fees must be paid directly from the Mortgagee, Servicer, Trustee,
or Owner. Third Party Registration fees are not allowed without the consent of the
City and/or its authorized designee.
e) This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a
foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage
involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.
f) Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration
requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance standards of this section as
long as they remain vacant or in default.
g) Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this section must
report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of
the change.
h) Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify the
registration form from time to time to reflect a change of circumstances as required
by this article is a violation of the article and shall be subject to enforcement.
i) Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination that any
property is in violation of this article, the City may take the necessary action to ensure
compliance with and place a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed
to benefit the property and bring it into compliance.
1732.06 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the property in accordance
with all applicable codes of the City may result in a violation of the applicable code(s)
and issuance of a citation or Notice of Violation in accordance with the applicable code
of the City. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the City’s Code Enforcement
Officer, Magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction, the City may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with this section.
1732.07 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
a) Properties subject to these Sections shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons.
b) A “secure manner” shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of
windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access
the interior of the property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other
ARTICLE 1732 5
openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or
structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the
window.
c) If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become vacant or
abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work
necessary to bring the property into compliance with the applicable code(s), and the
property manager must perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the
requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws.
1732.08 PUBLIC NUISANCE
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which
pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety
of the residents of the City.
1732.09 INSPECTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from any other
obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may apply to the property. Upon offer for
sale or transfer of title to the property, the owner shall be responsible to contact the City’s
Housing Inspections Office for the City of Bethlehem to schedule an inspection of the building
or structure.
1732.10 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY
a) If an Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property subject to the provisions
of this article is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the code
enforcement officer may temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee
and/or owner, and may bring the violations before the magistrate as soon as possible to
address the conditions of the property.
b) The Enforcement Officer or magistrate shall have the authority to require the mortgagee
and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional
maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing
any and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard
or other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.
c) If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, then the code enforcement board or special magistrate
may direct the City to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee with the cost of the
abatement.
ARTICLE 1732 6
d) If the mortgagee does not reimburse the City for the cost of temporarily securing the
property, or of any abatement directed by the code enforcement officer or magistrate,
within thirty (30) days of the City sending the mortgagee the invoice then the City may
lien the property with such cost, along with an administrative fee as determined in the
City’s fee ordinance to recover the administrative personnel services.
1732.11 OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the
enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in the applicable code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
1732.12 IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the City to enforce the sections here within
shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real
property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article.
1732.13 AMENDMENTS
Registration and Penalty Fees outlined in this article may be modified by a Resolution, passed
and adopted by the City Council of the City of Bethlehem.
1732.14 SEVERABILITY
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect or impair any of
the remaining portions of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intention of City Council
of the City of Bethlehem that this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
1732.15 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective on August 28, 2013.
1732.99 FEES AND PENALTIES
a) A non-refundable registration fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00),
per property, shall accompany the registration form.
b) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article may be cited and fined.
The following table shows violations of these sections, as may be amended from
ARTICLE 1732 7
time to time, which may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this regulation; and
the dollar amount of civil penalty for the violation of these sections as it may be
amended. The descriptions of violations below are for informational purposes only
and are not meant to limit or define the nature of the violations or the subject matter
of the City code sections, except to the extent that different types of violations of the
Code section may carry different civil penalties. For each Code section listed in the
schedule of civil penalties, the entirety of the section may be enforced by the
mechanism provided in this section, regardless of whether all activities prescribed or
required are described in the “Description of Violation” column. To determine
whether a particular activity is prescribed or required by this Code, the relevant City
Code section(s) shall be examined.
DESCRIPTION OF VIOLATION CIVIL PENALTIES
Failure to register abandoned real property
on annual basis and/or any violation of any
of the sections of Article 1732.
1st Violation - $ 1,000
2nd Violation - $ 1,000
3rd Violation - $ 3,000
4th Violation - $ 7,000
5th Violation - $10,000
(Ord. 2013-19-Passed 8/6/13)
ARTICLE 1733
International Property Maintenance Code
1733.01 Adoption.
1733.02 Additions, Deletions, and Modifications.
CROSS REFERENCE(S)
Adoption by reference - See 3rd Class Charter Law 608(a)
(53 P.S. 41608(a); 3rd Class 2403(67) (53 P.S. 37403(67)
1733.01 ADOPTION
There is hereby adopted the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code with
deletions and amendments thereto as hereinafter noted.
1733.02 ADDITIONS, DELETIONS, AND MODIFICATIONS.
The following articles, representing revisions or additions to the 2009 ICC International
Property Maintenance Code shall be applicable for the purpose of this Ordinance:
CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 106 - VIOLATIONS
That Sub-section PM-106.4 titled Violation Penalties which reads as follows:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or
local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Be amended to read as follows:
106.4 Penalty
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Ordinance or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof, or shall be in violation of an approved plan or directive
of the Inspector or of a permit issued under the provisions of the Ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Magistrate of the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania,
be liable to pay the following penalties:
a) First Violation – A fine of $200.00, or thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both;
ARTICLE 1733
2
b) Second Violation – A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
c) Third and each subsequent violation – A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense
SECTION 107 - NOTICES AND ORDERS
That Sub-section 107.7 be added to read as follows:
107.7 ABSENTEE LANDLORD
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any rental dwelling, excluding a
dormitory and hotel (as defined in Article 2, PM-201.0 APPLIED MEANING OF
WORD AND TERMS), unless there is provided to the Inspection Bureau the name and
address of an agent residing within a twenty mile radius of the City of Bethlehem,
authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the title owner or operator of said
dwelling.
The authorization shall be signed by the agent designated to accept service and the
landlord or operator shall be required to contact the Housing Bureau each year and/or
upon the change of agency in order to update the City records with regard to the name,
address and telephone number of the locally designated agent.
Failure to provide the information on the designated local agent, after two (2) weeks
notice, will result in the revocation of the Certificate of Occupancy and the closure of the
property to renters until a new and valid Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
SECTION 111 - MEANS OF APPEALS
That Sub-section 111.1 titled Application for appeal that reads as follows:
111.1. Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code
official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the
board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Shall be amended to read:
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued
under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a
ARTICLE 1733
3
written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after the day the decision, notice or
order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means. Notwithstanding the foregoing, or any other inconsistent
provision of this code, there shall be no right of appeal to the board of appeals from a
notice of violation issued by the code official alleging a violation of this code. Where a
person has been served with a notice of violation and has failed, within the time provided
for in the notice, to correct the violation, the code official may immediately issue a
summary citation to the person based upon the violation and may issue subsequent
citations as frequently as permitted by law until the violation is corrected.
(ORD 2017-35. Passed 12/05/17
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 302 - EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
That Sub-section 302.4 titled Weeds which reads as follows:
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of (jurisdiction to insert height in inches). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Be amended to read as follows:
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of 12”. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this
term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
That Sub-section 302.8 titled Motor Vehicles which reads as follows:
Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle
shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a
state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body
work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area
designed and approved for such purposes.
Be amended to read as follows:
(A) No person shall abandon and/or store any unregistered vehicle on private property
within the City of Bethlehem. No vehicle at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting
ARTICLE 1733
4
of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
(1) A vehicle, other than a pedalcycle, shall be presumed to be abandoned
under one or more of the following circumstances, but the presumption is
rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence:
(i) The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on
private property for more than 48 hours.
(ii) The vehicle has remained illegally on private property for more
than 48 hours.
(iii) The vehicle is left unattended on private property for more than
48 hours and does not bear the following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A current certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purpose, that is an
accessory use, incidental to the dwelling as defined in Article 1302.02 of the City
of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance #2210. All wrecked car parts and similar unused
components of a junk vehicle must not be stored on any private property in clear
view of the public right of way.
(B) A vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned when it remains on private property
for more than (48) hours and any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The vehicle is physically inoperable.
(2) The vehicle is left unattended.
(3) The vehicle does not have a valid registration plate.
(4) The vehicle does not have a current certificate of inspection.
(5) The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) is not ascertainable.
(6) The vehicle remains without the consent of the owner or person in charge
of the property.
(C) If the owner of an abandoned and/or junked motor vehicle cannot be located or
does not remove the vehicle, the code official shall contact the Bethlehem Police
Department, who is authorized to remove said vehicle under Transportation 67
PA Code Chapter 253 titled Salvors and Vehicles Title 75 Chapter 73 of the
Abandoned Vehicles and Cargos Code of the Commonwealth of PA.
(D) Any vehicle undergoing major overhaul, including body work, shall be registered
to the owner of the property where such work is being done or registered to the
lawful resident/tenant of the property where the work is being done.
ARTICLE 1733
5
SECTION 304 - EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
Sub-section 304.3 Premises Identification
That Sub-section 304.3.1 be added to read as follows:
All existing properties with a thoroughfare of public access to the back of the property be
identified with approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and
visible from the thoroughfare running behind the property. This may require the address
numbers be attached to a garage, shed, fence, retaining wall and any other similar
structure. The numbers shall contrast with the background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches.
That Sub-section 304.14 titled Insect Screens is hereby reinstated and reincorporated into Article
1733 and reads as follows:
304.14. Insect Screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas
where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens
of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall
have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air
curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
(Ord 2017-35. Passed 12/05/2017)
That Sub-section 304.19 titled Boarded up windows be added to read as follows:
No exterior window, skylight or door frame of any structure facing toward or visible
from the public right of way shall be covered with plywood or other non-approved
materials longer than 60 days.
After 60 days, all temporary cover over exterior windows, skylights and doors that face
toward or are visible from the public right of way, shall be removed, and the exterior
windows, skylights and doors shall be restored.
Restoration of exterior windows, skylights and doors must include proper fitting windows
and door frames, hardware, locks and glazing and be maintained in proper working
condition.
All exposed exterior metal or wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weatherproofing/coating material.
ARTICLE 1733
6
SECTION 308 - RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
That Section 308.4 titled Furniture be added to read as follows:
All furniture, materials and other similar products designed, built, and manufactured
exclusively for indoor living use shall not be placed or stored on exterior porches, in
yards or any part of an exterior property in residential and non-residential areas. The
storage or placement of automobile car seats and other non-weather resistant materials
shall also be prohibited. Any person who fails to comply with this Section after fortyeight
hours notice from the City to do so, shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this
Section and shall be subject to the fines set forth in Article 1733 Section PM 106.4
SECTION 309 - PEST ELIMINATION
Sub-section 309.1 Infestation
That Sub-section 309.1.2 be added to read as follows:
All extermination must be administered by a state certified technician.
CHAPTER 6 MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 602 - HEATING FACILITIES
That Sub-section 602.1 titled Facilities required which reads as follows:
Heating facilities shall be provided in structure as required by this section.
Be amended to read as follows:
All dwelling units shall have permanently installed, non-portable type central heating
facilities or fixed electrical heating systems that are approved for the purpose and
location where installed. Heating facilities shall be capable of maintaining the required
temperatures in all habitable areas of the dwelling unit.
NOTE: Pipeless and/or ductless heating systems do not meet the requirements of section
PM-602.0.
Exception to read: At the discretion of the Code Official, pipeless and/or ductless heating
systems will be allowed providing said system shall be capable of maintaining the
required temperatures in all habitable areas of the dwelling unit.
That Sub-section 602.3 titled Heat supply which reads as follows:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling
unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to
ARTICLE 1733
7
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from [DATE] to
[DATE] to maintain a temperature of not less than 68?F (20?C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature
for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be
required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design
capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30?F (-1?C) a
minimum temperature of 65?F (18?C) shall be maintained.
Be amended to read as follows:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling
unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom shall furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat during the period from [October 1] to [May 15] to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68?F (20?C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet
rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature
for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be
required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design
capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30?F (-1?C) a
minimum temperature of 65?F (18?C) shall be maintained.
That Sub-Section 602.4 titled Occupiable work spaces which reads as follows:
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from
[DATE] to [DATE] to maintain a temperature of not less than 65?F (18?C) during the
period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
ARTICLE 1733
8
Be amended to read:
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from
[October 1] to [May 15] to maintain a temperature of not less than 65?F (18?C) during
the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
SECTION 604 - ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
That Sub-section 604.2 titled Service that reads as follows:
604.2. Service. Every single family dwelling and housing rental unit shall be served by a
main that is not less than 100 amperes. Inadequate services must be upgraded to meet the
requirements of the National Electrical Code.
Shall be amended to read:
The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the
need for additional facilities in accordance with the ICC Electrical Code. Dwelling units
shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a
rating of not less than 100 amperes.
(Ord 2017-35. Passed 12/05/2017)
SECTION 605 - ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
That Sub-section 605.2 titled Receptacles which reads as follows:
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote
receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle
or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at
least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
Be amended to read:
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote
receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded type receptacle.
Every bathroom and powder room shall contain at least one (1) 3 wire 15 or 20 amp GFI
(Ground Fault Interrupter) and all outlets on light fixtures and bathroom cabinets must be
disconnected if not GFI protected.
ARTICLE 1733
9
That Sub-section 605.2.1 be added to read as follows:
a. All existing wall type receptacles which serve kitchen counter top surfaces must
be 3 wired 15 or 20 amp GFI (ground fault interrupted) protected. Counter top
spaces separated by range tops, refrigerators and sinks shall be considered as
separate counter top spaces and apply to the requirements of this section.
b. All kitchen areas shall have (2) accessible 15 or 20 amp GFI (ground fault
interrupted) receptacle to serve counter top surfaces. If no counter top is available,
there shall be (2) accessible GFI (ground fault interrupted) receptacles at counter
top height. Refrigerator receptacles shall not be counted in determining GFI
(ground fault interrupted) receptacle required in the kitchen areas.
c. All existing receptacles located within 6' on either side of an auxiliary sink shall
be 3 wired 15 or 20 amp GFI (ground fault interrupted).
d. All exterior receptacles must be 3 wired 15 or 20 amp G.F.I. Ground Fault
Interrupter) protected in weatherproof boxes and covers.
Exception: to read, All GFI outlets built into exterior walls must have
damp proof covers.
e. All electrical receptacles that cannot be tested for improper wiring, installation,
deterioration or damage due to immovable furniture, appliances, or other
obstructions shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or the agent.
NOTE: The inspection of electrical panels and boxes is limited to a visible inspection only.
Add new Sub-section 605.2.2 titled Common Area Branch Circuits to read as follows:
Branch circuits in dwelling units shall supply only loads within that dwelling unit or
loads associated only with that dwelling unit. Branch circuits required for purpose of
lighting, central alarm, signal communications or other needs for public or common areas
of a two family or multi-family dwelling shall not be supplied from equipment that
supplies an individual dwelling unit.
Add new Sub-section 605.2.3 titled Occupant to Have Ready Access to read as follows:
Each occupant of a dwelling unit shall have ready access to all overcurrent devices
protecting the conductors supplying that occupancy.
ARTICLE 1733
10
CHAPTER 7 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Add new Sub-section 705 titled Carbon Monoxide Detectors to read as follows:
SECTION 705 - CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION
705.1 General. An approved carbon monoxide (CO) detector shall be installed,
per the requirements of this Section, in all dwelling units when a fossil fuel or solid fuel
appliance is maintained or utilized as the primary or supplemental heat source and in all
dwelling units with an attached garage, where the garage contains, is adjoining to,
adjacent to, contiguous with, and/or in the immediate vicinity of a sleeping area.
705.2 Installation and Location of Detectors. An approved carbon monoxide (CO)
detector shall be installed in the following locations:
In all dwelling units where a fossil fuel or solid fuel appliance is maintained or
utilized as the primary or supplemental heat source, a carbon monoxide (CO) detector
shall be installed where the fuel-burning appliance is being used.
In all dwelling units with an attached garage where the garage contains, is
adjoining to, adjacent to, contiguous with, and/or in the immediate vicinity of a sleeping
area, a carbon monoxide (CO) detector shall be installed in the immediate vicinity of any
such sleeping areas, unless otherwise approved by the City.
Additional carbon monoxide (CO) detector shall be installed in each location as
required by the code inspector. It is the responsibility of the owner of each dwelling unit
or garage to obtain the advice and approval of such inspector.
705.3 Detectors. Approved detectors must have h UL ratings or equivalent rating.
705.4 Additional responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide functioning carbon monoxide alarms, per the requirements of this
Section. Removal of the battery or power source from a carbon monoxide alarm, making
the detector inoperable, is a violation of this Section.
(Ord. 4340. Passed 9/20/2005; Ord. 4419. Passed 3/6/2007; Ord. 2010-27. Passed 12/7/2010;
Ord 2017-35. Passed 12/5/2017.)
ARTICLE 1735
Rooming Houses
1735.01 Definitions
1735.02 Code Compliance; Exceptions
1735.03 License Required, Application; Issuance; Term
1735.04 Violations; Warning; License Suspension
1735.05 Hearing
1735.06 License; Fee; Expiration; Renewal
1735.07 Required Plumbing Facilities
1735.08 Operator Responsible For Bedding And Towels
1735.09 Shades Or Drapes
1735.10 Minimum Floor Area For Sleeping
1735.11 Proper Means Of Egress
1735.12 Operator Responsible For Sanitary Maintenance
1735.13 Privacy; Accessibility Of Sanitary Facilities
1735.14 Infirmed Or Bedridden Occupants
1735.15 Preparation Of Food In Rooming Units
1735.99 Penalty
CROSS REFERENCES
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem
BOCA Basic Existing Structures Code - See BLDG. Art. 1733
1735.01 DEFINITIONS.
"Rooming House" shall mean a dwelling in which at least two rooms
are offered for rent, payable in money or other consideration, whether or not
meals are furnished to lodgers, and in which no transients are accommodated
and no public restaurant is maintained. A school or college dormitory,
fraternity or sorority house, membership club with residents, and other
similar uses are not deemed as a rooming house. (Ord. 3012. Passed 9/3/85.)
"Bed and Breakfast" shall mean a single family detached residence,
owner-occupied, which may provide overnight lodging and serve breakfast
to transient guests. (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
"Rooming Facility" shall mean both uses - Rooming House or Bed
and Breakfast Establishments. (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
ARTICLE 1735 2
1735.02 CODE COMPLIANCE; EXCEPTIONS.
Every person who operates a rooming facility or who occupies or lets
to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming facility shall
comply with the provisions of every section of the BOCA Basic Existing
Structures Code. (Ord. 3012. Passed 9/3/85.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE;
TERM.
(a) No person shall operate a rooming facility unless he holds a valid
rooming facility license issued by the Bureau of Health in the name of the
operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall
apply to the Bureau of Health for such license yearly, which shall be issued
by the Bureau upon compliance by the operator with the applicable
provisions of the BOCA Basic Existing Structures Code and of any rules
regulations, codes, ordinances related to the use and occupancy, or adopted
pursuant thereto. (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
(b) A license shall be issued by the Bureau of Health to the operator
upon reasonable proof that an occupancy permit, certifying that there has
been compliance with all applicable codes, has been issued by the Bureau.
This license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming
facility at all times. No such license shall be transferable. Every person
holding such a license shall give notice in writing to the Bureau within
twenty-four hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise
disposed of ownership of, interest in or control of any rooming facility. (Ord.
3012. Passed 9/3/85.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87).
(c) Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rooming facility. Every
rooming facility license shall expire at the end of each calendar year, unless
sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2512 §2. Passed
4/6/76.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.04 VIOLATIONS; WARNING; LICENSE SUSPENSION.
Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming facility, the inspecting
officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of the BOCA Basic Existing Structures Code and any rules,
regulations, codes, ordinances related to the use and occupancy, or adopted
ARTICLE 1735 3
pursuant thereto, the inspector shall give notice in writing to the operator of
such rooming facility that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period, to be determined by the inspector, the operator's
rooming facility license will be suspended. At the end of such period the
inspector shall reinspect such rooming facility and, if he finds that such
conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in
writing to the operator that the latter's license has been suspended.
The fee for inspecting a rooming house “for sale” shall be one
hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each rooming house plus ten
dollars ($10.00) for each rental room unit. (Ord. 2010-37. Passed 12/21/10)
(Ord. 3012. Passed 9/3/85) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87)
1735.05 HEARING.
Any operator whose license to operate a rooming facility has been
suspended, or who has received notice from the inspector that his license
will be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming
facility are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Board of Appeals under the procedure provided by the
BOCA Basic Existing Structures Code. If no petition for such hearing is
filed within ten days following the day on which such license was
suspended, the operator shall immediately cease operation of the rooming
facility. (Ord. 3012. Passed 9/3/85.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.06 LICENSE; FEE; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.
The base license fee shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each
rooming, house and ten dollars ($10.00) for each rental room unit.
(Ord. 2010-37. Passed 12/21/10)
The license fee for bed and breakfast establishments shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) per rental room per calendar year.
No reduction in the license fee shall be made for fractional yearly
licenses.
The license shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is
issued and shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 2512 §4. Passed 4/6/76; Ord.
2751. Passed 1/6/81.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
ARTICLE 1735 4
1735.07 REQUIRED PLUMBING FACILITIES.
At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bath tub or shower
properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good
working condition shall be supplied for each four roomers wherever such
facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence
building served and shall be not more than one story removed from any of
the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory, basin and bath tub or
shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required
facilities shall not be located in a cellar except by written approval of the
inspection officer. Such sanitary facilities shall be separate from an in
addition to facilities used by a resident operator. (Ord. 2512 §6. Passed
4/6/76. (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.08 OPERATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR BEDDING AND TOWELS.
The operator of every rooming facility shall supply bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room
to another occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance
of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. (Ord. 2512 §7.
Passed 4/6/76.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.09 SHADES OR DRAPES.
Every window of every rooming unit shall be supplied with shades,
draw drapes or other approved devices or material which, when properly
used, will afford privacy to the occupant of the rooming unit. (Ord. 2512 §8.
Passed 4/6/76; Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.10 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR SLEEPING.
The minimum floor area for sleeping rooms is as follows:
Persons Per Room Square Feet
1 70
2 140
3 190
4 240
(Ord. 2512 §9. Passed 4/6/76; Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
ARTICLE 1735 5
1735.11 PROPER MEANS OF EGRESS.
Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of
this State and this City. This shall include at least one openable window of
sufficient dimensions to allow its use as a means of egress in each rooming
unit. There shall be no exceptions to this requirement for any facility
licensed after the date of passage of this ordinance. (Ord. 1632 §13. Passed
1/19/60.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.12 OPERATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR SANITARY
MAINTENANCE.
The operator of every rooming facility shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the sanitary
maintenance of every other part of the rooming facility; and he shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where
the entire structure or building within which the rooming facility is
contained is leased or occupied by the operator. (Ord. 2512 §10. Passed
4/6/76.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.13 PRIVACY; ACCESSIBILITY OF SANITARY
FACILITIES.
Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bath tub or shower
required by this article shall be located within the rooming facility and
within a room or rooms which:
(a) Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms; and
(b) Are accessible from a common hall and without going outside
rooming facility or through any other room therein. (Ord. 2512 §11. Passed
4/6/76.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.14 INFIRMED OR BEDRIDDEN OCCUPANTS.
No person shall rent or let rooms in a rooming facility to a person or
persons who are bedridden, infirmed or not ambulatory unless special
permission is given by the Bureau of Health. (Ord. 2512 §12. Passed
4/6/76.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
ARTICLE 1735 6
1735.15 PREPARATION OF FOOD IN ROOMING UNITS.
No cooking or preparing of food shall be allowed in a rooming unit.
Hot plates or other portable types of stoves and/or appliances shall not be
permitted. In facilities where food is prepared, such food shall be provided
exclusively for occupants of rooming facilities. No receptions or private
parties for a fee shall be allowed. Rooming facilities shall not be deemed to
be public eating and drinking establishments. (Ord. 2512 §13. Passed
4/6/76.) (Ord. 3123. Passed 6/16/87.)
1735.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment,
or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment,
or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or
ninety days imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 3038. Passed 10/22/85; Ord. 3242-
Passed 2/7/89)
(Ord. 3290. Passed 10/17/89 changed Article No. only)
ARTICLE 1737
Fair Housing Ordinance
1737.01 Definitions.
1737.02 Unlawful Discriminatory Practice.
1737.03 Notice Procedures.
1737.04 Investigation.
1737.05 Findings.
1737.06 Penalties.
1737.07 Formal complaints.
CROSS REFERENCES
Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act of 1955 P.L. 744 as amended
1737.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this article:
(a) "Unlawful Discriminatory Housing Practice" means any act that is unlawful under
Section 1737.02 of this article.
(b) "Dwelling" means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence for one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
(c) "Person" includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees-inbankruptcy,
receivers and fiduciaries.
(d) "Compliance Officer" means the City of Bethlehem official designated by the
Mayor as the person for handling alleged violations under this Article.
1737.02 UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE
It shall be unlawful for anyone to do any of the following because of actual or perceived
race, color, sex, religion, ancestry, genetic information, national origin, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, familial status, marital status, age, mental or
physical disability, use of guide or support animals and/or mechanical aids:
ARTICLE 1737 2
(a) Refuse to sell, lease, finance or otherwise deny or withhold any dwelling from any
person;
(b) Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling or leasing
any dwelling or in furnishing facilities, services or privileges in connection with
the ownership, occupancy or use of any dwelling;
(c) Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any loan of money,
whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any dwelling;
(d) Print, publish, or circulate any statement or advertisement relating to the sale,
lease or acquisition of any dwelling or the loan of money, whether or not secured
by mortgage or otherwise for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or
maintenance of any dwelling.
If someone has a physical or mental disability, has a record of such a disability, or is
regarded as having such a disability, a landlord may not:
(a) Refuse to let them make reasonable modifications to a dwelling or common use
areas, at their expense, if necessary for the disabled person to use the housing;
(b) Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or
services if necessary for the disabled person to use the housing.
(Ord. 2017-49. Passed 12/19/2017.)
1737.03 NOTICE PROCEDURES
(a) Any individual claiming to be aggrieved by any unlawful discriminatory housing
practice covered by this article shall, within one hundred-eighty (180) days after
the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurs, file with the Compliance
Officer, a notice, in which shall state:
(1) The alleged unlawful discriminatory housing practice complained of;
(2) The name and address of the person alleged to have committed the
unlawful discriminatory housing practice complained of;
(3) When the unlawful discriminatory housing practice occurred;
(4) Where the unlawful discriminatory housing practice occurred;
(b) Within five (5) days after the receipt of such notice, the Compliance Officer shall
forward a copy of same, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person
alleged to have violated Section 1737.02 of this Article and permit this person(s)
ARTICLE 1737 3
to submit a response within thirty (30) days of receipt of this notice.
1737.04 INVESTIGATION
(a) The Compliance Officer shall investigate a complaint and determine if there is
reasonable cause to believe this Article has been violated.
(b) If it is determined after the investigation that there is no basis for the allegations of
the complaint, the Compliance Officer will within ten (10) days from such
determination forward a written notice stating such by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to both the complainant and the person(s) alleged to have
committed the discriminatory act.
(c) If the Compliance Officer determines that reasonable cause exists for allegations
of the complaint, the Compliance Officer shall work to eliminate the unlawful
practice by persuasion, conference and conciliation.
(d) If it is not possible to eliminate such unlawful practices by persuasion, a hearing
shall be scheduled by the Compliance Officer and a written notice will be served
to both the complainant and respondent.
At said hearing, the Director of Community and Economic
Development shall preside as the Hearing Officer. Either party may elect as an
alternate to such Hearing, to have the claims decided in a civil action brought
under the jurisdiction of either Lehigh County or Northampton County Court of
Common Pleas. The written notice of hearing will include this information.
(e) Both parties will have a chance to support their claim and may attend the hearing
with counsel, if they so choose.
1737.05 FINDINGS
After the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall prepare a written statement of findings. If
he/she feels that no unlawful discriminatory practice has taken place, the claim will be
dismissed. However, if the Hearing Officer feels an unlawful discriminatory practice has
taken place, a citation shall be issued and brought before the appropriate District Justice.
1737.06 PENALTIES
Any person who violates this ordinance shall, upon conviction before a District Justice of
the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania be subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
ARTICLE 1737 4
1737.07 FORMAL COMPLAINTS
Reporting a housing complaint with the Compliance Officer does not preclude the
complainant from filing a formal complaint directly with either the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Commission or the Department of Housing and Urban Development under
Title VIII of the Civil Right of 1968.
(Ord. 3934. Passed 2/2/1999.)
ARTICLE 1738
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS
1738.01 General.
1738.02 Owner's Duties
1738.03 Occupant Duties.
1738.04 Licenses and Inspection
1738.05 Grounds for Non-Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License.
1738.06 Violations and Penalties; Other Remedies.
1738.07 Miscellaneous Provisions.
CROSS REFERENCES
Article 150, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Codes Board of Appeals”
Article 933, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Recycling”
Article 1162, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Solid Waste Collection
and Enforcement”
Article 1719, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Grounds and Procedures
for Denying Selected Permits and Authorizations for the Purpose of Promoting Property
Revitalization”
Article 1731, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Inspections”
Article 1733, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “International Property
Maintenance Code (2009)”
Article 1735, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Rooming Houses”
Article 1739, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Regulated Rental Unit
Occupancy”
Article 1741, Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, titled “Short Term Lodging
Facilities”
Zoning Ordinance, City of Bethlehem, re definition of hotel or motel
Zoning Ordinance, City of Bethlehem, re definition hospital or nursing home
Zoning Ordinance, City of Bethlehem, re definition of bed and breakfast home
Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101, et seq).
Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101, et seq)
Pennsylvania Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101, et seq)
Section 107.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the City of
Bethlehem pursuant to Article 1733 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
ARTICLE 1738 2
1738.01 GENERAL
A. Purpose/Scope/Declaration of Policy and Findings.
It is the purpose of this Article and the policy of the City of Bethlehem, in order to
protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and
obligations of Owners and Occupants relating to the rental of certain dwelling units in the City
of Bethlehem and to encourage Owners and Occupants to maintain and improve the quality of
rental housing within the community. It is also the policy of the City that Owners, Managers
and Occupants share responsibilities to obey the various Codes adopted to protect and promote
public health, safety and welfare. As means to those ends, this Article provides for a system
of inspections; issuance and renewal of occupancy license; and sets penalties for violations.
This Ordinance shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and policies.
B. Definitions.
1. Board of Appeal: The Board of Appeal identified in Article 150 of the Codified
Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and/or occasionally known as the “Codes Board of
Appeals”.
2. City - The City of Bethlehem, Lehigh and Northampton Counties, Pennsylvania.
3. Code - Any CODE or ordinance, including but not limited to Article 1733 (relating
to the International Property Maintenance Code) of the City’s Codified Ordinances, adopted,
enacted, and/or in effect in and for the City of Bethlehem concerning fitness for habitation or
the construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any PREMISES or
DWELLING UNIT.
4. Code Official - The duly appointed CODE OFFICIAL(S) having charge of Code
Enforcement for the City of Bethlehem, and any assistants or designees thereof.
5. Dwelling Unit - A room or group of rooms within a structure forming a single unit
and used for living and sleeping purposes, having its own cooking facilities, and a bathroom
with a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
6. Guest - A PERSON on the PREMISES with the actual or implied consent of an
OCCUPANT.
7. Landlord - One or more PERSONS, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or
part of the legal title to the PREMISES, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to
present use and enjoyment of the PREMISES, including a mortgage holder in possession of a
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. The term Landlord shall be used interchangeably with the
term Owner within the meaning of this Article.
ARTICLE 1738 3
8. Manager - An adult individual designated by the OWNER of a RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL UNIT under Section 1738.02.B. The MANAGER shall be the agent of the OWNER
for service of process and receiving notices or demands and to perform the obligation of the
OWNER under this Article and under RENTAL AGREEMENTS with OCCUPANTS.
9. [Reserved.]
10. Occupancy License - The License issued to the OWNER of RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL UNITS under this Article, which is required for the lawful rental and occupancy of
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS.
11. Occupant - An individual who resides in a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT,
whether or not he or she is the OWNER thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the
OWNER/LANDLORD is established by a written lease or [by] other legally enforceable
agreement under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The term Occupant shall be
used interchangeably with the term Tenant within the meaning of this Article.
12. Owner - One or more PERSONS, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or part
of the legal title to the PREMISES, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to
present use and enjoyment of the PREMISES, including a mortgage holder in possession of a
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT. The term Owner shall be used interchangeably with the term
Landlord within the meaning of this Article.
13. Owner-Occupied Dwelling Unit - A DWELLING UNIT in which the OWNER
resides on a regular, permanent basis.
14. Person - A natural PERSON, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association,
limited partnership, trust, or any other entity.
15. Premises - Any parcel of real property in the City, including the land and all
buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements, on which one or more
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS is located. The term PREMISES shall also include the
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT.
16. Rental Agreement – An agreement or arrangement between an
OWNER/LANDLORD and at least one OCCUPANT/TENANT concerning the use and
occupancy of a specified RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT.
17. Residential Rental Unit – A dwelling unit as defined by the City of Bethlehem
Zoning Ordinance, but which is subject to a rental agreement or arrangement between at least
one occupant and the Owner. A residential rental unit can be a “single family detached
dwelling”, a “single family attached dwelling”, a “single family semi-detached dwelling”, each
unit of a “two family detached dwelling”, each unit of a “two family semi-detached dwelling”,
or any individual dwelling unit found in a “multi-family dwelling”, as each of these terms is
defined by the City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance. Residential Rental Units shall not include
any property qualifying as any of the following:
ARTICLE 1738 4
? any dwelling unit in which the owner resides but allows one or more tenants to
share the same dwelling unit occupied by the owner;
? any rooming facility under Article 1735;
? any regulated rental unit under Article 1739;
? any short term lodging facility under Article 1741;
? any hotel or motel, as defined by the City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance;
? any hospital or nursing home, as defined by the City of Bethlehem Zoning
Ordinance; and
? any bed and breakfast home as defined by the City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance.
18. Tenant - An individual who resides in a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT, whether
or not he or she is the OWNER thereof with whom a legal relationship with the
OWNER/LANDLORD is established by a written lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. The term Tenant shall be used interchangeably with the term Occupant within
the meaning of this Article.
1738.02 OWNER'S DUTIES
A. General.
1. It shall be the duty of every OWNER to comply with the licensing and inspection
requirements of section 1738.04 of this Article.
2. It shall be the duty of every OWNER to keep and maintain all PREMISES in
compliance with all applicable Codes and provisions of all other applicable state
laws and regulations and local ordinances and to keep such PREMISES in good
and safe condition.
3. As provided for in this Article, every OWNER shall be responsible for regulating
the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every PREMISES which he, she or
it owns.
4. The OWNER shall furnish to the Code Official in writing any change of address
or contact information pertaining to Owner within five (5) calendar days of any
change.
5. This Ordinance is not intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the CITY against an OWNER,
OCCUPANT, or GUEST thereof.
B. Designation of Manager.
1. Every OWNER who is not a full-time resident of the City of Bethlehem, or
elsewhere in an area that is not within a twenty (20) mile radius of the City of
Bethlehem, shall designate a MANAGER who shall reside in an area that is
ARTICLE 1738 5
within a twenty (20) mile radius of the City of Bethlehem. If the OWNER is a
corporation, a MANAGER shall be required if an officer of the corporation does
not reside within the aforesaid area. The officer shall perform the same function
as a manager. If the OWNER is a partnership, a MANAGER shall be required if
a partner does not reside within the aforesaid area. Said partner shall perform the
same function as a MANAGER. The MANAGER shall be the agent of the
OWNER for service of process and receiving of notices and demands, as well as
for performing the obligations of the OWNER under this Article and under
RENTAL AGREEMENTS with OCCUPANTS. The identity, address and
telephone number(s) of a PERSON who is designated as MANAGER hereunder
shall be provided by OWNER or MANAGER to the CITY, and such information
shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
C. Disclosure.
1. On or before the commencement of the tenancy, the OWNER or MANAGER
shall disclose to the OCCUPANT in writing the name, address and telephone
number of the MANAGER, if applicable.
2. The OWNER or MANAGER shall furnish all OCCUPANTS with the most recent
inspection report relating to the property within ten calendar (10) days from
receipt from the City.
D. Maintenance of Premises.
1. The OWNER shall maintain the PREMISES in compliance with the applicable
CODES of the CITY and shall regularly perform all routine maintenance,
including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and shall promptly make any
and all repairs necessary to fulfill this obligation.
2. The OWNER and OCCUPANT may agree that the OCCUPANT is to perform
specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations, or remodeling. In such case,
however, such agreement between the OWNER and OCCUPANT must be in
writing. Such an agreement may be entered into between the OWNER and
OCCUPANT only if:
a. the agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not for the
purpose of evading the obligations of the OWNER or OCCUPANT; and
b. the agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the OWNER
to other OCCUPANTS in the PREMISES.
3. In no case shall the existence of any agreement between OWNER and
OCCUPANT relieve an OWNER of any responsibility under this Article or other
ordinances or codes for maintenance of PREMISES.
ARTICLE 1738 6
E. [Reserved.]
F. Complaints.
1. The OWNER or MANAGER shall promptly address reasonable complaints and
inquiries from an OCCUPANT and promptly resolve any conditions which exist
on the PREMISES in violation of any Code of the City.
G. [Reserved.]
H. [Reserved.]
I. [Reserved.]
J. Code Violations.
1. Upon receiving notice of any code violations from the CODE OFFICIAL, the
OWNER shall promptly take action, or cause the necessary action to be taken, to
abate the offending condition and eliminate the violation.
K. [Reserved.]
L. Inspection Access Hours.
1. The OWNER shall permit inspections of any PREMISES by the CODE
OFFICIAL at reasonable times upon reasonable notice.
1738.03 OCCUPANT DUTIES
A. General.
1. The OCCUPANT shall comply with all obligations imposed upon OCCUPANTS
by this Article, all applicable Codes and ordinances of the CITY and all applicable
provisions of state law.
B. Health and Safety Regulations.
1. The OCCUPANT shall dispose from his or her RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
all rubbish, garbage, and other waste in a clean and safe manner, and separate and
place for collection all recyclable materials, in compliance with the Recycling
Plan submitted by the OWNER to the CITY under Bethlehem's Solid Waste and
Recycling Ordinance; or, if there is no Recycling Plan for the PREMISES, then
in compliance with Bethlehem's Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinance and all
other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
ARTICLE 1738 7
C. Peaceful Enjoyment.
1. The OCCUPANT shall conduct himself or herself and require other PERSONS,
including, but not limited to, GUESTS on the PREMISES and within his or her
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT with his or her consent, to conduct themselves
in a manner compliant with the Ordinances and regulations of the City of
Bethlehem that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the PREMISES by
others, and that will not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby
DWELLINGS by the PERSONS occupying same.
D. Residential Use.
1. The OCCUPANT shall, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or
ordinance. occupy or use his or her RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT for no other
purpose than as a residence.
E. Illegal Activities.
1. The OCCUPANT shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
PREMISES to engage in, any conduct declared illegal under any federal criminal
statute, and/or under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101, et seq)
or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq), or The Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq).
F. [Reserved.]
G. Compliance with Rental Agreement.
1. The OCCUPANTS shall comply with all lawful provisions of the RENTAL
AGREEMENT entered into between OWNER and OCCUPANTS. Failure to
comply may result in the eviction of the OCCUPANTS by the OWNER.
H. Damage to Premises.
1. The OCCUPANT shall not intentionally cause, nor permit nor tolerate others to
cause, damage to the PREMISES. Conduct which results in damages in excess
of $500.00 shall be considered a violation of this Article.
I. Inspection of Premises.
1. The OCCUPANT shall permit inspections by the CODE OFFICIAL of the
PREMISES at reasonable times (during business hours of the Bureau of
Inspections), upon reasonable notice (twenty-four (24) hours’ notice, either
written or oral, by the Bureau of Inspections).
ARTICLE 1738 8
1738.04 LICENSES AND INSPECTION
A. License Requirement, Annual Term, Fee
1. As a prerequisite to furnishing or allowing the occupancy of any RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL UNIT, the OWNER of every such RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
shall be required to apply for and obtain a License for each RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL UNIT.
2. A License shall be required for each and every RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT.
3. [Reserved.]
4. The application for License shall be on a form as determined by the CITY.
5. Each License shall have an annual term. Upon application for a License and
prior to issuance or renewal thereof, each applicant shall pay to the CITY an
annual License fee.
6. Unless altered by a resolution of the City Council, the fee for a Residential
Rental Unit License shall be:
1-3 Units $75 per unit
4-9 Units $250 flat fee
10-19 Units $350 flat fee
20-49 Units $450 flat fee
50+ Units $600 flat fee
7. No license shall be issued if the OWNER has not paid any fines and costs arising
from enforcement of this Article or any of the ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
relating to land use and/or code enforcement or if any licensing or inspection fees
under this Article are due and owing the City, or if a there is a CODE violation
which remains unresolved at the time the license application is received by the
City.
B. Inspection.
1. Every Residential Rental Unit shall be subject to inspection every three (3) years
by the CODE OFFICIAL. The inspection may, at the discretion of the City’s
CODE OFFICIAL, also include the PREMISES generally.
ARTICLE 1738 9
2. The fee schedule set forth by Article 1731 of the Codified Ordinances shall not
apply to the inspections required by this Article 1738. Unless altered by a
resolution of the City Council, the fee for inspections under this Article shall be
as follows:
Initial inspection fee:
1-3 Units $100 per unit
4-9 Units $400 flat fee
10-19 Units $800 flat fee
20-49 Units $1,500 flat fee
50-149 Units $4,500 flat fee
150+ Units $9,000 flat fee
Reinspections (per dwelling unit) to verify correction of violations:
First reinspecton: no charge
Second reinspection: $ 75.00
Third reinspection: $100.00
Each subsequent reinspection: $125.00
3. As a prerequisite for the occupancy of any Residential Rental Unit, such unit must
pass the inspection of the CODE OFFICIAL required by this Article, which
evidence of compliance shall be established by a certificate of occupancy issued
by such CODE OFFICIAL.
4. Following each inspection for which one or more violations of this Article exists,
the CODE OFFICIAL shall issue a Formal Warning to the OWNER which
incorporates the content of the CODE OFFICIAL’S report. The Formal Warning
shall be considered moot when every violation in the Formal Warning has been
corrected.
5. The CODE OFFICIAL is hereby designated as the official authorized to enforce
this Article and may, at his or her discretion, take appropriate measures to abate
violations hereof, for and on behalf of the City of Bethlehem.
6. This section shall not be construed so as to limit or restrict the CODE
OFFICIAL'S authority to conduct inspections of PREMISES, whether or not
subject to the permitting and inspection requirements of this Article, pursuant to
any other ordinance or Code.
ARTICLE 1738 10
C. Search Warrant.
1. Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this Article or any other
ordinance of the City of Bethlehem has occurred, the CODE OFFICIAL may
apply to any court having jurisdiction in the City of Bethlehem for a search
warrant to enter and inspect the PREMISES.
1738.05 GROUNDS FOR NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF
LICENSE.
A. General.
1. After making a reasonable investigation, the CODE OFFICIAL may initiate
disciplinary action against an OWNER by issuing a formal warning or refusing
to renew, suspending or revoking the OWNER'S License for (i) violating any
provision of this Article that imposes a duty upon the OWNER, (ii) failing to
regulate the breach of duties by OCCUPANT as provided for herein, and/or (iii)
furnishing or allowing the occupancy of a Residential Rental Unit while a license
for such unit is not in good standing.
B. Definitions of Options to the Code Official.
1. Non-Renewal - The denial of the privilege to receive a renewed License to rent a
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT after expiration of a previous License term. The
CITY will permit the OWNER to maintain OCCUPANTS in the PREMISES
until the end of the license term but will not accept applications for license
renewal or authorize the renewal of a License until any and all violations of this
Article and/or any Formal Warnings are resolved.
2. Suspension - The immediate loss of the license to rent a RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL UNIT for a period of time set by the CODE OFFICIAL due to the
failure of Owner to resolve all violations set forth in a prior Formal Warning.
Upon suspension, the OWNER shall take immediate steps to evict the
OCCUPANTS.
3. Revocation - The immediate loss of the license to rent a RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL UNIT for a period of time set by the CODE OFFICIAL due to (i) 3 or
more violations of this Article within a consecutive twelve (12) month period or
(ii) some identifiable misrepresentation or material omission in the application
for license or the application for renewal of a license or a report concerning the
conditions of the property or fees required by this Article. In cases where
revocation is imposed, the PREMISES in its entirety will be ineligible for a
Residential Rental Unit license without regard for the identity of the Owner until
the expiration of a time period not to exceed one (1) year shall have passed from
the date all ongoing violations of this Article shall have been corrected. Upon
revocation, the OWNER shall take immediate steps to evict the OCCUPANTS.
ARTICLE 1738 11
4. Reinstatement - A Residential Rental Registration shall be reinstated if the owner
or operator of a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT corrects the reason for the
revocation of the Residential Rental Registration and has paid the Residential
Rental Registration reinstatement fee. The amount of the Residential Rental
Registration reinstatement fee shall be $50.00, unless altered by a Resolution of
City Council.
C. Criteria for Applying Sanctions.
1. The CODE OFFICIAL, when applying sanctions, shall consider the following:
(a) The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of the
OCCUPANTS of the RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT and other
residents of the PREMISES.
(b) The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
(c) Whether the OWNER has prior violations of this Article and other
ordinances of the CITY or has received notices of violations as provided
for in this Article.
(d) Whether the OWNER has been subject to sanctions under this Article.
(e) The effect of sanctions against the OWNER on the OCCUPANTS.
(f) The action taken by the OWNER to remedy the violation and to prevent
future violations, including any written plan submitted by the OWNER.
(g) The policies and lease language employed by the OWNER to manage the
DWELLING UNIT to enable the OWNER to comply with the provisions
of this Article.
(h) In addition to enforcing sanctions as set forth above, the CODE
OFFICIAL may impose upon the existing or subsequent licenses
reasonable conditions related to fulfilling the purposes of this Article.
(i) Whether denial of a license or certificate of occupancy is authorized by
Article 1719 of the Codified Ordinances.
ARTICLE 1738 12
D. Grounds for Imposing Sanctions.
1. Any of the following may subject an OWNER to sanctions as provided for in this
Article:
(a) Violating any provision of this Article.
(b) Failing to abate a violation of CITY Codes and ordinances within the time
directed by the CODE OFFICIAL.
(c) Refusing to permit the inspection of a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
by the CODE OFFICIAL as required by this Article.
(d) Making some identifiable misrepresentation or material omission in the
application for license or the application for renewal of a license or a
report concerning the conditions of the property.
E. Procedure for Non-Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License.
1. Notification. After imposing a sanction authorized by this Article, the CODE
OFFICIAL shall promptly notify the OWNER. Such notification shall be in
writing, addressed to the OWNER in question, and shall contain the following
information:
(a) The address of the PREMISES in question and identification of the
particular RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT(S) affected.
(b) A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
(c) A statement that the License for said RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT(S)
has been, as the case may be, subjected to a formal warning, suspended,
revoked, or will not be renewed. In the case of a suspension or revocation,
the notice shall state the date upon which such suspension or revocation
will commence and the terms under which the suspension or revocation
shall end, including its duration. In the case of a nonrenewal, the notice
shall state under which conditions renewal shall be permitted.
(d) A statement that due to the non-renewal, suspension or revocation (as the
case may be), the OWNER or any PERSON acting on his, her or its behalf
is prohibited from renting, letting, or permitting occupancy of the
DWELLING UNIT(S) subject to said enforcement action, from and
during the period said action is in effect.
(e) A statement that any OWNER affected by the non-renewal, suspension or
revocation of a license (as the case may be), but who allows or furnishes
the occupancy or continued occupancy of a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
ARTICLE 1738 13
UNIT during a period of non-renewal, suspension, or revocation, shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1738.06 and any other
remedies available at law or equity.
2. Delivery of Notification. All notifications required by this Article shall be served
upon the Owner at the address stated on the most current License application for
the RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT, or as required by Section 1738.02.A.4, in
accordance with the requirements of §107.3 of the International Property
Maintenance Code, as adopted by the City of Bethlehem pursuant to Article 1733
of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. Service shall be deemed
completed when deposited in a suitably-addressed envelope with the proper
amount of prepaid postage in a receptacle of the United States Postal Service
designated as a collection point for first class mail.
3. Appeals. Any Owner affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or
order issued by the Code Official shall have the right to appeal to the board of
appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within fifteen (15)
calendar days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that: the true intent of the
Codes or rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, and/or whether the period of license
suspension, revocation and/or nonrenewal was appropriate.
1738.06 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; OTHER REMEDIES
A. Basis for Violation.
1. It shall be unlawful for any PERSON, as either OWNER or MANAGER of a
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT for which a License is required, to operate
without a valid, current License issued by the CITY authorizing such operation.
Nothing in this Article shall bar the City from securing a conviction or a finding
of liability, and any penalty or other remedy, for violating any Code of the City
of Bethlehem or any law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any legal authority of
competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this subsection, a current License is a
License to furnish or allow the occupancy of any Residential Rental Unit which
is not then presently suspended for revoked.
ARTICLE 1738 14
B. Penalties.
1. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Article or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements hereof shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial
District Judge of the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, be liable to pay the
following penalties:
(a) First Violation - A fine of $500.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second Violation - A fine of $750.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
Upon conviction of a third offense, the OWNER of the property will be required to begin
eviction of the tenants/occupants of the property.
C. Non-exclusive Remedies.
1. The penalty provisions of this Article and the License non-renewal, suspension
and revocation procedures provided in this Article shall be independent, nonmutually
exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the CITY
as may be deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this Article. The
remedies and procedures provided in this Article for violation hereof are not
intended to supplant or replace, to any degree, the remedies and procedures
available to the CITY in the case of a violation of any other Code or ordinance of
the CITY, whether or not such other Code or ordinance is referenced in this
Article and whether or not an ongoing violation of such other Code or ordinance
is cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this Article.
1738.07 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
A. Notices.
1. For purposes of this Article, any notice required hereunder to be given to a
MANAGER shall be deemed as notice given to the OWNER.
2. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be given to
the OWNER under this Article shall have been received by such OWNER if the
notice was given to the OWNER in the manner provided by this Article.
3. A claimed lack of knowledge by the OWNER of any violation hereunder cited
shall be no defense to License non-renewal, suspension or revocation proceedings
as long as all notices prerequisite to institution of such proceedings have been
given and deemed received in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
Article.
ARTICLE 1738 15
B. Changes in Ownership/Occupancy.
1. It shall be the duty of each OWNER of a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT to
notify the CODE OFFICIAL in writing within five (5) days of any change in
Ownership of the PREMISES or of the number of RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
UNITS on the PREMISES. It shall also be the duty of the OWNER to notify the
CODE OFFICIAL in writing within five (5) days of a change of a DWELLING
UNIT from OWNER-OCCUPIED to non-owner-occupied, which thereby
transforms the DWELLING into a RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT for purposes
of this Article. Failure to so notify the CODE OFFICIAL shall be considered a
violation of this Article.
C. Owners Severally Responsible.
1. If any RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT is owned by more than one PERSON, in
any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or otherwise, each PERSON shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this
Article, and shall be severally subject to prosecution for the violation of this
Article.
Editor’s Notes. Article 1738 was established by Ordinance No. 2020-08 (Bill No. 06-2020),
passed in City Council on April 21, 2020 and signed by the Mayor on April 22, 2020. The
effective date is May 12, 2020 per Ordinance 2020-08, Section 2.
ARTICLE 1739
Regulated Rental Unit Occupancy
1739.01 General
1739.02 Owner’s Duties
1739.03 Occupant Duties
1739.04 Licenses and Inspection
1739.05 Grounds for Non-Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License
1739.06 Violations and Penalties
1739.07 Miscellaneous Provisions
CROSS REFERENCES
BOCA National Property Maintenance Code – Article 1733
Inspections – Article 1731
Codes Board of Appeals – Article 150.03(b)
Pennsylvania Crimes Code – 18 Pa.C.S.A. Sec. 101, et seq
Liquor Code – 47 P.S. Sec. 1-101 et seq
The Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act – 35 P.S. Sec. 780-101 et seq
1739.01 GENERAL
A. Purpose/Scope/Declaration of Policy and Findings.
It is the purpose of this Ordinance and the policy of the City of Bethlehem, in
order to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to
establish rights and obligations of Owners and Occupants relating to the rental of certain
dwelling units in the City of Bethlehem and to encourage Owners and Occupants to
maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within the community. It is also the
policy of the City that Owners, Managers and Occupants share responsibilities to obey
the various Codes adopted to protect and promote public health, safety and welfare. As
means to those ends, this Ordinance provides for a system of inspections; issuance and
renewal of occupancy license; and sets penalties for violations. This Ordinance shall be
liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and policies.
In considering the adoption of this Ordinance, the City of Bethlehem makes the
following findings:
1. There is a greater incidence of violations of various Codes of the City at
residential properties where Owners do not reside in the City and rent such property to
three or more unrelated individuals than at Owner-occupied residential properties or
family-occupied residential rental properties.
ARTICLE 1739 2
2. There is a greater incidence of problems with the maintenance and upkeep
of residential properties where Owners do not reside in the City and rent such property to
three or more unrelated individuals than at Owner-occupied residential properties or
family-occupied residential rental properties.
3. There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood at residential properties where Owners rent to three
or more unrelated individuals than at Owner-occupied residential properties or familyoccupied
residential rental properties.
B. Definitions.
1. City - The City of Bethlehem, Lehigh and Northampton Counties,
Pennsylvania.
2. Code - Any CODE or ordinance adopted, enacted, and/or in effect in and
for the City of Bethlehem concerning fitness for habitation or the construction,
maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any PREMISES or
DWELLING UNIT.
3. Code Enforcement Officer - The duly appointed CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER(S) having charge of Code Enforcement for the City of Bethlehem, and any
assistants or deputies thereof.
4. Common Area - In MULTIPLE UNIT DWELLINGS, space which is not
part of a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT and which is shared with other OCCUPANTS
of the DWELLLNG whether they reside in REGULATED DWELLING UNITS or not.
COMMON AREAS shall be considered as part of the PREMISES for purposes of this
Ordinance.
5. Disruptive Conduct - Any form of conduct, action, incident or behavior
perpetrated, caused or permitted, by any OCCUPANT or visitor of a REGULATED
DWELLING UNIT that is a violation of existing Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem or
statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In order for such Disruptive Conduct to
constitute an offense under this Ordinance, a Citation must be issued by the POLICE and
successfully prosecuted or a guilty plea entered before a District Justice. If an appeal is
filed from a decision of a district justice, the matter shall not be deemed to constitute
Disruptive Conduct, unless a finding of guilty is affirmed by a final decision on appeal.
In addition, the POLICE shall file a DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT with the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER who will keep a written record of such DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT.
6. Disruptive Conduct Report - A written report of DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT on a form to be prescribed therefor, to be completed by the POLICE, who
actually investigate an alleged incident of DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT and which shall be
delivered and maintained by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
7. Dwelling - A building having one or more DWELLING UNITS.
ARTICLE 1739 3
8. Dwelling Unit - A room or group of rooms within a DWELLING and
forming a single unit and used for living and sleeping purposes, having its own cooking
facilities, and a bathroom with a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
9. Guest - A PERSON on the PREMISES with the actual or implied consent
of an OCCUPANT.
10. Landlord - One or more PERSONS, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the PREMISES, or all or part of the beneficial ownership
and a right to present use and enjoyment of the PREMISES, including a mortgage holder
in possession of a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT. (Same as OWNER).
11. Manager - An adult individual designated by the OWNER of a
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT under Section 3.C. The MANAGER shall be the agent
of the OWNER for service of process and receiving notices or demands and to perform
the obligation of the OWNER under this Ordinance and under RENTAL
AGREEMENTS with OCCUPANTS.
12. Multiple-Unit Dwelling - A building containing two (2) or more
independent DWELLING UNITS, including, but not limited to, double houses, row
houses, town houses, condominiums, apartment houses, and conversion apartments.
13. Occupancy License - The License issued to the OWNER of
REGULATED RENTAL UNITS under this Ordinance, which is required for the lawful
rental and occupancy of REGULATED RENTAL UNITS.
14. Occupant - An individual who resides in a REGULATED RENTAL
UNIT, whether or not he or she is the OWNER thereof, with whom a legal relationship
with the OWNER/LANDLORD is established by a written lease or [by] other legally
enforceable agreement under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
15. Owner - One or more PERSONS, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the PREMISES, or all or part of the beneficial Ownership
and a right to present use and enjoyment of the PREMISES, including a mortgage holder
in possession of a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT.
16. Owner-Occupied Dwelling Unit - A DWELLING UNIT in which the
OWNER [resides on a regular, permanent basis] is domiciled.
17. Person - A natural PERSON, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust, or any other entity.
18. Police - The POLICE Department of the City of Bethlehem, or any
properly authorized member or officer thereof or any other law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction within the City of Bethlehem.
19. Premises - Any parcel of real property in the City, including the land and
all buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements, on which one or more
REGULATED RENTAL UNITS is located.
ARTICLE 1739 4
20. Regulated Rental Unit - A DWELLING UNIT occupied by three or more,
but not more than five, unrelated PERSONS under a RENTAL AGREEMENT.
21. Rental Agreement - A written agreement or other legally enforceable
agreement between OWNER/LANDLORD and OCCUPANT/TENANT supplemented
by the Addendum required under Article II, Section E of this Ordinance, embodying the
terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a specified REGULATED
RENTAL UNIT or PREMISES.
22. Tenant - An individual who resides in a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT,
whether or not he or she is the OWNER thereof with whom a legal relationship with the
OWNER/LANDLORD is established by a [written] lease or by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Same as OCCUPANT)
23. Unrelated - Of or pertaining to two (2) or more PERSONS not related to
one another through blood, adoption or marriage.
1739.02 OWNER'S DUTIES
A. General.
2.1 It shall be the duty of every OWNER to keep and maintain all
REGULATED RENTAL UNITS in compliance with all applicable Codes and provisions
of all other applicable state laws and regulations and local ordinances, and to keep such
property in good and safe condition.
2.2 As provided for in this Ordinance, every OWNER shall be responsible for
regulating the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every DWELLING which he,
she or it owns. As provided for in this Ordinance, every OWNER shall also be
responsible for regulating the conduct and activities of the OCCUPANTS of every
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT which he, she or it owns in the CITY, which conduct or
activity takes place at such REGULATED RENTAL UNIT or its PREMISES.
2.3 In order to achieve those ends, every OWNER of a REGULATED
RENTAL UNIT shall regulate the conduct and activity of the OCCUPANTS thereof,
both contractually and through enforcement, as more fully set forth below.
2.4 This section shall not be construed as diminishing or relieving, in any way,
the responsibility of OCCUPANTS or their GUESTS for their conduct or activity; nor
shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer, or projection over or onto any OWNER
of any responsibility or liability which OCCUPANTS or their GUESTS may have as a
result of their conduct or activity under any private cause of action, civil or criminal
enforcement proceeding, or criminal law; nor shall this section be construed so as to
require an OWNER to indemnify or defend OCCUPANTS or their GUESTS when any
such action or proceeding is brought against the OCCUPANT based upon the
OCCUPANT’s conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended to impose any additional
civil/criminal liability upon OWNERS other than that which is imposed by existing law.
ARTICLE 1739 5
2.5 This Ordinance is not intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the CITY against an OWNER,
OCCUPANT, or GUEST thereof.
B. Designation of Manager.
2.6 Every OWNER who is not a full-time resident of the City of Bethlehem,
or elsewhere in an area that is not within a twenty (20) mile radius of the City of
Bethlehem, shall designate a MANAGER who shall reside in an area that is within a
twenty (20) mile radius of the City of Bethlehem. If the OWNER is a corporation, a
MANAGER shall be required if an officer of the corporation does not reside within the
aforesaid area. The officer shall perform the same function as a manager. If the OWNER
is a partnership, a MANAGER shall be required if a partner does not reside within the
aforesaid area. Said partner shall perform the same function as a MANAGER. The
MANAGER shall be the agent of the OWNER for service of process and receiving of
notices and demands, as well as for performing the obligations of the OWNER under this
Ordinance and under RENTAL AGREEMENTS with OCCUPANTS. The identity,
address and telephone number(s) of a PERSON who is designated as MANAGER
hereunder shall be provided by OWNER or MANAGER to the CITY, and such
information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
C. Disclosure.
2.7 The OWNER or MANAGER shall disclose to the OCCUPANT in writing
on or before the commencement of the tenancy:
a. the name, address and telephone number of the MANAGER; if
applicable; and
b. the name, address and telephone number of the OWNER of the
PREMISES.
2.8 Before an OCCUPANT initially enters into or renews a RENTAL
AGREEMENT for a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT, the OWNER or MANAGER shall
furnish the OCCUPANT with the most recent inspection report relating to the property.
D. Maintenance of Premises.
2.9 The OWNER shall maintain the PREMISES in compliance with the
applicable CODES of the CITY and shall regularly perform all routine maintenance,
including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and shall promptly make any and all
repairs necessary to fulfill this obligation.
2.10 The OWNER and OCCUPANT may agree that the OCCUPANT is to
perform specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations, or remodeling. In such case,
however, such agreement between the OWNER and OCCUPANT must be in writing.
Such an agreement may be entered into between the OWNER and OCCUPANT only if:
ARTICLE 1739 6
a. the agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and not
for the purpose of evading the obligations of the OWNER or
OCCUPANT; and
b. the agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
OWNER to other OCCUPANTS in the PREMISES.
2.11 In no case shall the existence of any agreement between OWNER and
OCCUPANT relieve an OWNER of any responsibility under this Ordinance or other
ordinances or codes for maintenance of PREMISES.
E. Written Rental Agreement.
2.12 All RENTAL AGREEMENTS for REGULATED DWELLING UNITS
shall be in writing or otherwise legally enforceable and shall be supplemented with the
Addendum attached hereto as Appendix A. All disclosures and information required to
be given to OCCUPANTS by the OWNER shall be furnished before the signing or other
finalization of the RENTAL AGREEMENT. The OWNER shall provide OCCUPANT
with copies of the RENTAL AGREEMENT and Addendum before commencement of
the lease.
2.13 Terms and Conditions. OWNER and OCCUPANT may include in a
RENTAL AGREEMENT terms and conditions not prohibited by this Ordinance or other
applicable ordinances, regulations, and laws, including rent, term of the agreement, and
other provisions governing the rights and obligations of the parties.
2.14 Prohibited Provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance,
no RENTAL AGREEMENT may provide that the OCCUPANT or OWNER agrees to
waive or to forego rights or remedies under this Ordinance. A provision prohibited by
this subsection included in RENTAL AGREEMENT is unenforceable.
2.15 Attachment of Ordinance to Rental Agreement. Following the effective
date of this Ordinance, a summary hereof in a form provided to OWNER by the CITY, at
the time of licensing, shall be attached or otherwise delivered with each RENTAL
AGREEMENT delivered by or on behalf of an OWNER when any such agreement is
presented for signing to any OCCUPANT, or is otherwise finalized with such occupant.
If a summary has been provided when the RENTAL AGREEMENT was first executed, a
summary does not have to be provided upon renewal. Where a RENTAL AGREEMENT
has been entered into prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, the OWNER shall
provide the OCCUPANTS with a copy of the summary within sixty days after enactment
of this Ordinance.
2.16 The OWNER shall secure a written acknowledgment from OCCUPANTS
that the OCCUPANTS have received the disclosures and information required by this
Ordinance.
2.17 Upon oral or written request by the City of Bethlehem, the OWNER,
within ten days of the request, shall furnish to the City, copies of the acknowledgment
ARTICLE 1739 7
that the OCCUPANTS received the disclosures and information required by this
Ordinance.
2.18 Upon oral or written request by the City of Bethlehem, the OWNER,
within ten days of the request, shall furnish to the City for inspection purposes only,
copies of the leases the OWNER has entered into for regulated rental units.
F. Complaints.
2.19 The OWNER or MANAGER shall reply promptly to reasonable
complaints and inquiries from OCCUPANTS.
G. Landlord/Tenant Act.
2.20 The OWNER shall comply with all provisions of the LANDLORDTENANT
Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
H. Common Areas.
2.21 Where an OWNER does not regulate the use of COMMON AREAS and
the behavior of OCCUPANTS and GUESTS in the COMMON AREAS, the OWNER
shall be directly responsible for the behavior of OCCUPANTS and GUESTS in the
COMMON AREA as if the OWNER were an OCCUPANT.
I. Enforcement
2.22 In the event that the same occupant is convicted of a third DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT violation within a license year, the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall
direct the OWNER to evict the OCCUPANT who violated the Ordinance and not to
permit the OCCUPANT to occupy the PREMISES during the subsequent licensing.
J. Code Violations.
2.26 Upon receiving notice of any code violations from the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, the OWNER shall promptly take action, or cause the
necessary action to be taken, to abate the offending condition and eliminate the violation.
K. City Can Make Repairs.
2.27 In case the OWNER of PREMISES shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with any notice from the CITY or its CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER to correct a
violation relating to maintenance and repair of the PREMISES under any CODE within
the period of time stated in such notice, the CITY may cause the violation to be corrected.
There shall be imposed upon the OWNER a charge of the actual costs involved, plus ten
percent (10%) of said costs for each time the CITY shall cause a violation to be
corrected; and the OWNER of the PREMISES shall be billed after same has been
completed. Any such bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after the time specified
therein for payment shall be grounds for the imposition of a municipal lien upon the
PREMISES as provided by law. Such a lien may be reduced to judgment and enforced
ARTICLE 1739 8
and collected as provided by law, together with interest at the legal rate and court costs.
The remedies provided by this paragraph are not exclusive and the CITY and its CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER may invoke such other remedies available under this
Ordinance or other applicable codes, ordinances or statutes, including where appropriate,
condemnation proceedings or declaration of PREMISES as unfit for habitation; or
suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the License issued hereunder.
L. 2.28 The OWNER shall permit inspections of any PREMISES by the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER at reasonable times upon reasonable notice.
1739.03 OCCUPANT DUTIES
A. General.
3.1 The OCCUPANT shall comply with all obligations imposed upon
OCCUPANTS by this Ordinance, all applicable Codes and ordinances of the CITY and
all applicable provisions of state law.
B. Health and Safety Regulations.
3.2 The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in any
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT at any time shall not exceed five (5) occupants.
Occupancy limitations can be found in the International Property Maintenance Code,
Section PM 404.0 titled “Occupancy Limitations”. (Ord. 2010-38 - Passed 12/21/10.)
3.3 The OCCUPANT shall dispose from his or her REGULATED RENTAL
UNIT all rubbish, garbage, and other waste in a clean and safe manner, and separate and
place for collection all recyclable materials, in compliance with the Recycling Plan
submitted by the OWNER to the CITY under Bethlehem's Solid Waste and Recycling
Ordinance; or, if there is no Recycling Plan for the PREMISES, then in compliance with
Bethlehem's Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances,
laws and regulations.
3.4 The OWNER of the REGULATED RENTAL UNIT shall supply one
solid trash container per OCCUPANT with a minimum size of 32 gallons or the
equivalent to the number of TENANTS. This container must be an approved outside
container which is leak proof and has a secured solid lid. (Ord. 2012-25. Passed 9/19/12.)
C. Peaceful Enjoyment.
3.5 The OCCUPANT shall conduct himself or herself and require other
PERSONS, including, but not limited to, GUESTS on the PREMISES and within his or
her REGULATED RENTAL UNIT with his or her consent, to conduct themselves in a
manner compliant with the Ordinances and regulations of the City of Bethlehem that will
not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the PREMISES by others, and that will not disturb
the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby DWELLINGS by the PERSONS occupying
same.
D. Residential Use.
ARTICLE 1739 9
3.6 The OCCUPANT shall, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or
ordinance; occupy or use his or her REGULATED RENTAL UNIT for no other purpose
than as a residence.
E. Illegal Activities.
3.7 The OCCUPANT shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
PREMISES to engage in, any conduct declared illegal under any federal criminal statute,
and/or under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101, et seq) or Liquor Code
(47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq), or The Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act
(35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq).
F. Disruptive Conduct.
3.8 The OCCUPANT shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the
PREMISES to engage in, DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT, or other violations of the
Ordinance.
3.9 When POLICE investigate an alleged incident of DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT, he or she shall complete a DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT upon a
finding that the reported incident did, in his or her judgment, constitute “DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT” as defined herein. The information filled in on said report shall include, if
possible, the identity or identities of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT and all other obtainable information including the factual basis for the
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT requested on the prescribed form. Where the POLICE make
such investigation, said POLICE officer shall then submit the completed DISRUPTIVE
CONDUCT REPORT to the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. In all cases, the
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mail a copy of the DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT
REPORT to the OWNER or MANAGER within three working days of the occurrence of
the alleged DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT.
G. Compliance with Rental Agreement.
3.10 The OCCUPANT shall comply with all lawful provisions of the RENTAL
AGREEMENT entered into between OWNER and OCCUPANT. Failure to comply may
result in the eviction of the OCCUPANT by the OWNER.
H. Damage to Premises.
3.11 The OCCUPANT shall not intentionally cause, nor permit nor tolerate
others to cause, damage to the PREMISES. Conduct which results in damages in excess
of $500.00 shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance.
I. Inspection of Premises.
3.12 The OCCUPANT shall permit inspections by the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER of the PREMISES at reasonable times (during business
ARTICLE 1739 10
hours of the Bureau of Inspections), upon reasonable notice (twenty-four hours notice,
either written or oral, by the Bureau of Inspections).
1739.04 LICENSES AND INSPECTION
A. License Requirement.
4.1 As a prerequisite to entering into a RENTAL AGREEMENT or permitting
the occupancy of any REGULATED RENTAL UNIT (except as provided in
subparagraph C, below), the OWNER of every such REGULATED RENTAL UNIT
shall be required to apply for and obtain a License for each REGULATED RENTAL
UNIT.
4.2 A License shall be required for all REGULATED RENTAL UNITS.
4.3 The following categories of rental properties shall not require Licenses,
and shall not, therefore, be subject to the permitting provision of this Ordinance:
a. OWNER-occupied DWELLING UNITS provided that not more
than two UNRELATED individuals, in addition to the immediate
members of the OWNER'S family, occupy the DWELLING UNIT
at any given time.
b. Hotels and motels.
c. Hospitals and nursing homes.
d. Bed and Breakfast Homes as defined in the CITY'S Zoning
Ordinance.
4.4 A License shall not be required for MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLINGS,
although a License shall be required for each REGULATED RENTAL UNIT within the
structure. The foregoing notwithstanding, all other provisions of this Ordinance shall
apply to the COMMON AREAS of the structure.
4.5 The application for the License shall be in a form as determined by the
CITY.
4.6 The OWNER shall maintain a current list of OCCUPANTS in each
REGULATED DWELLING UNIT which shall include their name, permanent address
and permanent telephone number. The OWNER shall furnish the list to the CITY upon
request and shall notify the CITY of any changes in the number of OCCUPANTS so that
revisions can be made to the License.
4.7 The OWNER shall furnish with his or her application for license a copy of
the written lease form or detailed written summary of the terms and conditions of any
lease agreement the OWNER intends to have the OCCUPANTS of each licensed
dwelling unit execute or otherwise agree to. If the OWNER uses more than one form of
lease, the OWNER shall furnish a copy of each form. The license will not be issued if
ARTICLE 1739 11
the lease form does not meet the requirements of 1739.02, Section E. of this Ordinance.
4.8 The OWNER shall furnish with his or her application, for inspection
purposes only, the leases that have been entered into that will cover all or part of the
license term. The license will not be issued if such leases are not furnished for
inspection. Leases shall be furnished for all persons who have paid a downpayment at
the time that the OWNER applies for a license or who have committed to residing in the
premises.
B. Annual License Term, Fee and Occupancy Limit.
4.9 Each License shall have an annual term and each Regulated Rental Unit
shall be subject to a minimum of one annual inspection based on the following
schedule:
a.) Properties in Wards 6-15 of the City shall be inspected and
licensed during the months of January, February and March, April,
May and June.
b.) Properties in Wards 1-5, 16 and 17 of the City shall be inspected
and licensed during the months of July, August and September,
October, November and December.
(Ord. 4131; Passed 5/22/02)
4.10 Upon application for a License and prior to issuance or renewal thereof,
each applicant shall pay to the CITY an annual License and inspection fee.
a.) Registration – The fee for a Residential Rental Registration shall
be sixty dollars ($60.00) per residential rental unit plus ten dollars
($10.00) per occupant with a maximum of five (5) occupants per
year due and payable at the time of the scheduling of the original
inspection. (Ord. 2010-38 - Passed 12/21/10.)
b.) Licensure (Certificate of Occupancy) – See Article 1731,
Inspections, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
c.) Reinspection – See Article 1731.02(c) of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of Bethlehem.
d.) Reinstatement – The fee to reinstate a revoked Residential Rental
Registration or a Residential Rental License shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per residential rental unit and ten dollars ($10.00)
per occupant with a maximum of five (5) occupants.
e.) Transfer – See Article 1731.02(c) of the Codified Ordinances of
the City of Bethlehem.
For inspection fees, see Article 1731.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the
City of Bethlehem.
ARTICLE 1739 12
4.11 The License shall indicate thereon the maximum number of
OCCUPANTS in each REGULATED RENTAL UNIT.
4.12 No license shall be issued if the OWNER has not paid any fines and costs
arising from enforcement of this Ordinance or any of the ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem relating to land use and/or code enforcement or if any licensing fees under this
Ordinance are due and owing the City.
C. Inspection.
4.13 All PREMISES shall be subject to periodic inspection by the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or another duly authorized agent of the CITY as outlined in
Section 1739.04 B. 4.9. Such inspection may take place when an application is submitted
for a License or at any time during the year when a property becomes subject to this
Article. The fee for inspections are contained in Article 1731 of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of Bethlehem, Section 1731.02. (Ord. 4131; Passed 5/22/02)
4.14 The CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER is hereby designated as the
official authorized to enforce this Ordinance and to take appropriate measures to abate
violations hereof, for and on behalf of the City of Bethlehem.
4.15 This section shall not be construed so as to limit or restrict the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER'S authority to conduct inspections of PREMISES, whether
or not subject to the permitting and inspection requirements of this Ordinance, pursuant
to any other ordinance or Code.
D. Search Warrant.
4.16 Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this Ordinance or
any other ordinance of the City of Bethlehem has occurred, the CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER may apply to the District Justice having jurisdiction in the City of Bethlehem
for a search warrant to enter and inspect the PREMISES.
1739.05 GROUNDS FOR NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
A. General.
5.1 The CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER may initiate disciplinary action
against an OWNER that may result in a formal warning, non-renewal, suspension or
revocation of the OWNER'S License, for violating any provision of this Ordinance that
imposes a duty upon the OWNER and/or for failing to regulate the breach of duties by
OCCUPANTS as provided for herein.
B. Definitions of Options to the Code Enforcement Officer.
5.2 Formal Warning - Formal written notification of at least one violation of
this Ordinance. Upon satisfactory compliance with this Ordinance and any conditions
ARTICLE 1739 13
imposed by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER and/or the City of Bethlehem, the
formal warning shall be removed when the OWNER applies for License renewal at a
time set by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or by City of Bethlehem.
5.3 Non-Renewal - The denial of the privilege to apply for License renewal
after expiration of the License term. The CITY will permit the OWNER to maintain
OCCUPANTS in the PREMISES until the end of the license term but will not accept
applications for renewal of the License until a time set by the CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER or by City of Bethlehem such time not to exceed one year from the renewal
date.
5.4 Suspension - The immediate loss of the privilege to rent REGULATED
RENTAL UNITS for a period of time set by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or
City of Bethlehem such time not to exceed one year from the date of suspension. The
OWNER, after the expiration of the suspension period, may apply for License renewal
without the need to show cause why the OWNER'S privilege to apply for a License
should be reinstated. Upon suspension, the OWNER shall take immediate steps to evict
the OCCUPANTS.
5.5 Revocation - The immediate loss of the privilege to rent REGULATED
RENTAL UNITS for a period of time set by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or
the City of Bethlehem and the loss of the privilege to apply for renewal of the License at
the expiration of the time period such time not to exceed one year from the date of
revocation. Upon the loss of the privilege to rent, the OWNER shall take immediate
steps to evict the OCCUPANTS.
5.6. Reinstatement – A Residential Rental Registration shall be reinstated if the
owner or operator of a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT corrects the reason for the
revocation of the Residential Rental Registration and has paid the Residential Rental
Registration reinstatement fee.
C. Criteria for Applying Sanctions.
5.7 The CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, when recommending sanctions,
and the City of Bethlehem, when applying sanctions, shall consider the following:
(A) The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of the
OCCUPANTS of the REGULATED RENTAL UNIT and other residents of the
PREMISES.
(B) The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
(C) Whether the OWNER has prior violations of this Ordinance and
other ordinances of the CITY or has received notices of violations as provided for in this
Ordinance.
(D) Whether the OWNER has been subject to sanctions under this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1739 14
(E) The effect of sanctions against the OWNER on the OCCUPANTS.
(F) The action taken by the OWNER to remedy the violation and to
prevent future violations, including any written plan submitted by the OWNER.
(G) The policies and lease language employed by the OWNER to
manage the REGULATED DWELLING UNIT to enable the OWNER to comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
(H) In addition to enforcing sanctions as set forth above, the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER may recommend and City of Bethlehem may impose upon
the existing or subsequent licenses reasonable conditions related to fulfilling the purposes
of this Ordinance.
D. Grounds for Imposing Sanctions.
5.8 Any of the following may subject an OWNER to sanctions as provided for
in this Article:
(A) Failure to abate a violation of CITY Codes and ordinances that
apply to the PREMISES within the time directed by the CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER.
(B) Refusal to permit the inspection of the PREMISES by the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER as required by 1739.04, Section C of this Ordinance.
(C) Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this
Ordinance by OCCUPANTS of REGULATED RENTAL UNITS as required by 1739.02,
Section A of this Ordinance.
(D) Failure to evict OCCUPANTS after having been directed to do so
by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER of the CITY as provided for in 1739.02,
Section I of this Ordinance.
(E) Three violations of this Ordinance or other ordinances of the CITY
that apply to the PREMISES within a License term. For purposes of this Ordinance,
there need be no criminal conviction before a violation can be found to exist. Before a
prior violation can be considered under this Section, the OWNER must have received
notice in writing of this violation within thirty days after the CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER received notice of the violation.
E. Procedure for Non-Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License and Appeal.
5.9 Notification. Following a determination that grounds for non-renewal,
suspension or revocation of a License exist, the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
shall notify the OWNER of the action to be taken and the reason therefor. Such
notification shall be in writing. addressed to the OWNER in question, and shall contain
the following information:
ARTICLE 1739 15
(A) The address of the PREMISES in question and identification of the
particular REGULATED RENTAL UNIT(S) affected.
(B) A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
(C) A statement that the License for said REGULATED RENTAL UNIT(S)
shall be either suspended or revoked, or will not be renewed for the next
License or that the OWNER will receive a formal warning. In the case of a
suspension or revocation, the notice shall state the date upon which such
suspension or revocation will commence, and in the case of a suspension
shall also state the duration of said suspension.
(D) A statement that, due to the non-renewal, suspension or revocation (as the
case may be), the OWNER or any PERSON acting on his, her or its behalf
is prohibited from renting, letting, or permitting occupancy of the
DWELLING UNIT(S) by more than two UNRELATED individuals
subject to said enforcement action, from and during the period said action
is in effect.
(E) Any person affected by a decision of the CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER or a notice or order issued by the CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided
that a written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after the day
the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal may be
made when it is claimed that: the true intent of the Codes or rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better method can be
used. See BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, Section PM
111.0, Titled “Means of Appeal”. See also Article 150.03 (b) “Codes
Board of Appeals”, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
5.10 Delivery of Notification.
(A) All notices shall be sent to the OWNER and MANAGER, if applicable, by
certified mail. In the event that the notice is returned by the postal
authorities marked "unclaimed" or "refused", then the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall attempt delivery by personal service on
the OWNER or MANAGER, if applicable. The CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER shall also post the notice at a conspicuous place on the
PREMISES.
(B) If personal service cannot be accomplished after a reasonable attempt to
do so, then the notice may be sent to the OWNER or MANAGER at the
address stated on the most current License application for the PREMISES
in question, by regular first c1ass mail, postage prepaid. If such notice is
not returned by the postal authorities within five days of its deposit in the
U.S. mail, then it shall be deemed to have been delivered to and received
by the addressee on the fifth day following its deposit in the U.S. mail, and
ARTICLE 1739 16
all time periods set forth under Section 1 above, shall thereupon be
calculated from said fifth day.
1739.06 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
6.1 Basis for Violation.
It shall be unlawful for any PERSON, as either OWNER or MANAGER of a
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT for which a License is required, to operate without a
valid, current License issued by the CITY authorizing such operation. It shall also be
unlawful for any PERSON, either OWNER or MANAGER, to allow the number of
OCCUPANTS of a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT to exceed the maximum limit as set
forth on the License, or to violate any other provision of this Ordinance. IT SHALL BE
UNLAWFUL FOR ANY OCCUPANT TO VIOLATE THIS ORDINANCE.
6.2 Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Ordinance or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements hereof, or the Building Code of the City, or shall be in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon
conviction thereof before the district Magistrate of the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania,
be liable to pay the following penalties:
a) First Violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty days imprisonment, or both;
b) Second Violation – A fine of $500.00, or sixty days imprisonment, or both;
c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
Upon conviction of a third offense, the OWNER of the property will be required
to begin eviction of the tenants/occupants of the property.
6.3 Non-exclusive Remedies.
The penalty provisions of this Article and the License non-renewal, suspension
and revocation procedures provided in this Ordinance shall be independent, non-mutually
exclusive separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the CITY as may be
deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this Ordinance. The remedies and
procedures provided in this Ordinance for violation hereof are not intended to supplant or
replace, to any degree, the remedies and procedures available to the CITY in the case of a
violation of any other Code or ordinance of the CITY, whether or not such other Code or
ordinance is referenced in this Ordinance and whether or not an ongoing violation of such
other Code or ordinance is cited as the underlying ground for a finding of a violation of
this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 1739 17
1739.07 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
7.1 Notices.
(A) For purposes of this Ordinance, any notice required hereunder to be given
to a MANAGER shall be deemed as notice given to the OWNER.
(B) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to be
given to the OWNER under this Ordinance shall have been received by such OWNER if
the notice was given to the OWNER in the manner provided by this Ordinance.
(C) A claimed lack of knowledge by the OWNER of any violation hereunder
cited shall be no defense to License non-renewal, suspension or revocation proceedings
as long as all notices prerequisite to institution of such proceedings have been given and
deemed received in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
7.2 Changes in Ownership/Occupancy.
It shall be the duty of each OWNER of a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT to
notify the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER in writing within five (5) days of any
change in Ownership of the PREMISES or of the number of REGULATED RENTAL
UNITS on the PREMISES. It shall also be the duty of the OWNER to notify the CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER in writing within five (5) days of any increase in the
number of OCCUPANTS in any REGULATED RENTAL UNIT or of the changing of a
DWELLING UNIT from OWNER-OCCUPIED to nonowner-occupied, which thereby
transforms the DWELLING into a REGULATED RENTAL UNIT for purposes of this
Ordinance. Failure to so notify the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall be
considered a violation of this Ordinance.
7.3 Owners Severally Responsible.
If any REGULATED RENTAL UNIT is owned by more than one PERSON, in
any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership, or otherwise, each PERSON shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this Ordinance, and
shall be severally subject to prosecution for the violation of this Ordinance.
7.4 Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any PERSON or
circumstances is held invalid, such holding shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are declared severable.
7.5 Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, which are inconsistent herewith, are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
7.6 Effective date.
ARTICLE 1739 18
Pursuant to 53 P.S. 41608(b), this Ordinance shall take effect twenty days after its
final passage by City Council and approval by the Mayor.
(Ord. 4038; Passed 11/8/00.)
ARTICLE 1739 19
ADDENDUM TO RESIDENTIAL RENTAL AGREEMENT
This Addendum to Residential Rental Agreement is made this _______ day of
_________________, _______, and is incorporated into and shall be deemed to amend
and supplement the Residential Rental Agreement made by the undersigned Tenant and
Landlord, their heirs, successors and assigns, dated _______________________. The
Residential Rental Agreement and this Addendum pertain to the premises described in
said agreement and located at __________________________________________. This
Addendum is required by Article II, Section E. of the Regulated Rental Unit Occupancy
Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem.
ADDITIONAL COVENANTS AND OBLIGATIONS
In addition to the covenants and obligations set forth in the aforementioned
Residential Rental Agreement, Tenant and Landlord hereby covenant and agree as
follows:
A. Landlord’s Covenants and Obligations:
1. Landlord shall keep and maintain the leased premises in compliance with
all applicable Codes and Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and all applicable state
laws and shall keep the leased premises in good and safe condition.
2. The manager for the leased premises shall be as follows:
_________________________________________________
Name
_________________________________________________
Address
_________________________________________________
Telephone Number
3. The Landlord shall be responsible for regularly performing all routine
maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow removal, and for making any and
all necessary repairs in and around the leased premises, except for any specific tasks
which the parties hereby agree shall be delegated to the Tenant and which are identified
as follows:
4. The Landlord shall promptly respond to reasonable complaints and
inquiries from the Tenant.
5. The Landlord shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Landlord-
Tenant Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Tenant’s Covenants and Obligations:
ARTICLE 1739 20
1. Tenant shall comply with all applicable Codes and Ordinances of the City
of Bethlehem and all applicable state laws.
2. Tenant agrees that the maximum number of persons permitted within the
regulated rental unit at any time shall be ________ and the maximum number of persons
permitted within the common areas of the leased premises at any time shall be
_________.
3. Tenant shall dispose of all rubbish, garbage and other waste from the
leased premises in a clean and safe manner and shall separate and place for collection all
recyclable materials in compliance with City of Bethlehem’s Solid Waste and Recycling
Ordinance.
4. Tenant shall not engage in any conduct on the leased premises which is
declared illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or Liquor Code, or the Controlled
Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, nor shall Tenant permit others on the
premises to engage in such conduct.
5. Tenant shall use and occupy the leased premises so as not to disturb the
peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby premises by others.
6. Tenant shall not cause, nor permit nor tolerate to be caused, damage to the
leased premises, except for ordinary wear and tear.
7. Tenant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on the leased
premises to engage in, “disruptive conduct” which is defined as “any form of conduct,
action, incident or behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor of
a regulated rental unit that is so loud, untimely, offensive, riotous or that otherwise
unreasonably disturbs other persons in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such
that a report is made to the police and/or to the Code Enforcement Officer. It is not
necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense,
nor that criminal charges be filed against any person in order for a person to have
perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct as defined herein.
Provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless
the Code Enforcement Officer or police shall investigate and make a determination that
such did occur, and keep written records, including a Disruptive Conduct Report of such
occurrence.”
8. Tenant acknowledges and agrees that this tenancy is subject to the
provisions of the Regulated Rental Unit Occupancy Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem
and that the issuance by any municipal officer of the City of Bethlehem of a Certificate of
Non-compliance with said Ordinance relating to the leased premises shall constitute a
breach of the rental agreement of which this addendum is a part. Upon such breach,
Landlord shall have the right and option to pursue any and all of the following remedies:
a. Termination of the rental agreement without prior notice;
ARTICLE 1739 21
b. Bring an action to recover possession of the leased premises
without abatement of rents paid, including reasonable attorney’s
fees and costs;
c. Bring an action to recover the whole balance of the rent and
charges due for the unexpired lease term, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs;
d. Bring an action for damages caused by Tenant’s breach, including
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hands and seals the
day and year first above written.
______________________________ ________________________________
Witness Tenant
______________________________ ________________________________
Witness Tenant
______________________________ ________________________________
Witness Tenant
______________________________ ________________________________
Witness Tenant
______________________________ ________________________________
Witness Landlord
ARTICLE 1741
SHORT TERM LODGING FACILITIES
1741.01 Purpose.
1741.02 Definitions.
1741.03 Restrictions on Transient Rentals; Types of Short Term Lodging Facilities.
1741.04 Annual License Term, Fee and Occupancy Limit.
1741.05 Performance Standards.
1741.06 Grounds for Suspension, Revocation or Nonrenewal of License.
1741.07 Procedure for Non-Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License and Appeal.
1741.99 Penalties.
1741.01 PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Ordinance and the policy of the City of Bethlehem, in order to
protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and
obligations of Owners and Transient visitors to maintain and improve the quality of life around
residences throughout the City. There is a greater incidence of disturbances and violations of
various Codes of the City which adversely affect the peace and quiet of the neighborhood at
residential properties where Owners allow unregulated Transient visitors.
If unregulated, Short Term Lodging Facilities can create negative compatibility impacts in
residential neighborhoods, including inappropriate commercialization and disruption of the
character of single-family neighborhoods, excessive noise, on-street parking that overwhelms
use by local residents, increased risk of inappropriate conduct for which enforcement against
transients may be difficult, and accumulation of rubbish and trash.
A parallel purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure safe, healthy and nondiscriminatory
housing arrangements for Transient Visitors through a regular licensing and inspection
program not hitherto in place for rentals of single family dwellings or portions thereof.
The City Council of the City of Bethlehem declares the following purposes for enacting this
Ordinance:
1. to enhance accountability of property owners and transient visitors, minimize the
risk of communal disturbances and conflict and violations of various Codes of the
City which are capable of repetition but evading review, and otherwise protect and
promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;
2. to ensure safe, healthy and nondiscriminatory housing arrangements for Transient
Visitors through a regular licensing and inspection program not hitherto in place for
rentals of single family dwellings or portions thereof;
ARTICLE 1741 2
3. to minimize negative compatibility impacts from excessive noise, on-street parking
that overwhelms use by local residents, increased risk of inappropriate conduct for
which enforcement against transients may be difficult, and accumulation of rubbish
and trash;
4. to impose corresponding owner licensing arrangements for transient
accommodations already in place for other residential regulated rental units.
1741.02 DEFINITIONS
Board of Appeal: The Board of Appeal identified in Article 150 of the Codified Ordinances
of the City of Bethlehem and/or occasionally known as the “Codes Board of Appeals”.
Rent or Rental: an arrangement whereby one or more persons obtain permission to occupy
a property or portion thereof, regardless of whether compensation or other consideration is passed
by a transient visitor to the owner or an agent of the owner.
Short Term Lodging: The occupancy of a dwelling unit or portion thereof for temporary
rental occupancy by transients.
Transient visitor: An occupant of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for not more than 30
days, unless occupant is related to the Owner as married spouse, parent or child, grandparent or
grandchild, or brother or sister.
1741.03 RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSIENT RENTALS; TYPES OF SHORT
TERM LODGING FACILITIES
Unless qualified as a hotel or bed and breakfast home use conducted in accordance with the
Zoning Ordinance, Short Term Lodging is prohibited throughout the City of Bethlehem except in
the following circumstances:
A. Specific bedroom accommodation. The owner of an owner-occupied single family
dwelling may rent no more than 2 bedrooms to transient visitors for a period of not
less than 24 hours and not more than 30 consecutive days. Under this arrangement,
the owner must occupy the residence during the stay of the transient visitor.
B. Entire residential unit accommodation. An owner may rent his/her/their primary
residence to transient visitors for a minimum period of 7 consecutive days, not to
exceed 30 consecutive or nonconsecutive calendar days per year (each year shall be
January 1st through December 31st). Under this type of arrangement, the owner
may, but is not required to, remain on the premises during the stay of the transient
guests.
ARTICLE 1741 3
1741.04 ANNUAL LICENSE TERM, FEE AND OCCUPANCY LIMIT
A. Before providing any Short Term Lodging, property owners must obtain and keep
current a Short Term Lodging License for each property to be designated as a Short
Term Lodging Facility. Such License shall only be issued if the requirements of this
Ordinance are met.
B. Upon application in such form as may be required by the City Department of
Community and Economic Development for a Short Term Lodging License or renewal
thereof, each applicant shall pay to the City an annual License and inspection fee in
accordance with the Housing Inspection Fee Schedule Resolution. A license for a
Short Term Lodging Facility shall not be transferred or sold and will expire upon the
conveyance of the property.
C. Each License will note how many lodgers are permitted for short term rental and
require the applicant to submit proof of, and remain in constant compliance with, the
following:
1. An accurately-drawn floor plan of the residence showing the number of bedrooms
and location of smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors. Floor plans must
show details for every level of the residence and any attached structures, and the
location of windows and all interior and exterior doorways.
2. In the case of Short Term Lodging where the owner-occupant rents a specific
bedroom accommodation, the floor plan must clearly designate bedrooms to be
used for Short Term Lodging, which must be located within the principal dwelling
unit and not in an accessory building.
3. The requirements of Section 5-Performance Standards of this Ordinance.
1741.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Any Short Term Lodging arrangement allowed under this Ordinance must meet all of the
following standards:
A. The dwelling shall remain as a SINGLE household residential living unit with common
housekeeping, kitchen and laundry facilities.
B. The current City of Bethlehem Housing Code will determine the maximum occupancy
of the Short Term Lodging Facility and, in the case where the owner-occupant rents a
specific bedroom accommodation, the number of individuals permitted in the
designated bedroom.
C. Nothing in this housing ordinance shall allow the Licensee to make the Short Term
Lodging Facility available for use by a transient visitor or guest for nonresidential
ARTICLE 1741 4
purposes, such as, but not limited to, the lease or use of the property as reception space,
party space, meeting space or for other similar events open to the transient guests.
D. A Short Term Lodging Facility shall be either of the types set forth in Section 3 of this
Ordinance for the entire duration of the annual License unless a new Short Term
Lodging License is obtained and a new license fee is paid. A Facility may not change
or mix the type of transient accommodation during a licensed period.
E. The Short Term Lodging Facility shall not adversely affect the residential character of
the neighborhood. Short term rental may not generate noise, vibration, glare, odor or
other effects that unreasonably interfere with a person’s enjoyment of his or her
neighborhood.
F. The owner shall be responsible for the safety and welfare of all transient visitors and
guests, preserving the peace and quiet of the community within which the Short Term
Lodging Facility is found from noises or disruptions caused by any transient visitor or
guest, and to maintain the property in accordance with all laws, regulations and
ordinances, including but not limited to any conduct which would qualify as disruptive
conduct within the meaning of Article 1739.01.B of the Codified Ordinances of the
City, and promptly report those persons violating the same to the responsible City
officers and departments for enforcement purposes.
G. There shall be an annual inspection, conducted by the City of Bethlehem Bureau of
Housing, in accordance with the fee schedule resolution. The owner of the Short Term
Lodging Facility is responsible for scheduling the inspection and paying the fee.
Failure to do so will result in revocation of the Short Term Lodging license.
H. The owner of the Short Term Lodging Facility must apply for and keep current with a
City of Bethlehem Business Privilege Tax License.
I. There shall be no physical changes to the premises so that it no longer looks like a
single family dwelling, such as constructing a separate entrance for the use of the
transient visitor or guest.
J. The owner of the Short Term Lodging Facility shall submit a Certification of Trash
Hauler to the City on an annual basis. The owner of the Short Term Lodging Facility is
responsible for trash and recycling removal. Lodgers must be notified of trash and
recycling collection days.
K. With respect to making the property available for use, the owners of the Short Term
Lodging Facility shall comply with the anti-discrimination provisions of Article 145
and 1737 of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances.
L. The owner of the Short Term Lodging Facility must maintain a ledger which details the
length of stay of each transient visitor and present same to a City of Bethlehem Code
Enforcement officer when requested.
ARTICLE 1741 5
1741.06 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL
OF LICENSE
A. General. Aside from seeking fines under Section 8 of this Ordinance, the Code Official
may take administrative disciplinary action against an owner that may result in a formal
warning, non-renewal, suspension or revocation of the Short Term Lodging Facility
License, for violating any provision of this Ordinance that imposes a duty upon the
owner and/or for failing to regulate the breach of duties by Occupants as provided for
herein.
B. Definitions of Options to the Code Official.
1. Formal Warning - Formal written notification of at least one violation of this
Ordinance. Upon satisfactory compliance with this Ordinance and any conditions
imposed by the Code Official and/or the City of Bethlehem, the formal warning
shall be removed when the Owner applies for License renewal at a time set by the
Code Official or by City of Bethlehem.
2. Suspension - The immediate loss of the privilege to rent the Short Term Lodging
Facility for a period of time set by the Code Official not to exceed one year from the
date of suspension of the License. The Owner, after the expiration of the suspension
period, may apply for License renewal without the need to show cause why the
Owner’s privilege to apply for a License should be reinstated, provided the Owner
has paid a new license fee. Upon suspension, the Owner shall take immediate steps
to evict, and disallow any further use by, all Transient Visitors at the Short Term
Lodging Facility through the end of the suspension period and any unlicensed
period.
3. Revocation - The immediate loss of the privilege to rent the Short Term Lodging
Facility for any period of time longer than one year or for a second or subsequent
suspension of the license for the same Facility, as may be determined by the Code
Official. Upon revocation, the Owner shall take immediate steps to evict, and
disallow any further use by, all Transient Visitors at the Short Term Lodging
Facility through the end of the suspension period and any unlicensed period.
4. Reinstatement - A Short Term Lodging license shall be reinstated from suspension
or revocation if the owner or operator of a Short Term Lodging facility corrects all
reason(s) for the suspension or revocation of the Short Term Lodging License and
has paid a new license fee and all court penalties, if any, obtained pursuant to
Section 8 of this Ordinance.
5. Non-Renewal - The denial of an application for License renewal after expiration of
any License term due to the failure of the Owner to comply with the requirements
of this Ordinance or failure to correct the conditions for which his or her license
was previously suspended or revoked. Unless otherwise prohibited by the
suspension or revocation of a Short Term Lodging license, the City will permit the
Owner to maintain Transient Visitors in the Premises until the end of the license
term but will not accept applications for renewal of the License until a time set by
ARTICLE 1741 6
the Code Official or by City of Bethlehem such time not to exceed one year from
the renewal date.
6. Other remedies - Nothing in this Ordinance shall limit the right, power or
jurisdiction of the City to proceed against the Owner or any transient visitor or
guest under any other law, regulation or ordinance
C. Criteria for Applying Sanctions.
a. The Code Official, when applying sanctions, shall consider the following:
i. The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of the
Occupants of the Short Term Lodging Facility and other residents of the
Premises.
ii. The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
iii. Whether the Owner has prior violations of this Ordinance and other
ordinances of the City or has received notices of violations as provided for
in this Ordinance.
iv. Whether the Owner has been subject to sanctions under this Ordinance.
v. The action taken by the Owner to remedy the violation and to prevent future
violations, including any written plan submitted by the Owner.
vi. Notwithstanding any past or pending administrative action taken to
suspend, revoke, or not renew a license for Short Term Lodging Facility
license, upon conviction of a third offense under Section 8 of this Ordinance
within any 5-year period, the Owner of the Facility, and his/her successors,
heirs and assigns, shall be disqualified from using the property as a Short
Term Lodging Facility for a period of 2 years.
D. Reasonable Conditions. In addition to enforcing sanctions as set forth above, the Code
Official may impose upon the existing or subsequent licenses reasonable conditions related
to fulfilling the purposes of this Ordinance.
E. Search Warrant. Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this Ordinance or
any other ordinance of the City of Bethlehem has occurred, the Code Official may apply to
the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction in the City of Bethlehem for a search
warrant to enter and inspect the premises.
1741.07 PROCEDURE FOR NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND APPEAL.
A. Form of Notification. Following a determination by the Code Official that grounds for
non-renewal, suspension or revocation of a Short Term Lodging license exist, the Code
Official shall notify the Owner of the action to be taken by the Code Official and the reason
ARTICLE 1741 7
therefor. Such notification shall be in writing. addressed to the Owner in question, and shall
contain the following information:
1. The address and identification of the particular Short Term Lodging Facility
affected.
2. A description of the violation which has been found to exist.
3. A statement that the License for said Short Term Lodging Facility shall be
either suspended or revoked, or will not be renewed for the next License period.
In the case of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall state the date upon
which such suspension or revocation will commence, and in the case of a
suspension shall also state the duration of said suspension and may extend into
a period of license renewal. A revocation shall last through the end of the
current license period and may be combined with a period of disqualification
for renewal.
4. A statement that, due to the non-renewal, suspension or revocation (as the case
may be), the Owner is prohibited from allowing use of the Facility by
Transients.
B. Delivery of Notification. The Code Official shall post the notice at a conspicuous
place at the Short Term Lodging Facility and transmit a copy to the Owner by
personal delivery and/or some method documenting delivery thereof through
United States Postal Service or a private carrier to the Owner or an adult person in
responsible possession of the residence or business of Owner. In the event such
personal delivery or documented delivery cannot be accomplished after a
reasonable attempt to do so, then the notice may be sent to the Owner at the address
stated on the most current License application for the Short Term Lodging Facility
in question, by regular first class mail, postage prepaid. If such notice is not
returned by the postal authorities within five days of its deposit in the U.S. mail,
then it shall be deemed to have been delivered to and received by the addressee on
the fifth day following its deposit in the U.S. mail, and all time periods set forth
under Section 1 above, shall thereupon be calculated from said fifth day.
C. Appeals. Any Owner affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or
order issued by the Code Official shall have the right to appeal to the board of
appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after
the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal may be
made when it is claimed that: the true intent of the Codes or rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not
fully apply, and/or whether the period of license suspension, revocation and/or
nonrenewal was appropriate.
ARTICLE 1741 8
1741.99 PENALTIES
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Ordinance or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements hereof, or the Building Code of the City, or shall be in violation of
an approved plan or directive of the Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon conviction
thereof before a Magisterial District Judge of the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, be
liable to pay the following penalties:
a. First violation - a fine of $200.00 or 30 days imprisonment, or both;
b. Second violation - a fine of $500.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both;
c. Third and each subsequent violation - A fine up to $1,000.00, or ninety days
imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. 2017-37. Passed 12/5/2017)
L
FORM BOP 1
1. Total number of employee?s reported herewith
2. Gross amount of tax (Line 1 x $10.00)
3. Employer?s collection fee (Line 2 x 2%)
4. Net amount due-enclosed (Line 2 minus Line 3)
5. Penalty 5%
6. Interest 1Ú2% per month
7. Total - including any penalty and interest due
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
CITY OF BETHLEHEM, PA TAX BUREAU
I DECLARE UNDER PENALTY OF LAW THAT THE INFORMATION HEREIN CONTAINED IS TRUE AND CORRECT ACCOUNT NO.
DUE ON OR BEFORE
AUTHORIZED
SIGNATURE
OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE TAX
EMPLOYER?S RETURN
PAYABLE TO: CITY OF BETHLEHEM
P.O. BOX 500
BETHLEHEM, PA 18016-0500
610-865-7022 TDD 610-865-7015
L
INSTRUCTIONS TO EMPLOYER
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The total number of employees reported herewith must agree with the total number of OPT2?s "Employee?s
Deduction Certificates," Copy A, remitted to the Bureau.
Forms must be filed on or before due date as shown on the face of the form.
No collection fee will be allowed on returns filed after the due date shown.
In the event that you have no employees from whom you are required to deduct tax IN the period shown,
write the word NONE on line one (1) of Form BOP#1 "Employer?s Return," sign the form and return to TAX
BUREAU, P.O. BOX 500, BETHLEHEM, PA 18016-0500.
Retain all extra copies of Form OPT2, "Evidence of Deduction Certificate," for your use when hiring new
employees, who do not have a receipt or a "Certificate" from a former employer. Additional forms will be sent,
on your request to the TAX BUREAU, P.O. BOX 500, BETHLEHEM, PA 18016-0500.
Enclose Self-Addressed, Stamped Envelope for Return Receipt.
L
FORM BOP 3
ACCOUNT NO.
DUE ON OR BEFORE
Authorized
Signature
I declare under penalty of law that the information
herein contained is true and correct.
OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE TAX
PERSONAL RETURN
CITY OF BETHLEHEM, PA TAX BUREAU
TELEPHONE: 610-865-7022 TDD 610-865-7015
READ INSTRUCTIONS
ON BACK OF FORM.
VERIFY YOUR OCCUPATION
SITUATION BEFORE COMPLETING
- REMINDER -
SIGN THIS RETURN
1.
2.
3.
4.
OCCUPATIONAL
PRIVILEGE TAX
PENALTY 5%
INTEREST (1Ú2% PER MONTH)
TOTAL DUE
10 00
PAYABLE TO:
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
P.O. BOX 500, BETHLEHEM, PA 18016-0500
* *
L
A MY "EMPLOYER" WITHHELD MY OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE TAX.
B
C
EMPLOYER?S NAME EMPLOYER?S NUMBER
I PAID MY OCCUPATIONAL PRIVILEGE TAX FOR THE ABOVE REFERENCED CALENDAR YEAR AND HAVE IN MY
POSSESSION A RECEIPTED PERSONAL RETURN NUMBERED AS FOLLOWS:
PAID: DATED:
I CERTIFY THAT NO PORTION OF MY BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION IS CARRIED ON OR PERFORMED WITHIN
THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM, HANOVER TWP. (NORTH. CO.)
I CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE CHECKED
IS A TRUE AND CORRECT STATEMENT. SIGNED
? BOX.
SEE REVERSE SIDE
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND
MERCANTILE TAX
REGULATIONS
1
INTRODUCTION
Persons desiring to do business in the City of Bethlehem are
required to obtain a business privilege license and pay a tax on
gross receipts.
These Regulations provide a formal interpretation of the
City of Bethlehem’s Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax
Ordinance (Codified Ordinances Article 341) and establish
procedures for its administration. The Tax Ordinance is attached
and set forth as Addendum “A”.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority set
forth in Article 341.06 (b) of the Codified Ordinances, and shall
be interpreted, whenever possible, to be consistent with the
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Ordinance. In the event
that a provision of these Regulations shall be inconsistent with
the Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Ordinance, the
provisions of the Ordinance shall prevail.
THESE ARE REVISED REGULATIONS. THEY ARE EFFECTIVE
AS OF 12:01AM, JANUARY 1, 2002. ALL PREVIOUS VERSIONS
OF BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND MERCANTILE TAX
REGULATIONS ARE VOID.
For information or additional copies, please contact:
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau
10 East Church Street
Bethlehem, PA. 18018
Telephone: 610-865-7022
Fax: 610-997-7991
1
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND MERCANTILE TAX
REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I. Business Privilege License
Section 100: License Required 4
Section 101: Prerequisites for Issuance of License 4
Section 102: Fee, Term, and Proration 4
Section 103: Posting 5
Section 104: License for Branch Establishments 5
Section 105: License for Fairs, Festivals, Carnivals, Craft Shows/Fairs, and Other
Temporary Places of Business 5
Section 106: License for Real Estate Rentals 7
Section 107: Assignment and Transfer Prohibited 7
Section 108: Replacement License 7
Section 109: Change of Taxpayer's Address 7
Section 110: Failure to Procure License 7
ARTICLE II. Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax
Section 200: Authority 8
Section 201: Definitions 8
Section 202: Who Must File a Return 11
Section 203: Nature and Imposition of Tax 12
Section 204: Base and Rates of Tax 12
Section 205: Attribution of Gross Receipts 14
Section 206: Exclusions from Gross Receipts 17
Section 207: Interstate Commerce 22
Section 208: Inclusion in Gross Receipts 23
ARTICLE III. Declaration and Payment of Tax
Section 300: Tax Returns 25
Section 301: Due Dates for Filing Returns 25
Section 302: Extension of Time for Filing Returns 26
Section 303: Filing to be Complete 26
Section 304: Business Termination 27
ARTICLE IV. Accounting, Books and Records
Section 400: Accounting Methods and Periods 27
Section 401: Records to be Kept 27
2
ARTICLE V. Administration and Enforcement
Section 500: Collection and Receipt of Tax 27
Section 501: Records of Receipts 27
Section 502: Disclosure Statement of Taxpayer's Rights and Obligations 28
Section 503: Verification of Records, Audits, Response periods and Prior Year Returns 28
Section 504: Procedures for the Conduct of Taxpayer Audit 29
Section 505: Examination of Return, Notice of Assessment 29
Section 506: Petition for Reassessment 30
Section 507: Refund of Overpayments, Interest on Overpayments 30
Section 508: Abatement of Certain Interest and Penalty 31
Section 509: Installment Agreements 32
Section 510: Payment under Protest 33
Section 511: Violations and Penalties 33
Section 512: Confidential Nature of Returns 34
Section 513: Dishonored Checks 34
Section 514: Administrative Appeals 35
Section 515: Judicial Appeal 35
Section 516: Construction 36
ADDENDUM "A"
Codified Ordinances, Article 341 "The Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Ordinance"
ADDENDUM "B"
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau Disclosure Statement of Bureau's and Taxpayer's Rights and Responsibilities
3
CITY OF BETHLEHEM BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND
MERCANTILE TAX REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND MERCANTILE LICENSE
Section 100. License Required.
Persons or businesses desiring to do Business in the City of Bethlehem must first obtain a
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License from the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau located
in the City of Bethlehem Government Center, 10 East Church Street, Bethlehem, PA 18018.
Applications can be obtained by calling 610-865-7022.
Section 101. Prerequisites for Issuance of License.
No license shall be issued to persons or businesses who are required to obtain approval of
the City of Bethlehem Zoning, Building, Fire and/or Health Officials, unless such approval is
first obtained, then presented to the Tax Bureau.
No license will be issued to any person or business in default of any tax due to the City of
Bethlehem, levied under the Codified Ordinances Article 339 (Occupational Privilege Tax
Ordinance), Article 333 (Earned Income Tax Ordinance), and/or Article 341 (Business Privilege
and Mercantile Tax Ordinance). Licenses procured through payment by check shall be wholly
void and ineffective unless the license fee is actually received by the City of Bethlehem.
Section 102. Fee, Term, and Proration.
The Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License fee is $ 25.00 for each fiscal year
beginning May 1st and ending April 30th of the succeeding year. The fee shall not be reduced pro
rata by the portion of the license year elapsed in the year the license is first procured.
The City of Bethlehem, as the contracted collector of the business privilege and
mercantile tax license fee imposed by the Bethlehem Area School District, shall collect and
distribute the license fee as follows:
City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License Fee $13.00
Bethlehem Area School District Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax
License Fee $12.00
Total Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License Fee $25.00
4
Section 103. Posting.
Licenses shall be kept and posted as follows:
Fixed place of business. Licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises where business is conducted. Fair, festival, and/or craft vendors who do
business from a stand, booth, and/or other fixed, temporary place of business shall post
the license conspicuously upon that fixed, temporary place of business.
Operating from a cart or vehicle. License shall be posted in a conspicuous place
upon the cart or vehicle from where business is being conducted.
Contractors domiciled outside the City of Bethlehem. Contractors domiciled
outside the City of Bethlehem, who have obtained a Business Privilege and Mercantile
Tax License to do business within the City of Bethlehem shall keep the license available
for inspection at the site where business is being conducted.
Vending machine owners. A person or business who sells goods, wares or
merchandise by means of vending machines shall procure one license covering all of the
vending machines, and shall post it at the principal place of business. A person or
business operating arcade and video games shall be considered to be a vending machine
owner.
Others. Licensees engaged in business, but not operating from a fixed place of
business or from a vehicle, shall keep the license with their books of account or other
business records and have it available for verification if requested.
Example: Rental business – persons or businesses who rent residential or
commercial property within the City of Bethlehem are not required
to post a license in the individual rental units.
Section 104: License for Branch Establishments:
In the event that a licensee conducts business at more than one location in the City of
Bethlehem, an additional license is required for each additional place of business (except vending
machines). Additional licenses shall be posted in accordance with the provisions of Section 103
of these Regulations. The fee for each additional license is $ 25.00 in accordance with Section
102 of these Regulations.
Section 105: License for Fairs, Festivals, Carnivals, Craft Shows/Fairs, and Other
Temporary Places of Business.
It shall be the duty and requirement of the sponsoring individual, group, Association or
Corporation (including non-profit organizations) to provide to all of its vendors a City of
Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License Application and further, to provide
5
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau with the following information at least ninety (90) days prior
to any such festival, fair, carnival, craft fair or any other temporary place of business:
1) the event's scheduled dates and times
2) listing of all food, craft, and retail vendors
3) schedule of all vendor fees imposed by the sponsoring individual, group,
Association, Corporation or non-profit organization, including but not limited to,
registration fees, table fees, booth fees, utility fees, etc.
When any such festival, fair, carnival, craft fair or any other temporary place of business
(collectively referred to herein as “Temporary Event”) shall issue tickets, coupons, chips, or other
form of "currency" exclusive to their event, it shall be the duty and requirement of the sponsoring
individual, group, Association, Corporation, or non-profit organization to provide the City of
Bethlehem Tax Bureau with an accounting of the ticket, coupon, chip or other form of "currency"
exchanged or "cashed in" by its vendors within sixty (60) days of the Temporary Event's closure.
Any person or business desiring to do business at any Temporary Event within the City of
Bethlehem must first obtain a Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License from the City of
Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Licenses issued to persons or businesses under this Section 105 are
valid for the one-year term referenced in Section 102 and no additional licenses need to be
obtained for participation in additional Temporary Events within the City of Bethlehem during
the one year term.
A license to conduct business in the City of Bethlehem obtained pursuant to Section 100
herein also shall be deemed to apply to Temporary Events that the license holder participates in
and no additional license need be obtained pursuant to this Section 105 so long as the business
conducted at the Temporary Event is the same as the business conducted at the license holder’s
regular place of business.
Any person desiring to conduct any business, as herein defined, at any Temporary Event
shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to this Section 105 if such Temporary Event
does not exceed one (1) day; provided, however, that such persons subject to this exemption will
be required to make and file tax returns and remit tax due in accordance with Section 301C. of
these Regulations (within forty-five (45) days of the close of the one (1) day Temporary Event).
Licenses obtained pursuant to this Section 105 for Temporary Events shall be posted in
accordance with Section 103 of these Regulations at each Temporary Event location. A copy of
a license obtained pursuant to Section 100 shall be posted in accordance with Section 103 of
these Regulations at each Temporary Event location.
Participants in Temporary Events within the City are required to make and file tax returns
and remit tax due after the close of each Temporary Event where they conduct business.
Additional information regarding filing requirements can be found in Section 301C. of these
Regulations.
6
Section 106: License for Real Estate Rentals.
Any person or business entity desiring to rent residential or commercial real property
located within the City of Bethlehem must first obtain a Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax
License from the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. The number of "rental units" and their
location(s) is immaterial in determining whether a person or business entity requires a Business
Privilege and Mercantile Tax License. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau will consider the
property owner as the person or business entity requiring a Business Privilege and Mercantile
Tax License.
Example: John Public is the sole owner of a single home in the City of Bethlehem.
Mr. Public rents the home as residential rental property. Mr. Public is also
in a partner of General Public Partnership. The Partnership owns three
City of Bethlehem properties that are rented out as residential units. Mr.
Public would be required to obtain a Business Privilege and Mercantile
Tax License for the rental of the home he owns individually. General
Public Partnership would also be required to obtain a Business Privilege
and Mercantile Tax License for the rental of its three rental properties.
Total of two (2) licenses required.
Section 107: Assignment and Transfer Prohibited.
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Licenses may not be assigned or transferred. Any
purported transfer or assignment shall be void and ineffective.
Section 108: Replacement Licenses.
In the event of loss, defacement or destruction of any license, the licensee shall apply for
a replacement license. The fee for a replacement license is $10.00.
Section 109: Change of Taxpayer’s Address.
Taxpayer’s change of address must be reported in writing to the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau (see Section 100 for address), within ten (10) days after such change becomes effective.
Section 110: Failure to Procure License.
Persons and/or businesses that engage in a business, profession, or other commercial
activity without having first procured a Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License are
subject to penalty and fine.
7
ARTICLE II
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND MERCANTILE TAX
Section 200: Authority.
The Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Ordinance was enacted under the authority of
the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act 511 of 1965), 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., and appears in the
Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem at Article 341 (attached as Addendum “A”).
Section 201: Definitions.
As used in these regulations:
“Assessment” – The determination by a local taxing authority of the amount of
underpayment by a taxpayer.
"Association" – A partnership, limited partnership, or any other unincorporated group of
two or more persons or a limited liability company.
"Business" – The carrying on or exercising of any trade, profession, or other commercial
activity. Employment for a salary or wage is not “business”.
"City" – The City of Bethlehem.
"Contractor" – Every person engaged in the business of furnishing labor, or both labor
and materials, in connection with all or any part of the construction, alteration, repairing,
dismantling or demolition of buildings, roads, bridges, viaducts, sewers, water and gas mains,
and every other type of structure as an improvement, alteration or development of real property.
"Corporation" – A corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
"Current Year" – The calendar year for which the tax is being levied.
"Date of Overpayment" – The later of the date paid or the date tax is deemed to be
overpaid as follows:
(1) Any amount overpaid as estimated tax for the tax period shall be deemed
to have been overpaid on the last day for filing the final report for the tax
period, determined without regard to any extension of time for filing.
(2) An overpayment made before the last day prescribed for payment shall be
deemed to have been paid on the last day.
8
(3) Any amount claimed to be overpaid with respect to which lawful
administrative review or appellate procedure is initiated shall be deemed to
have been overpaid 60 days following the initiation of the review or
procedure.
“Date of Resolution” – The date the overpayment is refunded or credited as follows:
(1) For a cash refund, a date preceding the date of the Tax Bureau’s refund
check by not more than 30 days.
(2) For a credit for an overpayment:
(a) The date of the Tax Bureau’s notice to the taxpayer of the
determination of the credit; or
(b) The due date for payment of the tax against which the credit is
applied, whichever first occurs. For a cash refund of a previously
determined credit, interest shall be paid on the amount of the credit
from a date 90 days after the filing of a request to convert the credit
to a cash refund to a date preceding the date of the refund check by
not more than 30 days whether or not the refund check is accepted
by the taxpayer after tender.
"Domicile" – The place where one lives and has his or her permanent home and to which
he or she has the intention of returning whenever he or she is absent. Domicile is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory. Domicile is
the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a mere special or limited purpose, but
with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him or
her to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a Corporation or Association, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its
functions are discharged.
"Dwelling" – Any building, structure or single unit intended to provide complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons which has permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation by human occupants, but does not include hotels,
boarding and rooming houses.
"Dwelling Unit" – A room or group of rooms within a building, which forms one
habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, sanitation and the
preparation of meals, and arranged for occupancy by one family.
"Gross Receipts" – Cash, credits or property of any kind received in exchange for
merchandise sold or services performed or other business activity conducted within or
attributable to the City, without deduction therefrom on account for costs of property sold;
materials, labor or services used; interest or discount paid; or any other expense.
9
"Income Tax Officer" – Person, public employee, or private agency designated by the
governing body to collect and administer the licensing of businesses and the tax on gross
receipts.
"Independent Agent, Contractor, or Representative" – A person who, while performing
services for another person, is not subject to the direction and control of the other as to the
details, methods and means by which a result directed by the other is accomplished.
"Landlord" – A person who leases Dwellings or Dwelling Units to others.
"Lease" – A transfer of the right to possession and/or use of real or personal property
(including intangible personal property) for a term in return for consideration. A sale, including
a sale on approval, or retention or creation of a security interest is not a lease. For purposes of
these regulations any “rental” of property shall be treated as a lease.
“Local taxing authority” – A political subdivision levying an eligible tax. The term shall
include any officer, agent, agency, clerk, Income Tax Officer, employee or other person to whom
the governing body has assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment, determination or
administration of an eligible tax. The term shall not include a tax collector or collection agency
who has no authority to audit a taxpayer or determine the amount of eligible tax or whose only
responsibility is to collect an eligible tax on behalf of the governing body.
"Merchandise" – Produce, goods, commodities, food or foodstuffs, wares, items,
products, crops, livestock, animals, metals, gems, or any other property of whatever description,
whether new or used.
"Office" – City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau - an office established by the City of
Bethlehem, to license business activity and collect the business privilege and mercantile tax and
administer business privilege and mercantile tax ordinances or resolutions of the City of
Bethlehem, and any political subdivisions, including school districts, with which it may enter
into collection agreements. The Office performs the function of the "Income Tax Officer".
“Overpayment” – Any payment of tax which is determined in the manner provided by law
not to be due.
"Nonresident" – A person, Association or Corporation or other entity domiciled outside
the taxing district.
"Person" or "Individual" – A natural person, individual, Association, Corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary, corporate officer, or any other entity subject to
or claiming exemption from the tax or under a duty to perform an act for itself or for another
under or pursuant to the City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax.
"Preceding Year" – The calendar year before the Current Year.
10
"Resident" – A person, Association, or Corporation or other entity domiciled in the taxing
district.
"Retail Sales" – Sales made by persons engaged, as owner or agent, in the business of
selling or exchanging merchandise for cash or barter or any consideration on the assumption that
the purchaser of such goods has acquired the same for ultimate consumption or use and not for
resale.
"Resolution" – As adopted by the taxing district levying an "Ordinance" assessing a gross
receipts tax.
"Sale" – The passing of ownership from a seller to a buyer for a price.
"Services" – Any activity that does not involve Retail Sales or Wholesale Sales done for
the benefit of another, or others, for consideration, including but not limited to, consulting,
maintenance and repairs, building, engineering, planning, designing, installation, commission
sales, training, the Lease or use of real or personal property (tangible or intangible), and the
providing of legal, accounting or other professional expertise.
"Succeeding Year" – The calendar year following the Current Year.
"Taxing District" or "District" – The political subdivisions, including school districts,
levying and assessing a gross receipts tax, which have appointed or commissioned the City of
Bethlehem's Tax Bureau to license business activity and collect and administer the tax on gross
receipts.
"Taxpayer" – A person, Association, Corporation or any other entity, required hereunder
to file a return of Gross Receipts, or to pay a tax thereon.
“Underpayment” – The amount or portion of any tax determined to be legally due in the
manner provided by law for which payment or remittance has not been made.
"Voluntary Payment" – The payment of an eligible tax made pursuant to the free will of
the Taxpayer. The term does not include a payment as a result of distraint or levy or pursuant to
a legal proceeding in which the Local taxing authority is seeking to collect its delinquent taxes or
file a claim therefor.
"Wholesale Sales" – Sales made by persons engaged, as owner or agent, in the business of
selling to, or exchanging with another person, goods for cash or barter or any consideration, for
the purpose of resale by the person acquiring the goods sold or exchanged.
Section 202. Who Must File a Return.
Every person who has carried on or exercised business activity within the City of
Bethlehem must file a tax return. A tax return must be filed whether or not tax is due. Tax
11
returns are filed at the business entity level. In the case of a partnership, for example, the tax is
calculated on the gross receipts of the partnership rather than the individual income of the
partners. Any or all of the individual partners may be held responsible for the filing of the tax
return and payment of the tax. In the case of a corporation, for example, the tax is calculated on
the Gross Receipts of the Corporation. Corporate officers shall be held responsible for the filing
of the tax return and payment of the tax.
Section 203. Nature and Imposition of Tax.
The Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax is a tax on the privilege of doing business in
the City of Bethlehem. A person exercises the privilege of doing business by engaging in any
activity within the limits of the City to promote the sale of goods or the provision of services. It
is not necessary to be a Resident of the City of Bethlehem, or to have an office or place of
business within the City, to be doing business in the City.
Section 204. Base and Rates of Tax.
A. Tax Base. The tax is based on gross receipts attributable to doing business in the
City of Bethlehem. To determine whether Gross Receipts are attributable to doing business in
Bethlehem, see Attribution of Gross Receipts, Section 205. Receipts from certain activities are
excluded from taxation, see Exclusion from Gross Receipts, Section 206 and Interstate
Commerce, Section 207.
B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax varies depending on the nature of the business activity
performed, as follows:
NOTE: The Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax rates are the effective tax
rates. The City of Bethlehem and the Bethlehem Area School District both
impose a business privilege and mercantile tax, and Act 511 requires that the tax
rates set forth in the Tax Ordinance be reduced so that the combined rates of the
two taxes does not exceed .001 for Wholesale Sales, nor .0015 for Retail Sales
and for rentals and service providers.
1. Receipts from the Performance of Services. On Gross Receipts
generated by the performance of services, the rate of tax is .0015 ($1.50
per thousand dollars).
Example: Taxpayer, a partnership of consultants, earns $1,000,000.00
in gross sales (receipts) by performing services. The tax is
calculated:
Gross Receipts Rate Tax
$1,000,000.00 x .0015 = $1,500.00
12
2. Receipts from Sales of Merchandise. The rate of tax on receipts from
sales of merchandise varies depending on whether such sales are classified
as “Wholesale Sales” or “Retail Sales” (see Definitions, Section 201).
a) Receipts from Wholesale Sales. On receipts generated by the
Wholesale Sales of merchandise, the rate of tax is .001 ($1.00 per
thousand dollars).
Example: Taxpayer, a wholesale dealer of automobile parts,
has gross sales (receipts) of $5,000,000.00. The tax
is calculated as follows:
Gross Receipts Rate Tax
$5,000,000.00 x .001 = $5,000.00
b) Receipts from Retail Sales. On receipts generated by the Retail
Sales of merchandise the rate of tax is .0015 ($1.50 per thousand
dollars).
Example: Taxpayer, a retail dealer of automotive parts, has
gross retail sales (receipts) of $2,000,000.00. The
tax is calculated as follows:
Gross Receipts Rate Tax
$2,000,000.00 x .0015 = $3,000.00
3. Receipts from lease, use or rental of personal or real property.
Receipts from the Lease, use or rental of personal or real property shall be
deemed to be receipts from the performance of services and taxed at the
rate set forth in Section 204. B. 1. (.0015 or $1.50 per thousand dollars).
4. “Unearned” business receipts. Receipts derived from dividends,
interest, gain on the sale of capital assets; and the receipts from the license,
or use, of intangible property (including, for example, copyrights,
trademarks, licenses, patents, royalties, and other intellectual property)
received by persons doing business in the City of Bethlehem are subject to
the tax at the rate for services set forth in Section 204.B.1. Capital assets
do not include inventory, stock-in-trade or other assets held for sale in the
ordinary course of business. For the purpose of calculating gain on the
sale of capital assets, return of capital may be deducted.
5. Businesses engaged in more than one classification of business
activity. Businesses which engage in more than one classification of
business activity (for example, a service provider whose business includes
the sale of products, or a sales office that provides both retail and
13
wholesale sales), must segregate the receipts from each classification and
pay tax at the rate specified for each. Failure to segregate receipts
according to classification may result in all receipts being taxed at the
highest rate reasonably supportable.
Section 205. Attribution of Gross Receipts.
General. Gross receipts which are fairly attributable to exercising the privilege of doing
business within the City are subject to tax.
A. Attribution of gross receipts from sales of merchandise.
1. Receipts from Bethlehem sales transactions. All receipts from
Wholesale or Retail Sales made or effected within the territorial limits of
the City of Bethlehem are to be included in taxable receipts. Sales are
“made or effected” when an agreement of sale is concluded within the
City, or, when an order is accepted or forwarded for confirmation or
approval from a location within the City and, as a matter of business
custom or practice, delivery is made and the transaction is consummated
on the same terms and conditions as set forth in the order.
2. Delivery outside of Bethlehem. Receipts from sales made or effected in
Bethlehem are taxable whether delivery after sale is made within or
outside of the City.
Example: Taxpayer is distributor of musical instruments whose
headquarters and only sales office is located in Bethlehem.
Receipts from sales made in Bethlehem for delivery outside
the City of Bethlehem are attributable to Bethlehem (unless
excludable under Section 207. Interstate Commerce).
Example: Taxpayer, a dealer in scrap copper, enters into an agreement
in Bethlehem to sell three tons of metal located in
Philadelphia. The agreement consummated in Bethlehem
conveys immediate ownership and possession of the metal
to Taxpayer’s customer. The Gross Receipts of the sale are
properly attributed to Bethlehem.
3. Doing business through local representative or sales office. Receipts
from sales made or effected in Bethlehem by a local representative or sales
force are included in taxable receipts.
Example: Taxpayer, a wholesale distributor of food products has a
home office is in New York. It operates a “Bethlehem
Territory” from an office within the City of Bethlehem
14
where sales are effected for both delivery within and
outside the City of Bethlehem. Shipments are made
directly from Wisconsin. Receipts from sales made or
effected from the Bethlehem office are attributed to
Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer, a distributor of aerospace fasteners whose home
office is in Florida, sells to local Bethlehem customers
through the efforts of a sales representative working from
his home within the City of Bethlehem. Orders are
accepted in Bethlehem and routinely confirmed in Florida.
Shipments are made from Florida for delivery both within
and outside of Bethlehem. The Gross Receipts from sales
made or effected in Bethlehem by the Bethlehem
representative are attributable to the City of Bethlehem.
B. Attribution of Gross Receipts from the Sale of Services.
1. Services performed entirely within Bethlehem. All receipts from
services performed within the City of Bethlehem are attributable to the
City of Bethlehem, notwithstanding that a contract for such services may
have been entered into outside the City of Bethlehem, or that services are
performed for customers who reside outside the City of Bethlehem, or that
services are performed upon tangible items retrieved from and delivered to
locations outside the City of Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer, a plumbing and heating contractor whose sole
office is in Erie, sends a technician to Bethlehem to repair a
furnace. The receipts earned by the technician’s services
performed within Bethlehem are attributed to Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer, an employment agency located in Philadelphia,
provides staffing to Bethlehem businesses. Receipts earned
as a result of the services performed within Bethlehem are
attributed to Bethlehem.
2. Receipts from services directed from Bethlehem. Except as provided in
the following subparagraph 3. below, receipts from services performed
outside of Bethlehem but which are managed, directed or controlled from
within the City of Bethlehem are attributed to Bethlehem. Receipts from
services performed outside the City of Bethlehem, earned by persons
whose home office is within the City of Bethlehem, will be presumed to be
managed, directed or controlled from within the City of Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer, an architectural firm whose sole office is within
15
the City of Bethlehem, performs services throughout
Pennsylvania. All services are managed, directed or
controlled from the City of Bethlehem. Services will be
presumed to have been managed, directed or controlled
from the office located within the City of Bethlehem and all
receipts will be attributable to the City of Bethlehem.
3. Receipts from activities directed from Bethlehem, but subject to
business privilege tax elsewhere. Receipts from activities managed,
directed or controlled from within the City of Bethlehem, which the
Taxpayer can show are subject to a tax on gross receipts for the privilege
of doing business imposed by another local taxing jurisdiction, shall be
deemed to be fairly attributed to such other taxing jurisdiction and are
excluded from receipts taxed by Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer, an accounting firm whose sole office is in the
City of Bethlehem, sends junior level personnel to the City
of Pittsburgh for several months to complete an audit
supervised from Bethlehem. Receipts from the audit are
taxed by Pittsburgh under that city's business privilege tax.
The City of Bethlehem will allow the exclusion of such
receipts provided that proof of filing a tax return and
payment of the tax to Pittsburgh is demonstrated to the City
of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
4. Branch Offices located outside of Bethlehem. Receipts from services
managed, directed or controlled from a bona fide branch office located
outside the City of Bethlehem are not attributed to Bethlehem. The
following criteria will be considered (as relevant but not conclusive) by the
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau in determining the existence of a bona fide
branch office:
(a) The appearance of the taxpayer's name in telephone and/or building
directories.
(b) Stationary and calling cards showing the branch office address.
(c) Storage of inventory or display samples at branch office.
(d) The existence of a rental agreement (or lease) for space used at the
branch office.
(e) Employment of personnel at the branch office.
(f) The existence of a business license to operate at the branch office.
16
(g) Field Office. A field trailer may operate as a bona fide branch
office where the trailer bears the name of the taxpayer, the trailer is
staffed by the taxpayer's employees who report directly to the field
office site, the field office is maintained for not less than 60 days,
and a business license is maintained at the field office.
Example: Taxpayer, a contractor whose home office is in
Bethlehem, enters into a contract to build a stadium
complex in State College. Contractor establishes a
bona fide business office in State College for the
duration of the project, from which it manages,
directs and controls the entire project. Receipts
from the project are attributed to State College.
5. Apportionment of receipts where attribution is impossible. In
instances involving the performance of services both within and outside
the City of Bethlehem where it is impossible or impracticable to attribute
receipts to a specific source location, receipts may be apportioned using a
ratio equal to the number of hours of service performed within Bethlehem,
divided by the total number of hours of service performed both within and
outside the City of Bethlehem.
C. Unfair Attribution. If, in the discretion of the Tax Administrator of the City of
Bethlehem, the application of the provisions of this Section 205 results in an unfair or inequitable
attribution (or apportionment) of receipts, then the Tax Administrator may permit or require the
use of other methods of attribution to produce a fair and equitable attribution of gross receipts.
Section 206. Exclusions from Gross Receipts.
Exclusions from taxable gross receipts shall be allowed as follows:
A. State Preemption. Gross receipts from activity which has been judicially
determined to be preempted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are excluded
from gross receipts.
Limitation. Preemption does not relieve the taxpayer from all municipal
taxation. Gross receipts which are unrelated to the aspect of business operations
the taxation and regulation of which has been preempted by the Commonwealth
remain subject to the tax by the City of Bethlehem. Taxable activity will not lose
its character as such merely through association with preempted activity.
B. Duplicate State Tax. In the event the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania imposes a
tax on the same subject matter as is taxed under the City of Bethlehem Business
Privilege and Mercantile Tax, and such State tax is measured by the same gross
17
receipts sought to be taxed by the City of Bethlehem, the State tax shall prevail,
and the same subject shall not be also taxed by the City of Bethlehem.
C. Governmental Entities. Agencies of the government of the United States, the
various individual States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any political
subdivisions thereof are not subject to the tax.
D. Utilities. Receipts from utility services provided by any person or company
whose rates of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission are excluded from taxable receipts. Receipts from ancillary
activities not governed by the rate regulation are subject to the tax.
E. Reimbursement of expenses incurred as agent. Dollar-for-dollar
reimbursement of "out-of-pocket" expenses incurred by an agent for the benefit of
its principal are exempt from taxable receipts.
Example: Taxpayer, an attorney, advances the costs of a medical examination
of his client. The client reimburses the attorney the exact cost of
the examination. The reimbursement is excluded from the
attorney's taxable gross receipts.
Example: Taxpayer, an advertising agency, advances the costs of radio and
television advertisement placed by it for the benefit of its client.
The amount reimbursed by the client to the agency is excluded
from the agency's gross receipts.
F. Manufacturers, producers, and processors of by-products of manufacturing.
Receipts generated by engaging in the following activities are not subject to the
City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax: (i) manufacturing, (ii)
producing, and (iii) processing of by-products of manufacturing.
1. Ordinary and general meaning. Ordinary and general meaning shall be
given to the words "manufacturing", "producing" and "processing".
(a) Manufacturing. Manufacturing means the making of something
new and different, involving a substantial (not superficial) change
in material, form, composition, or character, resulting in different
goods and articles having a distinctive name, character and use.
Examples: Manufacturing has been held to include commercial
bookbinding, production of apparel, printing, oil
refining, and steel milling. Activities which have
been judicially determined not to be
manufacturing include: radio and television
broadcasting; steel annealing and galvanizing;
18
commercial illustration; work product which is
primarily intellectual or clerical in nature (e.g. work
of an attorney, architect, computer software
engineer, etc.); scrap metal bundling; dying and
finishing of cloth; purification through
pasteurization, filtration and testing for bacteria and
impurities; the preparation of potato salad, cole
slaw, bread filing, and like examples of “cooking”;
adding water to concentrated juice slurry or
powdered drink mix to make a finished product;
and printing designs and wording on ready made
clothing.
(b) Producers. The production, preparation or processing of natural
resources or farm products (by manufacturers, producers, and
farmers with respect to the goods, articles and products of their
own manufacture, production or growth) is not subject to the tax.
Example: Taxpayer owns an organically grown vegetable farm
and sells to a specialty grocery store. Taxpayer’s
receipts are excluded from the tax.
Example: Taxpayer buys coffee beans at wholesale, roasts
them in a commercial oven, and sells the processed
beans to local coffee shops. Since the beans
processed by the taxpayer are not grown by the
taxpayer, the exclusion does not apply. Receipts
from the sale of taxpayer’s coffee beans are taxable.
(c) Processing by-products of manufacturing. By-products of
manufacturing consist of secondary or additional products
produced in addition to a principal product. Processing of byproducts
is not taxable activity whether it is performed by the
original manufacturer or by others.
Example: Taxpayer takes molten slag, a waste product
discarded by a steel manufacturer, and subjects it to
a process which enables the iron component to be
separated and sold back to the steel manufacturer.
Taxpayer’s activity of processing the by-products of
manufacturing is not subject to the City of
Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax.
Example: Taxpayer is in the business of annealing and
galvanizing rolls of steel thereby making the steel
19
more malleable. Taxpayer’s activity is not
manufacturing since no “new” product is created;
nor is it “processing of a by-product of
manufacturing” because rolls of steel are not
secondary or additional products, but are themselves
the principal product of the original manufacturer.
Therefore, taxpayer’s receipts are taxable.
2. Application to goods and articles manufactured outside of the City of
Bethlehem. Receipts excludable under this subsection are excluded
whether the product is manufactured, produced or processed within or
outside the City of Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer manufactures computer equipment in New York.
It then leases, or sells, the equipment to customers within
the City of Bethlehem. Receipts from the sale or lease of
computer equipment by the manufacturer thereof are not
subject to the tax.
3. Goods and articles for own use. Receipts excludable under this
subsection are excluded whether the product is sold to others or used by
the taxpayer in its own operations.
Example: Taxpayer produces asphalt both for sale to others and for its
own use in fulfillment of paving contracts. Taxpayer’s sale
of the asphalt product to others is not subject to the
business privilege and mercantile tax. With respect to the
asphalt used by taxpayer to conduct its own business
operations, taxpayer may deduct the cost of producing the
asphalt from the receipts generated by such business
operations and only this deducted amount will be subject to
the tax.
4. Non-manufacturing activities not subject to exclusions. A
manufacturer’s receipts from activities other than manufacturing are not
excluded.
Example: Twenty percent of the gross receipts realized by taxpayer, a
manufacturer of small engine parts, is generated by
providing maintenance services for products not
manufactured by taxpayer. Receipts from such unrelated
products are not excluded.
5. Relation to Pennsylvania Capital Stock and Franchise Tax. Whether a
particular activity qualifies as “manufacturing” or “processing”, under the
20
provisions of the Pennsylvania Capital Stock and Franchise Tax is
relevant, but not decisive, in determining whether receipts are excludable
under the City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax.
G. Non-profit Organizations. Gross receipts generated by non-profit organizations
meeting the criteria for “institutions of purely public charity” as set forth in the
Institutions of Purely Public Charity Act, 1997, P.L. 508, No.55; 10 P.S. §371 et
seq., are not subject to the tax. However, gross receipts derived by non-profit
organizations from unrelated trade or business, regularly carried on are taxable.
1. Unrelated trade or business. An unrelated trade or business is one in
which the conduct of business transactions is not substantially related to
the exercise or performance of the exempt purposes of the organization
(aside from the need for income or the use made of the profits).
2. Regularly conducted. Activities will be deemed to be regularly
conducted if they manifest a frequency and continuity and are pursued in a
manner similar to comparable commercial activities of taxable
organizations.
3. Sales to nonprofit organizations. Receipts generated from the sales to
religious, charitable, educational, governmental, or other entities not
themselves subject to the tax, are not excluded from the tax.
H. Miscellaneous excluded receipts. Excluded from the Business Privilege and
Mercantile Tax are receipts which constitute:
1. Cash discounts to purchasers for prompt payment of bills.
2. Freight delivery or transportation charges paid by the seller for the
purchaser.
3. Sales of trade-ins, up to the amount given the prior owner as a trade-in
allowance.
4. Refunds, credits or allowances given customers for defective goods
returned.
5. Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the City of Bethlehem.
6. Exchanges between sellers of identical goods, but not to the extent of any
additional cash payment accompanying the exchange.
21
7. Sales to other sellers in the same line, at the same price for which the seller
acquired the merchandise.
8. Transfers between one department, branch or division of a business entity
and another, recorded as interdepartmental transfers.
9. Receipts from providing direct-to-home satellite service.
10. Commissions paid by on broker to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such other
broker.
11. Receipts from sales made by a purchasing cooperative acting as the joint
agent of its member principals for purchasing in bulk and distributing at
cost products sold by its members.
Section 207. Interstate Commerce
General. Gross receipts which are fairly attributed to the City of Bethlehem (see Section
205), earned by any person doing business within the City of Bethlehem and having substantial
nexus to the City of Bethlehem, are included in taxable gross receipts.
A. Substantial nexus with Bethlehem. Receipts earned by persons having no
physical presence or other substantial nexus to the City of Bethlehem are not subject to the tax.
Example: A large mail order company based in Delaware sells office supplies
via catalog sales and common carrier to customers located in
Bethlehem. The company has no sales offices, salespersons or
other physical presence in the City of Bethlehem (except its
catalogs). The company’s gross receipts are not subject to the tax.
B. Exclusion of gross receipts subject to tax outside of the Commonwealth.
Gross receipts from activities which are demonstrated by the taxpayer to be subject to a tax on
gross receipts for the privilege of doing business imposed by another taxing jurisdiction outside
the Commonwealth shall be deemed to be fairly attributed to other such taxing jurisdiction and
excluded from receipts taxable by the City of Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer is a wholesale distributor of musical instruments whose
sole headquarters and only sales offices are located in the City of
Bethlehem. Shipments are made from Bethlehem to mail order
customers and independent representatives throughout the United
States. Although taxpayer has physical presence (substantial
nexus) within the City of Bethlehem, any receipts shown by the
taxpayer to be subject to a gross receipts tax on the privilege of
doing business imposed by a jurisdiction outside of the
22
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania will be attributed to that
jurisdiction and excluded from the gross receipts taxable in
Bethlehem.
Example: Taxpayer provides consulting services in the area of structural
engineering throughout the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the City of Bethlehem. All activities are
managed, directed or controlled from Taxpayer’s home office
located within the City of Bethlehem. Any receipts shown by the
taxpayer to be subject to a gross receipts tax on the privilege of
doing business imposed by a jurisdiction outside of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania will be attributed to that
jurisdiction and excluded from the gross receipts taxable in
Bethlehem.
Section 208. Inclusions in Gross Receipts
A. Affiliated Companies. Receipts from sales to affiliated business entities are
included in taxable Gross Receipts.
Example: Taxpayer is a wholly owned subsidiary of ABC Company.
Taxpayer performs all of ABC's accounting and administrative
functions. Taxpayer bills ABC a "management fee" equal to its
costs and expenses so that, by design, no profit is generated by
Taxpayer. ABC purports to "reimburse" Taxpayer for all its
expenses. So long as Taxpayer remains a separate legal entity, the
intercompany management fee it receives constitutes taxable Gross
Receipts.
B. Conditional and Installment Sales.
1. A person making conditional sales or other installment sales of property is
required to report the total selling price of such sales as gross receipts for
the tax year in which the contracts of sale are entered into.
2. Where tangible personal property sold under a conditional or other
installment sales contract is repossessed by the seller, and the repossessed
property is subsequently sold, the receipts from such sales are to be
included in the measure of the tax only to the extent that the amount of
sale exceeds the balance due on the original sale at the time of
repossession. No deduction from Gross Receipts may be taken for any
unpaid balance due at the time of the repossession.
C. Consignment Transactions. Gross Receipts received by a consignor from
consignment transactions are subject to the tax.
23
Example: Taxpayer supplies merchandise to a retail jewelry store for sale on
consignment. Taxpayer must include the total Gross Receipts
realized from the sale of merchandise. Note: the commission paid
to the jewelry store (consignor's agent) is a taxable receipt to the
jewelry store.
D. Leased Departments. Gross receipts received from the lease of a department are
includable.
Example: Taxpayer receives fees for the use of its computer department
(personnel and equipment), which it makes available to other
companies. Such fees are includable in Gross Receipts.
E. Persons Erecting Buildings or Altering, Repairing or Improving Property.
Persons in the business of erecting buildings, or altering, repairing or improving real property,
under contract (i.e., contractors and subcontractors), shall include in their Gross Receipts all
sums paid to them under such contract, without deduction for sums paid to suppliers and/or
subcontractors.
Example: Taxpayer, a general contractor, builds and sells a new home for
$200,000.00. Payments to subcontractors equal $50,000.00.
Taxpayer may not deduct the payments to subcontractors, but must
include the entire $200,000.00 as taxable Gross Receipts.
F. General Agencies, Brokers, and Agents.
1. General Agencies and Brokerage Firms. All general agencies and
brokerage firms shall include in Gross Receipts all revenues received -
without deduction for commissions or fees paid to, or withheld by, agents
of the general agency or brokerage form.
Example: Taxpayer, a broker/dealer registered with the National
Association of Securities Dealers, earns commissions on
sales of securities made through the efforts of affiliated
registered representatives (stock brokers). Taxpayer may
not deduct from its Gross Receipts the commissions paid to
registered representatives. Similarly, business brokers, real
estate brokers, and insurance general agencies may not
deduct commissions paid to selling agents.
2. Agent's commissions. Independent agents shall include in Gross Receipts
all fees, commissions, or other remuneration received for services
performed as an agent.
24
Example: Taxpayer is a real estate agent who sells a home for
$100,000.00 on which a real estate commission is
generated in the amount of $7,000.00. After the
commission is split between the real estate brokerage firms
representing the buyer and seller, taxpayer is paid a
commission from her broker of $1,750.00. Taxpayer's
taxable Gross Receipts are $1,750.00.
Example: Taxpayer sells lottery tickets from his convenience store.
Gross commission receipts paid to taxpayer as a lottery
agent are taxable.
Example: Taxpayer works as a registered representative ("stock
broker") for a NASD broker/dealer. Gross commission
receipts received by taxpayer are taxable Gross Receipts.
3. Agent as employees. Income earned as an employee is not subject to the
tax. Any agent asserting status as an employee must provide a copy of
Federal Form W2 and/or such other documentation as the City of
Bethlehem Tax Bureau may reasonably require to show employment.
Receipts earned by independent agents are subject to the tax even though
such persons may qualify as "statutory employees" for purposes of federal
income taxation.
ARTICLE III
DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX
Section 300. Tax Returns.
Tax returns shall be made using forms approved by the City of Bethlehem Tax
Administrator and may inquire as to business name, type of activity, business receipts, and any
other information reasonably necessary to accurately determine taxpayer identity and liability.
Tax returns must be filed whether or not tax is due. The failure to receive a tax return, or form,
by mail from the City of Bethlehem does not relieve the taxpayer of the responsibility to timely
file a tax return.
Section 301. Due Dates for Filing Returns.
A. Quarterly Estimated Returns. Taxpayers whose annual gross receipts can
reasonably be expected to exceed two million dollars ($ 2,000,000.00), are encouraged to file
quarterly declarations of estimated tax and pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated annual
tax with each filing. Quarterly returns are due on or before April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31 of the Succeeding Year. Any overpayment of tax may either be credited to the next
year's first quarterly installment or refunded to the taxpayer.
25
B. Annual Returns. Annual returns are due the first Monday in May of the
Succeeding Year.
C. Returns of Temporary, Seasonal or Itinerant Business. Every person or
business engaged in business activity who does not intend to continue such activity within the
City of Bethlehem for a full year or which business activity by its very nature is not permanent
shall make and file with the Tax Administrator a tax return, as set forth in Section 300, and pay
the tax due thereon within 45 days of the close of the temporary, seasonal or itinerant business
activity. For purposes of these regulations vendors at fairs, festivals, and craft shows/fairs shall
be considered to be temporary, seasonal or itinerant businesses.
D. Proof of Mailing. The postmark of the United States Postal Service shall
constitute proof of mailing. The postmarked date shall constitute the filing date of the tax return.
Section 302. Extension of Time for Filing Returns.
A. The Tax Administrator, upon proper cause shown, may grant an extension of not
more than sixty (60) days for the filing of any tax return. Applications for extensions shall be
made on or before the last day for payment of the tax (the first Monday of May), in such form as
the Tax Administrator prescribes.
B. If the Taxpayer files a request for extension of time to file returns with the Internal
Revenue Service and is granted such extension by the Internal Revenue Service, the extension
will not be honored by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau unless a copy of the Taxpayer's request
is filed with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau on or before the last day for payment of the tax
(the first Monday of May).
C. In order for an extension to be granted the Taxpayer must file an Extension
Request Form and pay 100% of the tax estimated to be due on or before the due date. The
granting of any extension will not relieve the Taxpayer from the obligation to pay interest and
penalty upon any tax that remains outstanding after the due date (the first Monday of May).
Extensions are granted for filing of the tax return only. There are no extensions for payment of
the tax.
Section 303. Filing to be Complete.
Returns shall be completed in full and certified as true and correct by the taxpayer,
supported by all additional forms or schedules required (including Federal Income Tax Schedule
C if Taxpayer is a sole proprietor; Federal Form 1065 if Taxpayer is a partnership; Federal Form
1120/1120S if Taxpayer is a corporation; Federal Form 990 if Taxpayer is a non-profit
organization). In cases where the taxable Gross Receipts, as calculated by the taxpayer, differ
from Gross Receipts reported on the Federal Tax Form a reconciliation that fully explains the
difference must accompany the tax return.
26
Completed tax returns must be accompanied by payment of tax and delivered to the City
of Bethlehem Tax Bureau on or before first Monday of May of the succeeding year.
Section 304. Business Termination.
Any taxpayer going out of business or ceasing to do business shall, within thirty (30) days
from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the actual gross volume of business
generated during the tax year in which said taxpayer ceased doing business and pay the tax due
thereon at the time of filing the tax return. In the event that any tax has been paid upon estimated
Gross Receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund of any excess tax paid in the tax year for
which business was terminated.
ARTICLE IV
ACCOUNTING, BOOKS, AND RECORDS
Section 400. Accounting Methods and Periods.
Cash or Accrual Basis. The tax return may be filed on a cash basis or on an accrual
basis, but the return must be prepared in accordance with the method of accounting regularly
employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer.
Section 401. Records to be kept.
Every taxpayer is required to keep such accounts and records as will enable the filing of
true and accurate declarations and returns. Such accounts and records shall be sufficiently
complete to enable the Tax Administrator or his designees to verify the accuracy of declarations
and/or returns filed. Accounts and records are to be preserved for NOT LESS THAN SIX (6)
YEARS.
ARTICLE V
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 500. Collection and Receipt of Tax.
The Treasurer, with the assistance of the Tax Administrator, is authorized to collect and
receive taxes, fines, penalties and interest on behalf of the City of Bethlehem. Unless otherwise
specified by the taxpayer, all voluntary payments shall be applied against amounts owed as
follows: tax, penalties, and other fees, interest or charges.
Section 501. Records of Receipts.
27
The Tax Administrator is authorized and required to keep a record showing the amount
received by the City of Bethlehem from each taxpayer and the date of such collection and receipt.
Section 502. Disclosure Statement of Taxpayer’s Rights and Obligations.
The Tax Bureau shall notify any taxpayer contacted of their rights regarding an
assessment, audit, determination, review, refund, appeal or collection of tax by supplying a copy
of the City of Bethlehem Disclosure Statement with any correspondence regarding an
assessment, audit, determination, review, refund or collection of tax.
The Disclosure Statement, attached hereto as Addendum “B”, is available to taxpayers
upon request at no charge by calling 610-865-7022 between the hours of 8:00am and 4:30pm,
weekdays.
Section 503. Verification of Records, Audits, Response Periods and Prior Year Returns.
The Tax Administrator, or agents of the Tax Administrator designated in writing, are
authorized to examine the books, papers, and records of any person or business entity whom the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has engaged in taxable business activity within the City of
Bethlehem in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return has been filed, to
arrive at a reasonable assessment of tax, interest, penalty, and fine due.
A. Cost of audits. In the event the City of Bethlehem retains the services of tax
auditing professionals to verify the accuracy of returns filed or, if no return has been filed, to
arrive at a reasonable assessment of tax, interest, penalty, and fine due, any cost to the City of
Bethlehem to conduct such an audit shall be assessed against the Taxpayer if any amount is
found to be due and owing to the City of Bethlehem.
B. Issuance of subpoenas to compel attendance and production of records. The
Tax Administrator, through the assistance of the City of Bethlehem Law Bureau, shall have the
power and is authorized to (1) issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of persons deemed by
the Tax Administrator to be necessary to examine as witnesses, and (2) compel the production of
books, records, and papers relating to any person or business entity under examination.
C. Minimum time periods for taxpayer response. Taxpayers shall have at least
thirty (30) calendar days from the mailing date to respond with requests for information by the
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. The Tax Administrator shall notify any taxpayer from whom the
information is initially requested of the procedures to obtain an extension of time in which to
respond, and shall grant reasonable extensions of time in which to respond upon application for
good cause. No action shall be taken against a taxpayer for the tax year in question until the
expiration of the response period, including extensions.
28
D. Inquiry as to prior year returns. Except as provided below, an initial inquiry
regarding a taxpayer’s compliance with the Tax may include taxes required to be paid or tax
returns required to be filed no more than three (3) years prior to the mailing date of the notice of
such inquiry. If, after the initial request, the Tax Administrator (or designee) determines that the
taxpayer failed to file a tax return, underreported income or failed to pay a tax for one or more of
the tax periods covered by the initial request, subsequent requests for tax returns or supporting
information may be made. This subsection shall not apply if the Tax Administrator has sufficient
evidence to support his or her belief that the taxpayer has failed to file a required return or pay an
eligible tax which was due more than three (3) years prior to the date of the initial notice.
Section 504. Procedures for the Conduct of Taxpayer Audit.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of an audit or examination
of a taxpayer’s books and records:
A. Notice of Audit. The taxpayer shall be notified in writing of a scheduled audit at
least thirty (30) days in advance. The notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The reason for the audit;
2. The tax years subject to audit;
3. The date, place and time for the audit to be conducted;
4. A description of the information, books and records to be produced;
5. A copy of the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau Disclosure Statement.
B. Rescheduling audit. The taxpayer may request that the audit be rescheduled,
provided that it is rescheduled within a reasonable time not to exceed sixty (60) days.
C. Representation at audit. The taxpayer may have a representative present during
the audit.
D. Audit results. In the event a Notice of Assessment (Section 505.A.1) is issued as
a result of an audit, the Taxpayer shall be provided with a copy of the auditor’s report of findings
and conclusions, including the calculation of any tax, interest and/or penalty found to be due.
Section 505. Examination of Return, Notice of Assessment.
A. Examination of Return. The Tax Administrator shall examine every return as
soon after filing as is practical to determine the correct amount of tax.
1. Notice of Assessment for underpayment. If the Tax Administrator finds
that the amount of tax shown on a return is less than the correct amount,
29
the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the amount of
the underpayment (deficiency) assessed. A Notice of Assessment shall be
in writing and shall include:
(a) The tax period or periods for which the underpayment is asserted.
(b) The amount of the underpayment detailed by tax period.
(c) The legal basis upon which the City has relied to determine that an
underpayment exists.
(d) An itemization of the revisions made by the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau to a return or report filed by the taxpayer that results in the
determination that an underpayment exists.
2. Notice of Overpayment. If the Tax Administrator finds that the tax that
has been paid by the taxpayer is more than the correct amount, the Tax
Administrator shall credit the overpayment against any taxes owed by the
taxpayer to the City of Bethlehem and shall refund the difference to the
taxpayer. Written notice of such action by the Tax Administrator shall be
provided to the taxpayer.
B. No Return Filed. If the taxpayer fails to file any return of tax required to be
filed, the Tax Administrator may estimate from any available information the taxpayer’s gross
receipts and the tax thereon and notify the taxpayer in writing of the amount assessed against the
taxpayer as a deficiency.
Section 506. Petition for Reassessment.
Within ninety (90) days of the date of the Notice of Assessment, the taxpayer may file a
Petition of Reassessment setting forth the grounds upon which reassessment is requested.
Petitions for Reassessment shall be filed with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau for submission
to the City of Bethlehem Tax Appeal Hearing Officer for hearing and determination (see Section
514).
Section 507. Refund of Overpayments, Interest on Overpayments.
A. Taxpayer Request for Refund of Overpayments. Any taxpayer who has made
an overpayment of tax to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau may file a written request with the
Tax Administrator for a refund or credit. A request for a refund shall be made within three (3)
years of the due date for filing the tax return, or one year after actual payment of the tax,
whichever is later. If no return or report is required, the request shall be made within three (3)
years after the due date for payment of the tax or within one year after actual payment of the tax,
whichever is later.
30
1. Overpayment on tax return. For purposes of this section, a tax return
filed by the taxpayer with the City of Bethlehem showing an overpayment
of tax shall be deemed to be a written request for a cash refund unless
otherwise indicated on the tax return.
2. Refund request not a petition for appeal. A request for refund under
this section shall not be considered a petition for appeal to the Tax Appeal
Hearing Officer and shall not preclude the taxpayer from submitting a
petition for appeal (see Section 514).
3. Refund after Notice of Assessment. For amounts paid as a result of a
notice asserting or informing a taxpayer of an underpayment, a written
request for refund shall be filed with the City within one year of the date of
payment.
B. Interest on overpayments. All overpayments of tax due to the City of
Bethlehem shall bear simple interest from the date of overpayment until the date of resolution.
1. Rate of interest. Interest on overpayments shall be allowed and paid at
the same rate as the Commonwealth is required to pay pursuant to Section
806.1 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as the Fiscal
Code.
2. 75 Days before interest accrues. No interest shall be allowed if an
overpayment is refunded (or applied against any other tax, interest, or
penalty due the City of Bethlehem) within seventy-five (75) days after the
last prescribed date for filing the tax return or report of liability or within
75 days after the date the tax return or report of liability due is filed,
whichever is later.
3. No interest on Overpayments of Interest and Penalty. Overpayments of
interest and penalty shall not bear interest.
C. Acceptance of refund check. The taxpayer’s acceptance of the City’s refund
check shall not prejudice any right of the taxpayer to claim any additional overpayment and
interest thereon. Tender of a refund check by the City shall be deemed to be acceptance of the
check by the taxpayer.
Section 508. Abatement of Certain Interest and Penalty.
A. Errors and Delays. In the case of any underpayment, the Tax Administrator may
abate all or any part of interest and penalty for any period for the following:
1. Any underpayment of tax finally determined to be attributable in whole or
in part to any error or delay by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau in the
31
performance of a ministerial act; provided, however, that no significant
aspect of the error or delay is caused by the taxpayer after the City has
contacted the taxpayer in writing with respect to the underpayment of tax
finally determined to be due or payable.
2. Any payment of tax to the extent that any error or delay in the payment is
attributable to an officer, employee or agent of the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau being erroneous or dilatory in the performance of a ministerial act.
The Tax Administrator shall determine what constitutes timely
performance of ministerial acts.
B. Erroneous written advice by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. The City
shall abate any portion of any penalty or interest attributable to erroneous advice furnished to the
taxpayer in writing by an officer, employee or agent of the City of Bethlehem, acting in their
official capacity if:
1. The written advice was reasonably relied upon by the taxpayer and was in
response to a specific written request of the taxpayer; and
2. The portion of the additional tax, penalty an interest did not result from the
failure of the taxpayer to provide adequate or accurate information.
Section 509. Installment Agreements.
The Tax Bureau may enter into written agreements with any taxpayer under which the
taxpayer is allowed to satisfy liability for any eligible tax in installment payments if the Tax
Bureau determines that the agreement will facilitate collection. The following terms and
conditions shall apply to installment plans:
A. The taxpayer must file an annual tax return for the current tax year and any
delinquent tax years to be covered under the installment plan. These annual tax
returns must include a copy of the taxpayer’s Federal Tax Return and all
supporting documentation as verification that all taxable income has been
reported. In cases where a Federal Tax Return cannot be produced, the taxpayer
must complete a Federal Form 4506 “Request for Copies of Tax Return” naming
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau as recipient of the requested copy. The costs to
procure the Federal Tax Return and related information are the sole responsibility
of the taxpayer.
B. Installment plans will not be approved for tax amounts less than $100.00.
C. Installment Plans will not be approved for more than 4 months. Payment amounts
will be calculated by dividing the total tax liability by 4 and adding the applicable
penalty, interest, fines, and costs to each payment.
32
D. Taxpayers will be required to verify that their current year’s tax liability has been
satisfied to date either by proof of employer withholding or by direct payment
from the taxpayer.
E. Installment Plans will be granted only 1 time to any taxpayer.
F. Installment Plans will be revoked and immediate civil action or garnishment of
wages for collection of the tax due will be initiated if any of the aforementioned
terms and conditions are not met.
G. The Tax Bureau may terminate any prior agreement if:
(1) The information the taxpayer provided to the Tax Bureau prior to the date
of the agreement was inaccurate or incomplete, or
(2) If the Tax Bureau believes that collection of any eligible tax under the
Installment Plan is in jeopardy.
H. If the Tax Bureau finds that the financial condition of the taxpayer has
significantly changed, the Tax Bureau may alter, modify or terminate the
agreement, but only if:
(1) Notice of the Tax Bureau’s finding is provided to the taxpayer no later
than 30 days prior to the date of such action; and
(2) The notice contains the reasons why the Tax Bureau believes a change has
occurred.
I. The Tax Bureau may alter, modify or terminate an Installment Plan agreement if
the taxpayer fails to do any of the following:
(1) Pay any installment at the time the installment is due.
(2) Pay any other tax liability at the time the liability is due.
(3) Provide a financial condition update as requested by the Tax Bureau.
J. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent a taxpayer from pre-paying in whole or in
part any eligible tax under any installment agreement with the Tax Bureau.
Section 510. Payment under Protest.
The Tax Administrator is authorized to accept “payment under protest” of the amount of
tax in order to avoid liability for additional penalty, interest and fines. Payments made under
protest will be forwarded to the City of Bethlehem Law Bureau for deposit to escrow account.
33
Section 511. Violations and Penalties.
Failure to comply with the provisions of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinance,
Article 341 (Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Ordinance) may result in both civil and
criminal sanctions, including:
A. Administrative Penalty and Interest. If a person fails to pay the tax when due, a
penalty of ten percent (10 %) of the tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto plus
additional penalty of one percent (1%) per month for each month the tax, or part
of the tax, remains unpaid.
B. Revocation of License. The Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License of
any person or business entity who fails to file any declaration of estimated tax or
any tax return required under Article 341 of the Codified Ordinances of the City
of Bethlehem, or who files a false declaration of estimated tax or a false tax
return, may, after notice and hearing, be revoked.
C. Issuance of Non-Traffic Citation. The Tax Administrator may file a Non-
Traffic Citation against any taxpayer who violates any provision of Article 341 of
the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. Each twenty-four (24) hour
period during which such violation continues shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense punishable as outlined in the Business Privilege and Mercantile
Tax Ordinance. Such violations include, but are not limited to:
1. Failure to obtain a Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License.
2. Failure to make and file a required report or return.
3. Failure to remit any tax due.
4. Knowingly making false or fraudulent report or return.
Section 512. Confidential Nature of Tax Information.
Any information gained by the Tax Bureau as a result of any audit, return, report,
investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential tax information. It shall be unlawful,
except for official purposes or as provided by law, for the Tax Bureau to:
(1) Divulge or make known in any manner confidential information gained in any
return investigation, hearing or verification to any person.
(2) Permit confidential tax information or any book containing any abstract or
particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person.
(3) Print, publish or make known in any manner any confidential tax information.
34
Section 513. Dishonored Checks.
A $20.00 charge will be levied each time a check is returned from the bank unpaid.
Checks issued in violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code will be referred to appropriate
authorities for possible criminal prosecution.
Section 514. Administrative Appeals.
A. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau encourages any taxpayer or employer desiring
a specific ruling concerning the applicable Ordinances, Resolutions or these Rules and
Regulations to submit all pertinent facts in writing to the Tax Administrator who shall issue a
written ruling.
B. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau has established an administrative process to
receive and make determinations on petitions from taxpayers relating to the assessment,
determination and refund of eligible taxes as required by ACT 50 of 1998. The Hearing Officer
shall rule on all petitions submitted based on the regulations set forth governing the practice and
procedures of the Administrative Appeal Process.
C. Any taxpayer who is aggrieved by an assessment or determination of delinquency
of any of the eligible taxes has 90 days from the date of the assessment or determination notice to
file a petition for reassessment or re-determination with the Hearing Officer.
D. The petition shall be double-spaced and typed or legibly handwritten on plain
paper. The petition should contain a brief summary of the action and the “legal basis” that
precipitated the filing for reassessment or re-determination, along with any pertinent information
(copies of tax returns, supporting information, tax schedules, expense records, etc.).
E. The petition shall be mailed via First Class Mail, or delivered in person to the
Hearing Officer c/o the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Hand delivered petitions will be
receipted by the Tax Bureau and will be considered filed as of the date receipted. Petitions
received by mail will be considered filed as of the date of the United States Postal Service
postmark stamped on the envelope.
F. Petitions will be photocopied by the Tax Bureau and immediately forwarded to
the Hearing Officer. Within 10 days of the petition filing date, the Tax Bureau will submit its
position and all relevant facts pertaining to the action that precipitated the petition to the Hearing
Officer.
G. Within 60 days of the petition’s filing date a “Final Decision” must be issued by
the Hearing Officer. Failure to issue a “Final Decision” within 60 days will result in the petition
being deemed approved.
Section 515. Judicial Appeal.
35
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Hearing Officer, who has a direct interest in
the decision shall have the right to appeal to the court vested with the jurisdiction of local tax
appeals by or pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S. § 5571(b).
36
Section 516. Construction.
If any sentence, clause, or section or part of these regulations is, for any reason, found to
be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, or sections or parts of these
regulations. These regulations would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
END.
37
ADDENDUM “A”
ARTICLE 341
Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax Ordinance
341.01 Definitions.
341.02 Rate, basis and computation of tax.
341.03 Declaration and installment payment of estimated tax.
341.04 Returns.
341.05 Payment of tax and penalties for late payment.
341.06 License.
341.07 Continuing offense.
341.08 Duties of the Tax Administrator and Treasurer.
341.09 Confidential nature of returns, etc.
341.10 Suits on collection and penalty.
341.11 Savings and severability clauses.
341.12 Duties of other City departments.
341.99 Penalty.
CROSS REFERENCES
Power to tax - See Act 511 of 12/31/65 (53 P.S. §6901-6924) Occupation Privilege Tax - See
BUS. REG. Art. 339
341.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(a) "Business" means the carrying on or exercising of any trade, profession, or other
commercial activity. Employment for a salary or wage is not “business”.
(b) "City" means the City of Bethlehem.
(c) "License year" means the year commencing May 1 and ending April 30.
(d) "Person" means a natural person, individual, partnership, association, corporation,
limited partnership, limited liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary, corporate officer, or
any other entity subject to or claiming exemption from the tax or under a duty to perform an act
for itself or for another under or pursuant to the City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and
Mercantile Tax.
(e) "Taxpayer" means a person, partnership, association, or any other entity, required
hereunder to file a return of gross receipts, or to pay a tax thereon.
38
(f) "Tax year" means the calendar year.
(g) "Treasurer" means the Treasurer of the City.
341.02 RATE, BASIS AND COMPUTATION OF TAX.
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1971 and annually thereafter a tax for general
revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business as herein defined in the City, as follows:
(a) Rate and Basis of Tax.
The rate of tax on every dollar of the whole or gross volume of business
transacted within the territorial limits of the City shall be calculated as follows:
(1) On receipts attributable to wholesale sales of merchandise the rate shall be
one mill or one dollar ($1.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000) of gross
volume of business.
(2) On receipts attributable to all other business the rate shall be one and onehalf
mills or one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per one thousand dollars
($1,000) of gross volume of business.
(3) On receipts attributable to retail sales of merchandise the rate shall be one
and one-half mills or one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per one thousand
dollars ($1,000) of gross volume of business.
(b) Computation of Volume of Business.
(1) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced business prior to the beginning of the tax year shall compute
gross volume of business transacted during the immediately preceding tax
year.
(2) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced or who commences business subsequent to the beginning of
the tax year, shall compute gross volume of business upon the actual gross
volume of business transacted during that tax year.
(3) Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business’ temporary, seasonal or itinerant by nature, shall
compute his estimated gross amount of business to be transacted by him
for the period the person engages in such temporary, seasonal or itinerant
business within the City by a method to be determined by the Tax
Administrator.
39
(4) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept “payment in protest”
of the amount of business privilege tax claimed to be due by the Tax
Bureau in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or the amount
of the City’s claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by the
Tax Appeal Hearing Officer or a court of competent jurisdiction that the
City has been overpaid, the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded
to the taxpayer. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to cases
in which the facts are similar to those in a case litigated in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(c) Persons, Business and Receipt Exempted.
(1) Persons and Businesses.
Persons employed for a wage or salary, nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
agencies of the government of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and the business of any political subdivision, or of any
authority created or organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly
are exempt from the provisions of this article.
(2) Privileges, Transactions, etc.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege, transaction,
subject, or occupation which is subject to a State tax of license fee, and
which tax or license fee has been held by the Courts of Pennsylvania to be
the basis for exemption from the imposition of a business privilege or
mercantile tax by a municipality.
(3) Utilities.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross receipts from
utility service of any person or company whose rates of service are fixed
and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or on any
public utility service rendered by any such person or company or on any
privilege or transaction involving the rendering of any such public utility
service.
(4) State Tax on Tangible Property.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the privilege of employing
such tangible property as is subject to a State tax except on sales of
admission to places of amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or
possession of property.
40
(5) Production and Manufacture.
No such tax shall be assessed and collected on goods, articles and
products, or on byproducts of manufacture, or on minerals, timber, natural
resources and farm products, manufactured, produced or grown in the City
or on the preparation or processing thereof for use or market, or on any
privilege, act or transaction related to the business of manufacturing, the
production, preparation or processing of minerals, timber and natural
resources or farm products, by manufacturers, by producers and by farmers
with respect to the goods, articles and products of their own manufacture,
production or growth, or any privilege, act or transaction relating to the
business of processing byproducts of manufacturer, or on the
transportation, loading, unloading or dumping or storage of such goods,
articles, products or byproducts.
(d) Determination of Gross or Whole Volume of Business. The gross or whole
volume of business upon which the tax hereunder is computed shall include the gross
consideration credited or received for or on account of sales made and/or services rendered,
subject only to the following allowable deductions and exemptions:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail dealers
derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise taken by any
dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and
merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price exceeds the trade-in
allowance.
(2) Refunds, credits or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser on
account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or on account of
goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of a
purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared with such other
broker.
(4) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for Federal
income taxation purposes.
(5) Taxes collected as agent for the United States, the Commonwealth or the
City.
(e) Partial Exemptions. Where the gross or whole volume of business in its entirety
cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by this article by reason of the provisions of the
Constitution of the United States, or any other provision of law, the Tax Administrator under the
direction of the Business Administrator shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the gross or whole volume of business which is
41
properly attributable and allowable to doing business in the City shall be taxed hereunder.
(f) Rate When Two Taxing Bodies Impose Same Tax. If any person is liable for the
same tax on the same subject imposed under Pamphlet Law 1257 and its amendments (Act 511
of 12/31/65 (53 P.S. §6901-6924)), to the City and one or more political subdivisions of the
State, then and in that event the tax shall be apportioned by such percentage as may be agreed
upon by such political subdivisions, but, in no event, shall the combined taxes of both
subdivisions exceed a maximum rate of tax as fixed by the Enabling Act permitting the
imposition of such taxes.
(g) Records. The exempt or partially exempt taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing
enumerated exclusions and deductions, shall keep books and records of business so as to show
clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales and services as are excluded from the
tax and the amounts of such sales and services, which may be deducted from the gross volume of
business as hereinbefore, provided.
341.03 DECLARATION AND INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED TAX.
(a) Every person subject to the provisions of this article, whose annual gross receipts
can be reasonably expected to exceed two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), is encouraged to file
quarterly declarations of estimated tax and pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated annual
tax with each filing.
(b) Every person filing a declaration shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
The fact that an individual’s name is signed on the return shall be prima facie evidence that the
individual is authorized to sign the return on behalf of the taxpayer.
(c) Every person filing a declaration of estimated tax shall file such declaration and
make payment of the estimated tax in quarterly installments of twenty-five percent (25%) of the
total estimated tax to be due for the year. Payments of the quarterly estimated installments are
due on April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31 of the succeeding year.
(d) An overpayment of the quarterly estimated installments may be credited to the
next year’s first quarterly installment or refunded directly to the taxpayer.
341.04 RETURNS.
(a) Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Administrator.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof by affidavit.
(b) The fact that an individual’s name is signed on the return shall be prima facie
evidence that such individual is authorized to sign the return on behalf of the taxpayer.
(c) Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commenced his
business subsequent to the beginning of any tax year shall on or before the first Monday of May
42
of the next year, file with the Tax Administrator a return setting forth his name, his business,
business address and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross
amount of business transacted by him during the preceding tax year and the amount of the tax
due.
(d) Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article who
engages in a business activity that is temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature or who does
not intend to continue such activity within the City of Bethlehem for a full year, shall within
forty-five (45) days of the close of the temporary, seasonal or itinerant business activity, file a
return with the Tax Administrator setting forth his name, his business name, his business address
and such information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross amount of business
transacted. At the time of filing the tax return the taxpayer shall make payment of the tax due or
make claim for credit or refund of any overpayment. For purposes of this paragraph, vendors at
fairs, festivals, and craft shows/fairs shall be considered temporary, seasonal or itinerant
businesses required to file such returns within forty-five (45) days of the close of the fair, festival
or craft show/fair.
(e) Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall, within thirty (30) days
from the date of ceasing to do business, file a return showing the actual gross volume of business
conducted and done by such person during that tax year in which the person ceased doing
business, and pay the tax due as computed thereon at the rate herein provided for at the time of
filing the return. If such tax has been previously paid based upon estimated gross receipts, the
taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund of any excess tax paid for the tax year in which business
was terminated.
(f) Every person required to file a return by this article shall attach to such return a
copy of the Internal Revenue Service schedule or form that said person uses to report the
business activity to the Internal Revenue Service.
341.05 PAYMENT OF TAX AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT.
(a) The Business Privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due and payable
on the first Monday of May of the year following the tax year.
(b) The Treasurer shall, upon payment to him of the Business Privilege Tax, give the
person paying the same a receipt therefore.
(c) The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept “payment in protest” of the
amount of business privilege tax claimed to be due by the Tax Bureau in any case where the
taxpayer disputes the validity or the amount of the City’s claim for tax. Such payment must be
clearly marked as a “payment in protest” and must include the taxpayer’s name, address,
identification number, and tax period for which the payment is being made.
(d) If there is an underpayment of the tax, late payment of the tax, or a failure to pay
the tax due on or before the due date for filing a return and paying the tax, as set forth above, a
43
penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added thereto, plus an additional penalty of one percent
(1%) per month or fractional part of a month until the tax is paid.
341.06 LICENSE.
(a) Any person desiring to conduct, or to continue to conduct any business, as herein
defined, within the City shall file, prior to the commencement of such conduct, with the Tax
Administrator an application for a business privilege license and shall pay a fee of thirteen
dollars ($13.00) for the initial license and thirteen dollars ($13.00) for each renewal thereof.
(b) The license issued shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business for
which the license is issued, and shall remain in effect for the license year or fraction of year for
which the license was issued.
(c) In cases where business is conducted in more than one place, a separate license
shall be issued for each place of business.
(d) Whenever any licensee under this article shall change the address of the business
for which such license is issued, the licensee shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator of
such change of address and the new address or location where the business will be conducted.
(e) Whenever the ownership of any such business shall be changed, the new owner,
upon taking possession thereof, shall notify the Tax Administrator of such fact within ten (10)
days after such change becomes effective.
(f) No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred or
assigned to any other person, firm or corporation.
(g) Any taxpayer who is in default of payment of tax due hereunder shall be refused a
license until such tax is paid in full.
(h) A City business which obtains a business privilege and mercantile tax license will
not be required to obtain a separate license to participate in any festival, fair, carnival, craft fair
or any other temporary place of business (referred to herein as a “Temporary Event”) so long as
the business conducted at such Temporary Event is the same as the business conducted at the
license holder’s regular place of business in Bethlehem.
(i) It shall be the duty and requirement of the sponsoring individual, group,
association or corporation (including non-profit organizations) of a Temporary Event to provide
to all of its vendors a City of Bethlehem Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax License
application and further, to provide the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau with the following
information at least ninety (90) days prior to any such festival, fair, carnival, craft fair or any
other temporary place of business:
1) the Temporary Event's scheduled dates and times;
44
2) listing of all food, craft, and retail vendors;
3) schedule of all vendor fees imposed by the sponsoring individual, group,
association, corporation or non-profit organization, including but not
limited to, registration fees, table fees, booth fees, utility fees, etc.
(j) When any such Temporary Event shall involve the issuance of tickets, coupons,
chips, or other form of "currency" exclusive to their event, it shall be the duty and requirement of
the sponsoring individual, group, association, corporation, or non-profit organization to provide
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau with an accounting of the ticket, coupon, chip or other form of
"currency" exchanged or "cashed in" by its vendors within sixty (60) days of the Temporary
Event's closure.
341.07 CONTINUING OFFENSE.
Each day on which a person violates any of the provisions of this article may be
considered as a separate offense and punishable as such as provided in Section 341.99.
341.08 DUTIES OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR AND TREASURER.
(a) The Treasurer is charged with the duties of collecting and receiving the taxes,
license fees, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer or his
delegates to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person paying the tax,
fees, and the date of such receipt.
(b) The Tax Administrator and his duly appointed deputies under the direction of the
Business Administrator are hereby empowered with the approval of the Business Administrator
to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination and
correction of returns, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an
overpayment is claimed, or found to have occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of
this article and any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
(c) In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a return, then in
such case the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall assess the person or persons
on such an amount of whole or gross volume of business as the Tax Administrator or his deputies
deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment, the Tax Administrator or his duly
appointed deputies shall give the parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the trade,
business, occupation or class and the amount of the Business Privilege Tax imposed or levied.
(d) The taxpayer shall maintain such records and books of account as will enable him
to make a true and accurate return in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such accounts
and records must disclose in detail the gross receipts and other date pertaining to the taxpayer's
gross volume of business and must be sufficiently complete to enable the Tax Administrator or
his deputies to verify all transactions.
45
(e) The Tax Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to examine the
books, papers and records of any person or persons subject to or supposed to be subject to-the tax
imposed by this article, in order to verify the accuracy of the return made, or if no return was
made, ascertain the tax due.
(f) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator shall have the right to
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other cases.
341.09 CONFIDENTIAL NATURE OF RETURNS, ETC.
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator, or any other official, agent or
employee of the City, as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article, shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial order
or as otherwise provided by law.
341.10 SUITS ON COLLECTION AND PENALTY.
(a) The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the power in the
name of the City to institute proceedings against any and all persons who violate the provisions
of this article.
(b) If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the recovery
of any such tax, the person liable therefore, shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection
and interest and penalties herein imposed.
341.11 SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY CLAUSES.
(a) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City to levy
and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person, business or any portion of any business not
within the taxing power of the City under the Constitution of the United States and the laws and
Constitution of the Commonwealth.
(b) If the tax or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the provisions of
this article shall be held by any court of competent power or jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the Commonwealth or any other provision of the law, the
decisions of the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose taxes, or the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons herein provided.
(c) The provisions of this article are sever able, and if any of its provisions shall be
held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of
the remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council that
this article would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provisions had not
been included herein.
46
341.12 DUTIES OF OTHER CITY DEPARTMENTS.
(a) Upon request by the Tax Administrator, it shall be the duty of any City employees
having access thereto to examine all places of business and persons within their respective
employment duties and territories subject to the provision of this Article, to determine whether
the license provisions of this Article have been complied with.
(b) The above requests shall be made to the various department heads responsible for
the supervision of said employees and those department heads shall report to the Tax
Administrator any license violations under the provisions of this Article.
341.99 PENALTY.
Any person who conducts, transacts or engages in any of the businesses subject to the tax
imposed by this article, without having first secured a business privilege license for the year, or
any person who fails to file a tax return as required by the provisions of this article, or any person
who willfully files a false return, shall, upon summary conviction before any Justice of the Peace,
be sentenced to pay a fine of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for any one offense, recoverable with
costs, or imprisoned not more than ninety days, if the amount of the fine and costs are not paid.
(Ord. 2230 §6. Passed 12/22/70; Ord. 3242-Passed 2/7/89; Ord. 4130-Passed 4/16/02)
47
ADDENDUM “B”
CITY OF BETHLEHEM TAX BUREAU DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
OF THE BURAU'S AND TAXPAYER'S RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
It is the obligation of all taxpayers in the City of Bethlehem, Hanover Township (Northampton
County) and the Borough of Freemansburg to file all tax returns and pay all taxes to which they
are subject. However, when the Bureau determines that a required return has not been filed, or a
liability has not been paid, it has certain rights granted by law that describe how it may enforce a
taxpayer’s obligations. In conjunction with the Bureau’s rights, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania now has a Local Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights which provides legal rights on behalf of
the taxpayer, and creates obligations for the Bureau, so that equity and fairness control how these
requirements are enforced.
At any time a taxpayer may request an “Administrator’s Ruling” on any issue regarding any of
the eligible taxes by submitting all pertinent facts in writing to the Tax Administrator.
TAXPAYER’S RIGHTS DURING AN AUDIT
 Taxpayer has the right to be represented. Notice of representation must be in writing, signed
by taxpayer, and must contain a statement allowing named representative to view and discuss
confidential information.
 Taxpayer has the right to expect that all information requested by and submitted to the
Bureau will remain confidential and will only be used for official purposes or as provided by
law.
 Taxpayer has the right to expect a “reasonable time” (30 days from date of notice) to respond
to requests for information from the Bureau.
 Taxpayers have the right to request extensions of time to respond with information, if there is
“good cause” for such extension.
 Taxpayers have the right to appeal or seek review of any adverse decision of the Bureau.
BUREAU’S OBLIGATIONS DURING AN AUDIT
 The Bureau shall provide the taxpayer with a copy of this disclosure statement.
 The Bureau shall respect the confidential nature of information gained through the audit
process.
 The Bureau shall prepare a written explanation of the assessment of any tax liability
determined during the audit (including the tax period, breakdown of amount due, legal basis
and itemized revisions of tax return).
 The Bureau shall process the audit timely upon the receipt of all the applicable information.
 The Bureau shall conduct a post audit conference at which a Bureau employee or
representative will explain the audit findings and make recommendations on how to correct
areas of noncompliance.
48
 The Bureau shall explain the taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment of any tax liability
determined during the audit.
 The Bureau shall take no lawful action against a taxpayer for the tax year in question until the
expiration of the applicable response period and extensions.
The Bureau may require the taxpayer to provide exact copies or certified copies of the
individual’s federal tax returns if the Bureau can demonstrate that the federal tax return is
reasonably necessary and the information is not available elsewhere, or from the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue. The taxpayer is solely responsible for obtaining the information and for
any costs associated with obtaining the records or information.
TAXPAYER’S APPEAL RIGHTS
To appeal any adverse decision of the Bureau, a taxpayer must file a petition with the Bureau’s
Hearing Officer within 90 days of the date of the audit assessment notice. The Hearing Officer
will review the case as it is provided by the taxpayer along with the information the Bureau relied
on to make its initial decision. Decisions on petitions shall be issued within 60 days of the date a
complete petition is received. Failure to act within 60 days shall result in the petition being
deemed approved.
Appeals of decisions by any person who has a direct interest in the decision may be filed with the
court vested with jurisdiction of local tax appeals pursuant to 42 PA. C.S. (relating to judiciary
and judicial procedure).
APPEAL TO THE HEARING OFFICER
A petition for appeal of an adverse decision of the Tax Bureau regarding the reassessment of any
eligible tax must be filed with the Hearing Officer within 90 days of the date of the assessment
notice. The petition will be considered timely filed if the letter transmitting the petition is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or before the final day on which the petition is
required to be filed.
Appeal petitions should be mailed to:
TAX APPEAL HEARING OFFICER
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau
10 East Church Street
Bethlehem, PA 18018
TAXPAYER’S PROCEDURES FOR REFUNDS OF OVERPAID TAX
If a taxpayer determines that it has paid a tax to which it is not subject, a petition for refund of
overpaid taxes must be filed with the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer will handle petitions
for refund in the same manner he/she handles appeal petitions, as previously described.
49
However, refund petitions shall be filed within three years after the due date for filing the report
as extended or one year after actual payment of an eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is
required, the petition shall be filed within three years after the due date for payment of an eligible
tax or within one year after actual payment, whichever is later.
TAXPAYERS’ COMPLAINTS
If a taxpayer has a complaint about an action the Tax Bureau has taken in regard to Earned
Income and Net Profits Taxes, Occupational Privilege Taxes, or Business Privilege and
Mercantile Taxes a written description of the action should be filed with the Hearing Officer at
the aforementioned address. The Hearing Officer will then facilitate the resolution of the
complaint by working with the appropriate Tax Bureau personnel, or by issuing an assistance
order if it is requested by the taxpayer and so warranted.
TAX BUREAU’S ENFORCEMENT METHODS
If a taxpayer has not paid a tax liability determined to be due and the taxpayer has not filed a
timely appeal of the liability, the Tax Bureau may take the following actions:
 The Tax Bureau may contact a delinquent taxpayer and attempt to resolve the liability
through payment in full or by payment plan. The Bureau may utilize outside legal counsel to
assist in the collection of delinquent taxes.
 If a taxpayer owes delinquent taxes or has not filed a properly completed tax return form, this
Bureau may deny the issuance of any applicable license for any tax this Bureau collects on
behalf of a taxing authority.
 The Tax Bureau may file a civil law suit against the person responsible for filing the tax
return form and/or for payment of the tax or delinquent tax, employer withholding, etc., and
obtain a judgment which would be the basis of a levy to seize the property of the taxpayer.
 The Tax Bureau may file a criminal complaint or action against a taxpayer, or employer, or
business owner, etc., when a properly prepared tax return form has not been received by this
Bureau.
 The Tax Bureau may also investigate, assess and advance through the Courts of Common
Pleas actions against delinquent taxpayers violating criminal statutes and governing
legislation.
 The Tax Bureau may also prepare and issue wage a attachment to employers of a taxpayer
when that taxpayer does not remit to this Bureau timely payment of tax due this Bureau.
Copies of the Ordinance, Resolutions, and Rules and Regulations are available to any taxpayer
free of charge. Please contact the Tax Bureau at (610) 865-7022, Monday through Friday,
8:00am to 4:30pm for your copy.
50
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
Northampton And Lehigh Counties
10 E. Church Street
Bethlehem PA 18018
CODIFIED ORDINANCES
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
AND ITS GOVERNMENT
The City of Bethlehem was incorporated as a Third Class City on July 17,
1917, following consolidation of the Borough of South Bethlehem with the
Borough of Bethlehem. Prior to that consolidation, in 1904 the Borough of
Bethlehem and the Borough of West Bethlehem voted to consolidate as one
Borough of Bethlehem.
The voters at the general election on November 3, 1959, approved the
adoption of the Mayor-Council Plan A form of government, as authorized by
the Optional Third Class City Charter Law (Act of July 15, 1957) (P.L. 901),
as amended (53 P.S. §41101 et seq.). The change from the former
Commission form of government to the new form of government, also known
as the "Strong Mayor" form of government, became effective the first Monday
of January 1962. An explanation of the change can be found in the booklet
entitled Report of Findings and Recommendation - Bethlehem Charter
Commission, dated July 27, 1959. The City is governed by a City Council of
7 Members, elected at large, and serving four year terms. Legislative authority
rests with City Council. Executive and administrative authority rests with the
independently elected Mayor. The Mayor appoints Department Heads subject
to the consent of Council, and supervises the work of all City departments.
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
1
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 9.26.2016
Disposition of Ordinances
The Comparative Section Table is included to show the disposition of every ordinance
included in the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. It indicates whether a given
ordinance was consolidated with another into one section or split into two or more sections. Cross
references direct the user to subject matter reasonably related to material contained within a given
article.
1946 Code Section Codified Ordinance Section
Chapter 2
§51-53 155.01 to 155.03
§54 155.04(b)
§55-71 155.05 to 155.21
§73-75 133.01 to 133.03
Chapter 3
§1 1121.01
§10-15 1121.02 to 1121.07
Chapter 7
§1-6 157.01 to 157.03
Chapter 12
§1-6 1165.01, 1165.04 to 1165.08
§9-13 1165.10 to 1165.14
§16 1165.02
§17 1165.03
Chapter 13
§7-12 1161.01 to 1161.06
§14 1161.08
§16 1161.09
§17 1163.01
§18 1163.02
§20 163.03
§21 1163.04
Chapter 14
§1 135.01
§2 135.02
Chapter 15
§3, 9, 11, 19 303.01
Chapter 18
§1 717.01
§9-11 717.02 to 717.04
§18 701.03
Chapter 19
§13 705.04
§14-16 713.01 to 713.03
Chapter 22
§1-3 1103.01 to 1103.03
Chapter 23
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
2
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
1946 Code Section Codified Ordinance Section
§1-3 907.01 to 907.03
§7 907.04
Chapter 24
§5 313.01, 313.02
Chapter 25
§1-5 119.01 to 119.05
Chapter 28
§1 721.01
§2 721.02
§5 721.03
§34-37 1715.01 to 1715.04
Chapter 30
§1-6 911.01 to 911.06
§20 913.07
§22 913.04
Chapter 31
§2-4 317.01 to 317.03
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
3
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
ORDINANCES AND REFERENCED CODIFIED ORDINANCE ARTICLES/SECTIONS
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
972 12/31/1946 305.02 to 305.06
1023 10/19/1948 1115.01 to 1115.03
1032 12/28/1948 151.01 to 151.08, 151.10, 151.11
1033 12/28/1948 153.01, 153.02, 153.03(b) to (j), 153.04 to
153.18
1077 5/09/1950 921.01 to 921.04, 921.06 to 921.11
1087 7/25/1950 923.01, 923.03 to 923.10, 923.12 to 923.14
1115 4/17/1951 909.03
1122 5/22/1951 1111.01 to 1111.03, 1111.05, 1111.06,
1111.08 to 1111.15, 1111.17 to 1111.83
1124 5/29/1951 709.01 to 709.10
1135 7/31/1951 311.01, 311.02
1180 5/27/1952 543.01 to 543.07, 543.99
1271 12/15/1953 309.01 to 309.03
1281 2/02/1954 921.05
1282 2/02/1954 923.11, 923.15
1340 3/10/1955 155.04(a)
1368 8/02/1955 307.01, 307.02, 307.04 to 307.08
1390 11/22/1955 1303.01, 1303.02(b) to 1303.05, 1303.07 to
1303.18, 1303.20, 1303.21(b) to (e), (g) to
(j), (1), 1303.23, 1303.24, 1303.27 to
1303.34, 1303.36 to 1303.41, 1305.01 to
1305.06, 1307.01, 1307.02 (a). 1307.03 to
1307.06, 1307.08 to 1307.13, 1309.01,
1309.02, 1311.01 to 1311.05, 1315.01 to
1315.04, 1319.01 to 1319.04, 1323.01 to
1323.04, 1327.01, 1327.02(a) to (h),
1327.03(a), (c) to (f), 1327.04, 1331.01,
1331.02(a) to (d), 1331.03(a)(1) to (5),
(a)(6)B. to (f), 1331.04, 1335.01 to 1335.04,
1339.01 to 1339.04, 1343.01 to 1343.05,
1343.07, 1359.01 to 1359.04, 1363.01 to
1363.03, 1367.01, 1367.02, 1381.01, 1381.02
1381.03(b), 1381.04 to 1381.08, 1381.10(b),
(c), (e) to (g), 1381.11(a) to (b)(7),
1383.01 to 1383.08, 1838.09(b) to (e),
1383.10, 1383.11(a) to (d), 1383.12 to
1383.18, 1383.20, 1383.21, 1383.23 to
1383.25, 1385.01, 1385.02, 1387.01 to 1387.03
1401 3/13/1956 307.03
1416 6/26/1956 915.01 to 915.15, 915.99
1422 7/17/1956 1503.06
1434 9/18/1956 1167.01 to 1167.05
1481 7/23/1957 701.01, 701.02
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
4
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
1492 9/03/1957 1303.22, 1383.11(e)
1554 7/01/1958 315.01 to 315.11, 315.12(b) to 315.17
1560 7/22/1958 1311.01, 1347.01 to 1347.09
1570 8/26/1958 1303.26, 1311.01, 1351.01 to 1351.03,
1381.01, 1381.11(b)(8), 1381.12, 1383.01,
1385.01
1580 12/04/1958 1343.06
1587 12/30/1958 913.02, 913.05
1614 9/08/1959 151.12
1632 1/19/1960 1131.01 to 1131.03, 1133.01 to 1133.08,
1135.01 to 1135.10, 1137.01 to 1137.07,
1139.01 to 1139.07, 1141.01 to 1141.09,
1143.01 to 1143.07, 1145.01 to 1145.06,
1147.01 to 1147.04, 1149.01 to 1149.12,
1151.01 to 1151.06
1657 6/28/1960 1165.09
1682 1/17/1962 901.01, 901.02
1727 12/19/1961 1381.11(c)
1728 12/27/1961 1713.01 to 1713.14
1730 2/13/1962 101.04(1), (aa), 101.05, 103.01, 103.02,
103.04, 105.01 to 105.03, 107.01 to 107.06,
109.01 to 109.03, 111.01 to 111.03, 113.01,
113.02, 117.01 to 117.04, 121.01 to 121.03,
121.05, 121.07, 133.01, 135.01
1731 3/06/1962 1303.25, 1311.01, 1355.01 to 1355.16
1732 3/06/1962 1381.12
1738 4/17/1962 1303.02(a), 1315.02, 1381.10(a)
1739 4/17/1962 1711.01 to 1711.07
1743 6/19/1962 1161.07
1747 8/07/1962 725.01
1757 10/02/1962 131.01, 131.02
1759 10/16/1962 1501.01, 1501.02, 1503.01 to 1503.05,
1505.01 to 1505.04
1760 10/16/1962 137.01 to 137.06
1761 10/16/1962 1331.03(a)(6)A., 1383.09(a), 1383.11(c), (d)
1762 11/81/1962 905.01 to 905.03(c), 905.04 to 905.08
1767 11/13/1962 103.03, 103.05, 115.01., 115.02, 121.06(a)
1768 11/13/1962 119.99, 137.99, 303.99, 305.99, 307.99,
309.99, 311.99, 315.99, 317.99, 335.99,
701.99, 705.99, 709.99, 717.99, 721.99,
725.99, 907.99, 911.99, 921.99, 1115.99,
1121.99, 1133.99, 1161.99, 1163.99,
1165.99, 1167.99, 1503.99, 1711.99,
1715.99
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
5
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
1769 11/13/1962 501.01, 501.02, 503.01 to 503.14, 505.01,
505.02, 507.01, 507.02, 509.01 to 509.06,
509.99, 521.01 to 521.06, 531.01 to 531.06,
533.01 to 533.12, 535.01 to 535.10, 537.01
to 537.03, 541.01 to 541.04
1771 11/13/1962 315.12(a)
1773 11/13/1962 523.01, 523.02, 523.99
1774 11/20/1962 1701.01, 1701.02, 1701.99
1775 12/4/1962 1117.01 to 1117.13, 1117.99
1781 12/27/1962 913.01, 913.03
1783 12/28/1962 1327.02(i), 1327.03(b), 1383.19
1786 12/27/1962 705.01 to 705.03, 705.99
1787 12/27/1962 331.02
1788 12/27/1962 331.01
1789 12/27/1962 923.02
1791 1/23/1963 1303.06, 1303.19, 1303.21 (a), (f), (k),
1303.35, 1305.99, 1307.02 (b), 1307.07,
1315.02, 1331.02 (e), 1381.02, 1381.03
1381.09, 1381.10 (d), 1381.11 (c), 1383.22
1792 1/23/1963 155.03
1793 1/24/1963 155.03 (a)
1794 2/05/1963 1113.01, 1113.99
1796 2/19/1963 305.01
1797 2/19/1963 909.01, 909.02, 909.04 to 909.06, 909.99
1800 3/05/1963 903.01 to 903.10, 903.99
1801 3/11/1963 713.99
1802 3/11/1963 151.09
1803 3/05/1963 1111.04, 1111.07, 1111.15, 1111.16, 1111.99
1804 3/05/1963 121.04
1808 4/19/1963 121.06 (b)
1809 5/07/1963 1103.04
1810 5/07/1963 905.03 (d)
1811 5/07/1963 911.07, 913.06
1825 9/17/1963 Adopting Ordinance for Entire Codified Ordinances
of 1963, Repealed 1946 Code;
101.01 to 101.04 (k), (m), to (z), 101.06, 101.99
1817 7/16/1963 1381.09
1818 8/06/1963 157.03 (a) to (c)(1), (d), (f), (g)
1821 8/20/1963 155.12 (c)
1827 10/01/1963 145.01 to 145.03
1829 10/29/1963 705.05
1831 10/29/1963 509.99 (b), (c)
1833 11/19/1963 143.01, 143.02
1834 12/03/1963 155.22
1835 12/03/1963 155.23
1836 12/17/63 335.01 (c)
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
6
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
1837 12/17/1963 333.01 (h), 333.05 (a)
1838 12/17/1963 523.02 b
1839 12/17/1963 711.01, 711.99
1850 2/04/1964 305.01 to 305.09, 305.99
1853 2/18/1964 910.01 to 910.15, 910.99
1859 4/07/1964 155.24, 155.25
1860 4/21/1964 511.01 to 511.04
1861 4/21/1964 908.01 to 908.14, 908.99
1862 4/21/1964 1343.06 (a), (k)
1863 4/21/1964 905.07 (d)
1863 4/21/1964 905.07 (d)
1864 5/05/1964 905.03 (a)
1867 7/21/1964 709.03
1874 9/01/1964 923.02
1884 12/15/1964 1105.01 to 1105.05, 1105.99
1892 12/29/1964 331.02
1893 12/29/1964 331.01
1894 12/29/1964 337.01
1895 12/29/1964 339.01 to 339.12, 339.99
1901 2/16/1965 913.01 (first par.), 913.03
1904 2/16/1965 303.01 (1), 303.02
1907 4/20/1965 151.02, 151.03, 151.05, 151.06, 151.09,
151.10, 151.11; Repeals 151.07, 151.08,
151.12
1908 4/20/1985 1323.02 (d), 1383.26
1911 5/04/1965 717.05
1913 5/25/1965 1383.11 (first par.), 1383.11 (c)(2), (3),
1383.11 (d)(2), (3), 1383.11 (e)(first par.),
(e)(4) to (6); Repeals 1315.02 (q)(1)
1916 5/25/1965 908.14
1921 6/15/1965 1383.11 (d)(1)
1927 7/20/1965 909.01
1931 9/07/1965 1501.01, 1501.02, 1503.01 to 1503.05,
1503.99, 1505.01 to 1505.04
1939 10/18/1965 1355.10
1948 11/30/1965 905.03 (a)
1965 2/15/1966 153.01
1970 3/15/1966 533.02, 533.10
1987 7/19/1966 1323.02 (e)
1993 8/16/1966 905.06
1999 9/20/1966 921.12
2000 9/20/1966 151.13
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
7
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
2006 11/22/1966 147.01 to 147.04
2017 12/30/1966 335.01 to 335.12, 335.99
2018 12/30/1966 333.01 to 333.11, 333.99
2019 12/30/1966 337.01
2020 12/30/1966 339.01 to 339.14, 339.99
2029 4/18/1967 Repeals 1161.07 (c)
2030 5/08/1967 913.01, 913.02, 913.025
2031 5/23/1967 729.01 to 729.03, 729.99
2033 5/23/1967 923.02
2040 8/08/1967 905.02, 905.03 (b), (d), (e), 905.04 (b),
905.05, 905.08
2048 11/14/1967 535.99
2054 12/06/1967 1501.02
2058 12/19/1967 711.02
2088 4/02/1968 1505.05
2091 5/21/1968 1505.06
2092 6/11/1968 931.01 to 931.08, 931.99
2102 9/03/1968 901.01
2103 9/03/1968 721.02
2127 1/07/1969 335.07; Repeals 335.08, 335.09
2140 3/19/1969 133.01
2142 4/15/1969 337.02, 337.99
2143 4/15/1969 321.02, 331.99
2151 6/05/1969 151.12
2152 6/17/1969 151.02, 151.05, 151.10
2154 6/17/1969 733.01 to 733.04, 733.99
2158 8/05/1969 153.01, 153.08 (c)
2182 2/17/1970 535.04
2189 4/07/1970 151.11
2190 4/07/1970 153.07
2196 6/02/1970 Art. 139 Ed. Note
2197 6/16/1970 1701.03 (a) to (h)
2198 6/16/1970 1701.03 (i)
2199 6/16/1970 521.07
2204 8/18/1970 1701.01, 1701.02, 1701.99
2205 8/18/1970 1731.01, 1731.02, 1731.99
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
8
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
2207 8/18/1970 1703.03
2210 9/15/1970 1301.01 to 1301.06, 1302.01 to 1302.88,
1303.01 to 1303.05, 1304.01 to 1304.06,
1305.01 to 1305.06, 1306.01 to 1306.06,
1307.01 to 1307.06, 1308.01 to 1308.06,
1309.01 to 1309.07, 1310.01 to 1310.06,
1311.01 to 1311.06, 1312.01 to 1312.06,
1313.01 to 1313.06, 1314.01 to 1314.06,
1315.01 to 1315.06, 1316.01 to 1316.06,
1317.01 to 1317.06, 1318.01 to 1318.26,
1319.01 to 1319.05, 1320.01 to 1320.10,
1321.01 to 1321.03, 1322.01 to 1322.04,
1323.01 to 1323.11, 1324.01 to 1324.12,
1326.01 to 1326.05
2211 9/22/1970 941.01 to 941.05, 941.06 (a)(2) to 941.09,
941.99
2213 12/01/1970 155.01 to 155.25
2214 12/19/1970 111.02 (b)
2230 12/22/1970 341.01 to 341.09, 341.99
2232 1/19/1971 145.04
2241 3/25/1971 1302.17, 1302.36, 1302.38, 1304.02 (c)(1),
1305.02 (b)(2), 1308.02 (c)(2), 1310.02
(c)(3), 1311.02 (a)(1), (9), (10), 1312.02
first par., 1313.02 (a)(13), 1318.05,
1318.11, 1318.13 (b), 1318.18, 1318.23 (c),
1320.07 (g), 1320.09 (a), 1320.10 (a)(2)(i),
1321.01, 1321.02 (b), 1322.01, 1325.08 (b),
first par., Table; Repeals 1308.02 (a)(2).
1319.03 (k)
2245 4/20/1971 909.03, 909.05
2250 6/08/1971 1320.09 (a) (2) (ii)
2251 6/08/1971 131.01 to 131.04
2252 6/22/1971 521.01
2253 6/22/1971 121.03
2259 9/07/1971 1311.02 (c), 1312.02 (c), 1318.04, 1318.05
first par., 1319.02 (g), 1320.08 (a) (10),
1320.10 (a), (1), 1325.08, Table; Repeals
1311.02 (a) (8)
2260 9/07/1971 1320.07 (d), 1320.08 (a) (10)
2262 10/05/1971 147.01 to 147.04
2266 10/26/1971 1318.24 (d) (2)
2267 10/26/1971 1319.01 (a) (1), (11)
2273 11/30/1971 121.04
2284 12/27/1971 331.01
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
9
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
2285 12/27/1971 337.01
2286 12/27/1971 329.01
2293 5/02/1972 315.03(b)
2294 5/02/1972 309.03
2295 5/02/1972 903.05
2296 5/02/1972 303.01 (c) (1), (2)
2297 5/02/1972 908.14 (a)
2298 5/02/1972 1324.03
2300 5/02/1972 303.01 (1)
2301 5/16/1972 1705.01 to 1705.03
2302 5/16/1972 1501.01
2303 5/16/1972 1703.01, 1703.02
2304 5/16/1972 135.01
2305 6/06/1972 1319.01 (a) (22)
2309 6/20/1972 507.01
2310 7/11/1972 1320.08 (a) (12)
2315 9/05/1972 1318.27
2316 9/05/1972 1313A.01 to 1313A.05, 1318.23 (b),
1320.09 (a) (2) (IV), (a) (3) (V) (VI),
1322.04 (i) renumbered, 1322.04 (j), Table
2318 9/19/1972 941.06 (a) (1)
2320 9/19/1972 131.05, 131.06
2323 10/03/1972 921.01 to 921.12, 921.99
2324 10/24/1972 1507.01, 1507.99
2325 11/14/1972 539.01 to 539.04, 539.99
2327 11/28/1972 141.01 to 141.03
2329 11/28/1972 155.26
2349 2/06/1973 155.12 (b), (c)
2361 2/27/1973 1703.02, 1703.99
2362 2/27/1973 1501.01
2363 3/06/1973 921.03 (c) (13) re copper and zinc
2364 3/20/1973 1324.06
2367 4/03/1973 1319.01 (a) (27), 1319.03 (first par.),
(d), (e), (h), 1325.08 (e)
2370 4/03/1973 155.26 (a)
2371 4/03/1973 147.04 (e)
2381 8/07/1973 1310.02 (b) (3), (c), 1318.23 (first par.),
1319.04, Appendix A (Footnote 12)
2384 9/04/1973 1115.01, 1115.02
2388 10/02/1973 1320.08 (a) {13), (14)
2389 10/16/1973 105.04
2408 12/27/1973 121.04
2409 1/29/1974 107.01, 107.02, 107.05, 107.07, 107.08
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
10
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in City Council Referenced
2425 6/11/1975 131.04, 131.05
2427 7/02/1974 1503.01,1503.04, 1503.05, 1503.06 (b),
(c), 1505.06
2428 7/02/1974 535.01, 535.03 to 535.05, 535.08, 535.11
2429 7/02/1974 543.02
2430 7/02/1974 1303.03 (c)
2432 7/16/1974 531.07
2440 10/29/1974 533.08 (b)
2446 11/26/1974 1310.04; Repeals 1319.02 (g)
2458 1/21/1975 1341.01 to 1341.05, 1343.01, 1343.02,
1345.01, 1345.03 to 1345.05, 1347.01 to
1347.11, 1349.01 to 1349.11, 1351.01,
1351.02
2459 2/18/1975 1319.03 (f), (g)
2462 3/18/1975 941.07 (b) to (d)
2463 3/18/1975 721.02
2470 5/27/1975 1711.01 (a), (c) to (e), 1711.03 (b), 1711.04
(c), (j), (k); Repeals 1711.07
2474 7/01/1975 1304.02 (d) (2)
2479 8/05/1975 705.03
2481 8/26/1975 119.04 (b), 119.06, 119.07
2483 9/16/1975 1505.07
2512 4/06/1976 1733.01 to 1733.09, 1733.11 to 1733.14
2518 5/18/1976 1163.01, 1163.03, 1163.04, 1163.99
2529 9/21/1976 121.05 (b)
2531 10/05/1976 1343.02 (f) (2) G., 1349.08
2532 10/05/1976 1713.04, 1713.06 to 1713.14, 1713.99
2533 10/05/1976 1115.03
2555 3/01/1977 1701.03 (i)
2560 4/05/1977 1320.08 (a) (2), (9); Repeals 1302.71
2564 5/24/1977 951.01 to 951.23, 951.99
2567 6/07/1977 543.02
2568 7/05/1977 133.01
2570 7/19/1977 913.03
2571 7/19/1977 913.02, 913.025, 913.06, 913.07
2573 9/06/1977 941.01 (f), 941.06 (a), 941.08 (a)
2574 9/20/1977 1322.04 (i) (4)
2580 10/18/1977 329.02
2581 10/18/1977 1351.03
2582 11/01/1977 931.01 (f) to (i), 931.02 to 931.08
2583 11/01/1977 1316.02 (a) (23)
2600 2/07/1978 913.01
2601 2/07/1978 923.02
2609 4/04/1978 1325.02
2610 4/04/1978 1325.03 (b)
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
11
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in City Council
2611 4/04/1978 533.01, 533.02 (a), 533.13
2614 5/23/1978 1341.02 (a) (10), (11), 1343.02 (d), (f) (2)
Q, (f) (3) R., 1345.02, 1347.02 (a),
1347.05 (d), 1347.12, 1349.03 (c), (d),
1349.04 (a), 1349.05 (h), 1349.12, 1349.13,
1351.04
2615 5/23/1978 1302.01 (a) (8), 1302.32, 1302.765,
1303.06, 1327.01 to 1327.08
2619 6/20/1978 135.01
2621 8/15/1978 155.21
2623 10/03/1978 503.01, 503.08 (a), 505.01, 509.99, 523.01
(b), (f), 523.02 (a), (c), (d), 531.01 to
531.06, 531.08, 531.99, 533.09, 533.99,
543.01, 543.99
2624 10/03/1978 1113.01, 1113.02, 1113.99
2625 11/14/1978 908.13
2627 12/05/1978 153.04, 153.08 (c), 153.10, 153.12 (b)
2628 12/19/1978 1701.01, 1701.02, 1701.99
2629 12/19/1978 1703.03
2630 12/19/1978 1703.01, 1703.02
2631 12/19/1978 315.03 (b)
2632 12/19/1978 303.01
2633 12/19/1978 1701.03(i)
2634 12/19/1978 1163.02
2635 12/19/1978 1731.01, 1731.02, 1731.99
2636 19/19/1978 1705.01, 1705.02
2637 12/19/1978 1324.03
2651 12/28/1978 329.01
2652 1/23/1979 1731.02
2653 2/06/1979 923.02
2661 6/19/1979 1351.03 A B C
2662 6/19/1979 107.04, 107.06
2664 6/19/1979 913.06
2665 6/19/1979 913.03
2668 8/08/1979 705.05
2669 8/22/1979 Art. 149
2670 9/04/1979 535.04, 535.10
2671 9/04/1979 533.01
2677 9/13/1979 153.09
2679 12/04/1979 153.08 (c)
2693 12/19/1979 Art. 131
2695 2/19/1980 151.05 (a)
2696 31411980 1349.07 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f)
2699 4/16/1980 107.04, 107.06
2702 6/03/1980 Art. 1735
2707 7/01/1980 133.02, 133.03, 107.04
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
12
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in City Council
2710 8/05/1980 Art. 1308 A, 1302.67, 1319.01 (a) (32),1322.04
2714 9/02/1980 1304.02 (b), 1305.02 (b) (1), 1322.04
2715 10/07/1980 533.01
2719 10/21/1980 133.03
2726 12/02/1980 Amending Zoning Ord., Table of Area,
Yard and Building Regulations
2727 12/02/1980 931.01
2728 12/02/1980 915.03
2729 12/16/1980 533.99 (b)
2730 12/16/1980 931.09, 931.10, 931.11
2745 12/16/1980 1701.03 (i)
2746 12/16/1980 305.03, 305.04, 305.06, 305.07
2747 12/16/1980 Repeals 301.01
2748 12/16/1980 909.05
2749 12/16/1980 907.01, Repeals 907.04
2750 1/06/1981 910.05 (b), 910.10 (b)
2751 1/06/1981 1733.05
2752 1/06/1981 1501.01, 1501.02, 1503.01 to 1503.95,
1503.99, 1505.01 to 1505.07, 1506.01 to
1506.06, 1507.01, 1507.02, 1507.99
2753 1/06/1981 303.01
2754 1/06/1981 903.05, 903.11
2755 1/06/1981 1113.03
2756 1/06/1981 1117.09
2757 1/06/1981 Repeals 1111.15
2758 1/06/1981 311.01, 311.02
2760 2/03/1981 923.02
2767 2/17/1981 Amending Zoning Ord., Table of Area, Yard
and Building Regulations
2771 3/03/1981 1735.02 (a) (b) (c) (d)
2772 4/07/1981 533.01
2773 4/07/1981 1302.38, 1304.02 (c) (6), Repeals 1304.02
(d) (2), 1325.08 (h) (] through 10)
2775 4/21/1981 1701.03
2776 5/26/1981 910.01 to 910.04, 910.09, 910.10, 910.12,
910.13
2777 5/26/1981 1347.10
2779 6/02/1981 909.03
2797 11/17/1981 1302.45, 1302.45 (j), 1302.52
2798 12/01/1981 1701.01, 1701.02
2799 12/01/1981 1705.01, 1705.02
2800 12/01/1981 1703.01, 1703.02, 1703.03
2801 12/01/1981 1731.01, 1731.02
2817 12/15/1981 303.01
2819 2/16/1982 931.09 (A) (4)
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
13
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in City Council
2826 3/02/1982 Art. 1360
2827 3/02/1982 1309.02 (b) (5)
2828 3/02/1982 143.01
2831 4/07/1982 1117.09
2833 4/07/1982 303.01
2835 5/25/1982 1701.03
2836 5/25/1982 1113.03
2837 5/25/1982 Repeals 1304.02 (c) (6), 1305.02 (c) (2)
2838 5/25/1982 1318.22 (a)
2839 5/25/1982 1343.01 (f) (2), 1343.01 (f) (3), 1349.02
2842 7/20/1982 531.99 (b)
2849 10/19/1982 1347.13
2850 11/09/1982 1302.66, 1318.26
2851 11/9/1982 1702.01
2854 11/16/1982 1731.02
2857 12/21/1982 908.05, 908.13, 908.14 (a) (b)
2858 12/21/1982 341.01 to 341.04, 341.06, 341.10
2880 4/05/1983 135.01 (a) (b) (c) (e)
2881 4/05/1983 931.09
2883 4/19/1983 305.01, 305.03, 305.04 (d), 305.05, 305.06,
305.07, 305.08
2884 4/19/1983 Art. 307
2886 5/03/1983 1327.05, 1327.06, 1327.09
2888 5/03/1983 1705.02
2890 5/24/1983 535.04
2891 6/07/1983 Repeals 1308.02 (c) (2)
2893 6/07/1983 1325.02
2897 7/05/1983 Repeals 1115.03 (a) (b)
2898 7/05/1983 1161.04 (a) (b)
2899 7/05/1983 941.06
2903 10/04/1983 931.09
2910 11/15/1983 Art. 951
2913 11/15/1983 913.07 (a) (b)
2928 2/21/1984 533.01
2934 3/20/1984 913.01, 913.03
2935 3/20/1984 923.02
2936 3/20/1984 Art. 1114
2937 3/20/1984 1113.03
2940 4/17/1984 Art. 920
2941 5/01/1984 1701.03
2942 5/01/1984 1113.03
2943 5/0l/1984 1114.03
2947 6/19/1984 1324.03
2948 6/19/1984 913.03
2949 7/03/1984 911.08
2950 8/07/1984 913.01, 913.02
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
14
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in Council
2954 9/18/84 1315.02 (a)
2956 10/16/84 923.02
2957 11/13/1984 1731.02
2958 11/13/1984 Art. 1702, Repeals 1701.03
2959 11/13/1984 Art. 342
2963 11/20/1984 931.09
2981 3/05/1985 535.03
2982 3/19/1985 1302.71, 1318.28
2987 4/02/1985 107.03 to 107.06, 107.08, 115.01, 115.02,
117.02, 119.03, 119.04, 121.02, 121.06,
121.07
2988 4/02/1985 135.02, Art. 139, Repeals Arts. 137 and 145
2989 4/02/1985 151.09, 153.03
2990 4/16/1985 131.05, 131.06, 131.07
2993 5/07/1985 317.02
2994 5/07/1985 329.02, 333.01, 333.03, 333.04, 333.05,
335.11, 339.02, 339.05 to 339.08, 339.11
2998 5/28/1985 1731.01, 1731.02
2999 5/28/1985 1701.01, 1701.02
3000 5/28/1985 1705.01, 1705.02
3001 5/28/1985 1703.01, 1703.02
3004 7/03/1985 1320.04, 1320.07 (k), 1320.10
3008 9/03/1985 1324.03
3009 9/03/1985 705.03, 705.04, 713.01 to 713.03, 717.04,
721.01
3010 9/03/1985 905.07, 908.05, 908.11, 910.05, 931.01,
931.03 to 931.06, 931.08, 931.09, 941.08
3011 9/03/1985 Repeals Art. 1111, 1113.03
3012 9/03/1985 Art. 1733
3013 9/03/1985 303.01
3017 9/17/1985 Art. 1165
3021 10/01/1985 Art. 122
3022 10/01/1985 931.09
3023 10/01/1985 951.03 (d) (e)
3024 10/01/1985 903.01 (b), 903.02, 903.03, 903.05, 903.09,
903.10, 903.11, 905.01 (a) (b), 905.02 (a)
(b), 905.04 (a) (b), 905.07 (d), 907.01,
907.02, 909.01, 909.02, 909.05 (a) (b) (c),
909.06, 909.07, 909.08, 905.02, 915.04
3025 10/15/1985 Art. 911
3026 10/15/1985 Art. 913
3027 10/15/1985 Art. 921
3028 10/15/1985 Art. 923.01 to 923.07, 923.99
3929 10/15/1985 Art. 925
3030 10/15/1985 Art. 927
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
15
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in Council
3032 10/22/1985 141.01
3033 10/22/1985 Art. 1161
3034 10/22/1985 Art. 1163
3035 10/22/1985 1701.02
3036 10/22/1985 1705.02
3037 10/22/1985 1703.03, 1703.99
3038 10/22/1985 903.99, 907.99, 908.99, 909.99, 910.99,
915.99, 931.99, 941.99, 951.99, 1114.99,
1115.99, 1117.99, 1159.99, 1165.99,
1360.99, 1503.99, 1507.99, 1702.99,
1711.99, 1713.99, 1715.99, 1717.99, 1731
Sec. ES-110.0, 1733.99, 1735.99
3051 12/17/1985 107.05, 107.08
3052 12/17/1985 135.01
3063 3/04/1986 910.12
3064 3/04/1986 303.01
3066 5/06/1986 1302.27
3069 5/27/1986 342.01, 342.06, 342.07, 342.10
3070 5/27/1986 343.01 through 343.10
3075 6/17/1986 135
3076 7/15/1986 533.01
3083 9/16/1986 931.10
3089 11/18/1986 931.13, 931.14
3090 12/02/1986 1347.11, 1351.02
3102 12/16/1986 927.02
3103 12/16/1986 342.01
3116 3/03/1987 535.01, 535.02, 535.03, 535.04, 535.11
3117 3/17/1987 903.03, 903.08, 903.11
3118 4/07/1987 1349.11
3123 6/16/1987 Art. 1733
3126 6/16/1987 1302.06, 1302.37, 1302.85, 1306.02,
1319.01, 1325.08
3127 7/07/1987 523.99
3129 7/21/1987 951.01, 951.03, 951.99
3130 7/21/1987 1161.07
3131 7/21/1987 1131.99
3132 7/21/1987 Art. 1731
3136 8/04/1987 531.99
3137 8/18/1987 Art. 735
3138 9/15/1987 Art. 156
3139 9/15/1987 151.02, 151.14
3140 9/15/1987 153.03, 153.05, 153.06, 153.19
3141 9/15/1987 155.05, 155.27
3143 10/6/1987 931.10
3147 11/17/1987 533.01
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
16
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in Council
3148 11/17/1987 Art. 125
3161 2/02/1988 117.04
3172 3/01/1988 931.10
3173 3/15/1988 1302.29, 1302.45, 1302.58, 1302.69,
1302.78, 1302.87, 1304.02, 1307.02,
1308.02, 1310.02, 1311.02, 1325.08
3174 3/15/1988 117.04
3176 4/19/1988 Art. 1120
3177 4/19/1988 535.01, 535.05, 535.06, 535.07, 535.12
3178 4/19/1988 705.05
3179 4/19/1988 908.13, 908.14
3183 5/03/1988 107.04, 107.06
3184 5/03/1988 721.04, 721.99
3185 5/03/1988 951.13, 951.15
3186 5/03/1988 303.01
3187 5/03/1988 Art. 1703
3188 5/03/1988 Art. 1705
3189 5/17/1988 Art. 1701
3195 6/07/1988 701.01, 701.02
3196 6/07/1988 135.01
3197 6/21/1988 1113.03
3198 6/21/1988 1114.04
3199 6/21/1988 1117.09
3200 6/21/1988 931.06
3204 8/02/1988 535.04
3205 8/02/1988 342.01, 342.03, 342.06, 342.07, 342.10
3206 8/02/1988 343.01, 343.03, 343.06, 343.07, 343.10
3208 9/06/1988 531.99
3209 9/06/1988 533.99
3210 9/06/1988 910.13
3211 9/20/1988 1349.08
3215 9/20/1988 533.01
3216 10/04/1988 911.01
3218 10/18/1988 Art. 139
3220 11/01/1988 333.03, 333.04
3225 12/06/1988 Art. 908
3227 12/06/1988 341.04
3239 12/20/1988 931.10
3242 2/07/1989 Changed Penalty Provisions Throughout
Codified Ordinances
3243 2/07/1989 1324.03, 1324.04
3244 2/07/1989 1351.02
3245 2/07/1989 925.05
3246 2/21/1989 735.11
3250 2/21/1989 133.01
3251 2/21/1989 Art. 139
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
17
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in Council
3260 4/18/1989 Art. 534
3265 5/23/1989 1351.05
3266 5/23/1989 913.01, 913.03
3267 5/23/1989 931.10
3271 6/06/1989 141.01, 141.03
3272 6/06/1989 927.02
3281 8/01/1989 Art. 150
3282 8/01/1989 1701.02
3283 8/01/1989 1503.06
3284 8/15/1989 1318.27
3285 9/19/1989 1360.03
3290 10/17/1989 Art. 1731; renumbering 1731, 1733
and 1735 as 1733, 1735 and 1737
3291 10/17/1989 1702.02
3292 10/17/1989 1733.02
3295 11/21/1989 903.05
3296 11/21/1989 909.03, 909.05
3297 11/21/1989 921.04
3300 12/05/1989 Art. 931
3301 12/05/1989 Art. 933
3302 12/05/1989 Art. 935
3303 12/05/1989 1325.02, 1326.02, 1326.03, 1326.06
3304 12/05/1989 921.03
3305 12/05/1989 923.01, 923.02, 923.99
3307 12/05/1989 535.04
3320 2/20/1990 910.16
3322 3/06/1990 534.06, 534.07, 534.09, 534.10
3323 3/06/1990 533.09
3329 3/06/1990 933.11, 933.12
3331 4/17/1990 105.04
3332 4/17/1990 935.03, 935.06
3339 5/01/1990 534.12
3340 5/22/1990 1113.01; 1113.02; renumbering
1113.02 and 1113.03 as 1113.03 and
1113.04
3341 5/22/1990 1114.02
3352 10/02/1990 503.07
3353 10/02/1990 531.99
3354 10/02/1990 Art. 535; renumbering 535 and 537
as 538 and 540
3355 10/16/1990 342.01, 342.02, 342.04, 342.05,
342.06, 342.07, 342.08, 342.10
3356 10/16/1990 343.06, 343.07, 343.08, 343.10
3357 10/16/1990 107.01, 107.05
3360 11/13/1990 1701.02
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
18
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s) Referenced
Number in Council
3361 11/13/1990 1703.03
3362 11/13/1990 1705.02
3363 11/13/1990 1711.03
3364 11/13/1990 1113.03
3365 11/13/1990 1114.03
3370 11/20/1990 305.05
3371 11/20/1990 538.99
3384 12/18/1990 Art. 1119
3386 12/18/1990 341.04
3388 12/18/1990 309.01, 309.03
3389 1/08/1991 1302.23, 1302.42, 1302.79, 1302.81,
1318.29
3391 2/19/1991 153.03
3392 2/19/1991 155.04
3393 2/19/1991 156.03
3400 3/05/1991 1113.04
3401 3/05/1991 931.02
3402 3/05/1991 531.03, 531.99
3403 3/05/1991 533.99
3404 3/05/1991 913.01, 913.03
3406 3/19/1991 Art. 301
3407 3/19/1991 Art. 1501; repealed:
Articles 1503, 1505, 1506, 1507
3408 3/19/1991 Art. 1733
3411 4/02/1991 342.01
3412 4/02/1991 Art. 1701
3413 4/02/1991 Art. 1703
3414 4/02/1991 Art. 1705
3415 4/02/1991 1731.01
3418 5/28/1991 Art. 149
3420 6/04/1991 721.04
3422 6/04/1991 933.12
3425 8/06/1991 135.01
3426 8/06/1991 941.08
3427 8/06/1991 Art. 536
3430 8/20/1991 Art. 723
3431 9/03/1991 911.03
3432 9/17/1991 534.05
3437 10/01/1991 1501.21
3439 11/19/1991 342.01
3441 11/19/1991 1120.02
3442 11/19/1991 1114.02, 1114.03
3443 11/19/1991 533.01, 533.02, 533.05, 533.09,
533.13, 533.99
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
19
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
3444 12/03/1991 538.04
3469 3/03/1992 Art. 731 - Addition
3470 3/03/1992 923.01, 923.02, 923.04, 923.05,
923.99
3474 4/21/1992 1705.02
3476 5/05/1992 Art. 925
3477 5/05/1992 1349.04
3478 5/05/1992 1321.03
3479 5/05/1992 1701.02
3480 5/05/1992 Art. 971 - Addition
3481 5/19/1992 910.04
3485 6/16/1992 935.06
3487 8/18/1992 923.03(b)
3488 8/18/1992 913.04, renumbering 913.04 and
913.05 as 913.05 and 913.06
3489 8/18/1992 927.09
3492 10/06/1992 1320.08(a) (4), 1320.08(b) (3)
3493 10/06/1992 109.01
3498 11/17/1992 1302.66
3499 11/17/1992 1317.02(a)
3500 11/17/1992 538.01
3519 12/15/1992 342.06, 342.07, 342.10
3520 12/15/1992 343.06, 343.07, 343.10
3521 12/15/1992 151.15
3523 1/05/1993 342.01(a) (5)
3524 1/05/1993 343.01(a) (5)
3533 2/16/1993 935.05(b)
3535 2/16/1993 151.05(a)
3536 2/16/1993 153.12(a)
3545 4/20/1993 935.06(c), 935.06(e)
3546 4/20/1993 1731.03(a), 1731.03(b), 1731.03(c)
3547 4/20/1993 119.07
3552 6/01/1993 933.12 - Annex A
3553 6/01/1993 1114.02
3554 6/01/1993 Art. 1167
3555 6/01/1993 1733.02
3557 6/15/1993 913.01(a), 913.01(b), 913.01(c),
913.01(d), 913.01(e)
3559 7/06/1993 Art. 536
3560 7/20/1993 1326.02
3567 9/07/1993 935.02
3568 9/07/1993 911.01, 911.09
3569 9/07/1993 951.02,951.03, 951.04, 951.09,
951.11,951.12, 951.13, 951.15,
951.22,951.99
3570 9/21/1993 1501.18(m)
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
20
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
3573 11/09/1993 1501.20
3574 11/09/1993 1113.04
3575 11/09/1993 1114.03
3576 11/09/1993 1117.09
3577 11/09/1993 1120.02
3578 11/09/1993 1324.03
3579 11/09/1993 1703.03
3596 12/21/1993 1302.31, 1302.82 - deleted,
1302.48 - deleted, 1302.74A,
Art. 1304, 1305, 1306, 1307,
1308, 1308A, 1325.08(j),
1325.08(k)
3607 3/01/1994 913.01
3608 3/01/1994 927.02
3613 4/19/1994 1705.02 - P-100.7 - repealed
3617 5/17/1994 141.01
3618 6/07/1994 531.09 new section, 531.99
3619 6/07/1994 533.09 deleted; 533.10 through
533.13 renumbered; 533.99
3620 8/23/1994 935
3632 9/06/1994 1701
3633 9/06/1994 1703
3634 9/06/1994 1705
3635 9/06/1994 1733
3636 9/20/1994 935.07(b)
3639 10/04/1994 155.03,155.15; renumbering 155.15
and 155.16; 155.17 deleted
3640 10/18/1994 1501.04(b); 1501.20
3642 11/01/1994 342.06; 342.07; 342.10
3643 11/01/1994 343.06; 343.07; 343.10
3646 11/01/1994 1731.01; 1731.02
3659 1/03/1995 1161.08 added; renumbered 1161.09
through 1161.11
3660 1/03/1995 Art. 127 Addition
3669 2/07/1995 523.01; 523.02
3670 2/21/1995 935.07(b)
3671 2/21/1995 531.04
3672 3/07/1995 935.01 (c); 935.04 (a)
3674 3/21/1995 1319.03 (a) (2)
3675 3/21/1995 935.07(b); 935.07(c)
3680 4/04/1995 1120.02
3681 4/04/1995 303.01(a) (9) deleted
3684 4/18/1995 721 04(d) (IV), (f); 721.04(g) added
3685 4/18/1995 153 01; 153.04; 153.08
3686 5/02/1995 913.01
3687 5/02/1995 927.02
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
21
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
3689 6/06/1995 151.02
3690 6/06/1995 153.04
3691 6/20/1995 536.08
3692 6/20/1995 531.10 added
3698 7/18/1995 153.01
3705 8/22/1995 534.12(e) and (i)
3714 12/05/1995 971.03 added
3717 12/05/1995 538.01(c); 538.01(d) added; 538.04;
538.98 added
3718 12/21/1995 333.99(a)
3731 2/06/1996 721.02
3740 3/05/1996 1120.02
3751 5/21/1996 923.02(a)(13);923.02(d);923.02(a)(2);
923.03(b); 923.04(c)
3754 6/18/1996 536
3755 6/18/1996 1501.18(f)
3764 9/17/1996 151
3768 10/01/1996 913.01
3769 10/01/1996 927.02
3771 10/01/1996 342.06; 342.07; 342.10
3772 10/01/1996 343.06; 343.07; 343.10
3777 11/19/1996 Art 715
3799 2/04/1997 531.99
3800 2/04/1997 533.99
3806 3/04/1997 1120.02
3810 4/01/1997 Art 1701
3811 4/01/1997 Art 1703
3812 4/01/1997 Art 1705
3813 4/01/1997 Art 1733
3814 4/01/1997 Art 1706 - Addition
3815 4/01/1997 Art 1501
3821 6/03/1997 Art 933
3822 6/03/1997 Art 1160 - Addition
3826 6/17/1997 Art 536
3841 10/21/1997 Art 913
3842 10/21/1997 Art 927
3863 1/20/1998 93309
3868 2/17/1998 92103
3869 2/17/1998 92302
3870 2/17/1998 53699
3876 3/17/1998 92501; 925.03; 925.04; 925.05;
92506; 925.07
3880 4/21/1998 92302
3885 6/02/1998 53608; 536.99
3894 6/16/1998 10701; 107.06; 107.09 added
3895 7/07/1998 53199(c)
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
22
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
3896 7/07/1998 53404; 534.06; 534.07; 534.09;
53412; 534.13; 534.99
3905 10/06/1998 34206; 342.07; 342.10
3906 10/06/1998 34306; 343.07; 343.10
3922 12/15/1998 1113.04; 1113.05 added
3923 12/15/1998 1114.03; 1114.04 added
3924 12/15/1998 1703.02
3925 12/15/1998 342.01
3927 1/05/1999 910.05; 910.10
3928 1/05/1999 333.13 and 333.14 added
3929 1/05/1999 531.03; 531.04; 531.99
3930 1/05/1999 1501.18 (e) added
3931 1/05/1999 1120 Replacement
3932 1/05/1999 125.05 added
3933 2/02/1999 151.05(a)
3934 2/02/1999 1737 Replacement
3936 3/02/1999 913.01
3940 3/02/1999 927 Replacement
3944 3/16/1999 153.12 (a); 153.20 added
3945 3/16/1999 121.06 (b)
3946 3/16/1999 717.01 (n) , (B) ; 717.99
3947 4/06/1999 910.13 (b) (c)
3948 4/06/1999 Est. 736
3952 4/20/1999 Est. 1714
3958 7/06/1999 1302.17 A added, 1313.02 (a) (15) added
3963 9/07/1999 1322.04 (f)
3969 10/19/1999 534.06 (f), 534.10 (c)
3970 10/19/1999 535.01 (a)
3972 11/16/1999 1714.05(a); 1714.06(a)
3986 12/21/1999 935 Replacement
3987 12/21/1999 971.01
3988 12/21/1999 Est. 347
3989 2/01/2000 1714 .05, Exhibit B
3990 2/15/2000 155.12
3996 3/07/2000 531.04(f); 531.99(b)(5)
3997 3/07/2000 735.10; 735.11
3998 3/07/2000 1501.19 deleted; 1501.18(e) added
4007 5/02/2000 1714.06(b)
4010 6/06/2000 Est. 345
4011 6/06/2000 Est. 1718
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
23
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
4012 6/06/2000 1159.05
4017 6/06/2000 1117.01(d); 1117.11(a);
1117.13(g)
4018 6/06/2000 911 Replacement
4023 8/01/2000 923.01; 923.02; 923.03;
923.04; 923.05
4024 8/01/2000 503.03; 503.07; 503.08;
503.09; 503.10; 503.11;
503.12
4025 8/01/2000 521.03 deleted
4026 8/01/2000 540.01
4038 11/08/2000 Est. 1739
4042 11/21/2000 342.01(a)(2); 342.06; 342.07; 342.10
4043 11/21/2000 343.06; 343.07; 343.10
4044 11/21/2000 119.04(b)
4045 11/21/2000 1161.07(b)
4046 12/05/2000 141.01
4047 12/05/2000 143.01
4059 12/19/2000 1733.02
4068 2/20/2001 1304.02(d)
4069 2/20/2001 1318.30 added
4073 5/16/2001 913.05 replaced; 913.06
4077 6/05/2001 1302
4078 6/05/2001 1327.03; 1327.04; 1327.05;
1327.09(a); 1327.09(b)(4)(VI)(VII)
(VIII); 1327.09(c)(4)(5)(6)(7);
1327.09(d)(2)
4079 6/19/2001 1159.08 and 1159.09 added
4082 8/14/2001 139; 139.01 added
4087 9/04/2001 1318.31 (a) (b) (c) added
4088 9/04/2001 1161.03 replaced
4089 9/04/2001 1161.08 (g) added
4091 10/16/2001 153.01; 153.04
4093 11/20/2001 1163.02 (a); 1163.04
4095 11/20/2001 333.06 (c)
4096 11/20/2001 903.01 (b) replaced; 903.01 (c) relettered;
903.05 (a) (b)
4097 11/20/2001 907.01
4098 11/20/2001 921.04
4100 11/20/2001 1309.08 (a) added
4101 12/04/2001 921.02 (g) replaced
4102 12/04/2001 155.28 (a) (b) (c) (d) added
4116 12/18/2001 923 Replacement
4117 12/18/2001 135.01 (a) (b) (c)
4130 4/16/2002 341 Replacement
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
24
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
4131 5/22/2002 1739.04 B 4.9; 1739.04 C 4.13
4134 7/16/2002 531.03 (d)
4135 9/03/2002 1302.76
4136 9/03/2002 1310.02 (a)(8)
4137 9/03/2002 1311.02 (a)(4)
4138 9/03/2002 1318.30 (a)(1)
4139 9/03/2002 1320.04 (j)(k); 1320.05(b); 1320.06;
1320.07; 1320.08(a)(3)(11)(13);
1320.09(a)(2)(I)(V), (a)(3)(II)(V), (c);
1320.10(c)(2); 1320.11 renumbered
4140 9/03/2002 1345.02
4143 9/03/2002 121.08
4146 10/01/2002 1701
4147 10/01/2002 1703
4148 10/01/2002 1705
4149 10/01/2002 1706
4151 11/06/2002 1159 Replacement
4152 11/06/2002 303.01(a)(11)
4154 11/06/2002 905.02
4155 11/06/2002 909 Replacement
4156 11/06/2002 150
4159 12/03/2002 905.02
4172 12/23/2002 342.06; 342.07; 342.10
4173 12/23/2002 343.06; 343.07; 343.10
4187 5/06/2003 Estab. 1317B
4190 5/21/2003 1316.02(a)(19)
4191 5/21/2003 1317A.03(a)(47)
4192 5/21/2003 1320.04(i)
4193 5/21/2003 1326.02; 1326.03(b)
4194 6/03/2003 1301.07
4195 6/03/2003 1308.07
4200 6/17/2003 1120 Replacement
4203 7/29/2003 149.05; 149.06
4204 7/29/2003 150.02; 150.03(d)(e)
4205 8/19/2003 1304.07 added
4206 8/19/2003 1733.02
4215 10/21/2003 1302.38
4216 10/21/2003 1309.02(b)(7)
4217 10/21/2003 1318.11; 1318.17
4218 10/21/2003 1320.09(a)(2)(II)
4219 10/21/2003 1322.04(f)(1); 1322.04(m)(1) added
4220 11/05/2003 107.05; 107.08
4221 12/02/2003 155.12
4222 12/02/2003 951.01; 951.03
4234 12/16/2003 927.02
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
25
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
4235 12/16/2003 933.09
4236 12/16/2003 1731.02
4237 12/16/2003 913.01(b); 913.01(c)
4238 12/16/2003 1159 Replacement
4254 6/15/2004 1701 Replacement; Deleted 1501,
1702, 1703, 1705, and 1706
4255 6/15/2004 1702 Replacement
4256 6/15/2004 1703 Replacement
4257 6/15/2004 1705 Replacement
4259 6/15/2004 335 Replacement
4266 8/03/2004 1313.02(a)(12); 1313.02(a)(13)
1313.02(a)(16) added; Appendix A-4
4267 8/03/2004 709 Repealed
4268 8/03/2004 1711 Repealed
4269 8/17/2004 Appendix A-2
4272 8/17/2004 151.05
4273 8/17/2004 153.09; 153.12
4275 9/21/2004 Estab. Art. 128
4277 10/05/2004 534.12(k)
4278 10/05/2004 342.06; 342.07; 342.10
4279 10/05/2004 343.06; 343.07; 343.10
4282 10/19/2004 150.01
4286 11/03/2004 Estab. Art. 129
4300 12/21/2004 1113 Replacement; 1114 Repealed;
1115 Repealed; 1117 Repealed
4301 1/04/2005 339.01; 339.02(d); 339.02(f); 339.03;
339.04; 339.05; 339.08(b); 339.10
4302 1/04/2005 1304.08 added
4303 2/15/2005 347.02; 347.03
4304 2/15/2005 925 Replacement
4310 3/01/2005 1302.29; 1302.99
4311 3/01/2005 Added 1312.02(a)(18); 1312.02(a)(19);
and 1312.02(a)(20)
4312 3/01/2005 Added 1316.02(a)(25)
4313 3/01/2005 1319.01(a)(13)
4314 3/01/2005 1322.04(f)(5)(I)
4315 3/01/2005 Appendix A-2, A-3, and A-4
4316 3/15/2005 1347.14 added
4333 8/02/2005 927.02(a); 927.02(b)
4335 8/16/2005 121.09 added
4340 9/20/2005 1733
4341 9/20/2005 1731.01; 1731.02
4342 10/04/2005 921.08 added
4344 10/18/2005 1317.02(a) (6) and (7) added
4345 10/18/2005 1317A.03(a)(48) added
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
26
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
4350 12/06/2005 1113.05; 1113.06; 1113.07 added
4363 12/20/2005 913 Replacement
4372 2/21/2006 927.02 (a) (b) (d)
4373 3/07/2006 1323.04; 1323.05; 1323.06; 1323.12
4374 3/07/2006 Added 1314A, 1314A.01, 1314A.02,
1314A.03, 1314A.04, 1314A.05, 1314A.06,
1314A.07, 1314A.08
4379 4/04/2006 Added 121.10
4380 4/18/2006 Added 1302.05, 1302.63, 1306.02(c)(3),
1308A.02(a)(5), 1309.02(a)(3); 1319.01(a)(9);
Added 1325.08(L)
4384 5/02/2006 1120.05
4391 9/19/2006 Estab. Art. 1314.B
4392 10/03/2006 Added 1302.49, 1317A.03(a)(49);
1319.01(a)(34); and amended
1317A.03(a)(5), 1317A.04,
1313.02(a)(1)
4393 10/03/2006 Added 1302.49, amended
1317A.03(a)(5), 1313.02(a)(1),
1317A.04, added 1319.01(a)(34),
1317A.03(a)(49), 1317A.08, 1302.03,
1302.21, 1302.51, 1302.62, repealed
1302.71, 1318.26, added 1325.08.1,
added 1318.33, 1318.34, 1318.35,
1311.02(c)(5) and (6), 1313.02(c)(1)
and (2), 1317.02(c)(2).
1317A.03(c)(10),(11) and (12),
1319.01(a)(35)
4397 10/03/2006 Added 1159.01(5), 1159.02 E,
amended 1159.07, delete 1159.08,
amended 1159.09, 1159.10, 1159.11.
1159.15, 1159.16, 1159.99
4399 11/08/2006 Added 509.03, amended 509.99
4400 11/08/2006 717 Replacement
4406 12/05/2006 342.06, 342.07, 342.10
- 12/31/2006 Art. 343 – Terminated
4419 3/06/2007 1733.02
4420 3/06/2007 1701.01, 1701.02
4421 3/06/2007 1702.01(c), 1702.01(h)
4423 4/17/2007 Art. 925 Replacement
4424 4/17/2007 941.01(f), added 941.01(g), 941.04(a), 941.04(e),
added 941.01(h)
4425 5/01/2007 121.08, added 121.08(c)
4430 5/01/2007 1120.05 C(1)(2), added 1120.05 C(8)
4431 5/01/2007 Estab. Art. 146
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
27
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
4432 5/16/2007 1714.04 q.; 1714.05 b.c.; 1714.06 a.;
1714.06 d.; 1714.07 a.(1)(i)(iii);
1714.08 e.; 1714.09 a.(1);
1714.09 b.(1)(a)(b), 1714.10 a.(1)(2)
(3)(4)(5)(6)(7); 1714.11 c.; deleted
1714.11 d.
4433 6/19/2007 Art. 313 Repealed & Replaced
4436 7/03/2007 Added 129.03
4439 7/03/2007 1347.10
4441 9/04/2007 Added 1343.02(e)1, added
1343.02(f)(2)R,S,T,U, added
1343.02(f)(3)S,T,U,V
4442 9/04/2007 Added 1345.06
4446 10/16/2007 342.01(a)(2)(5); 342.02(b); 342.03
342.04(a); 342.05; 342.06; 342.07;
342.10; added 342.11; added 342.12
4447 11/07/2007 Added 531.01(d)(e); 531.99(b)(3)(4)(5)
4448 11/07/2007 533.99(b)
4454 12/04/2007 Re-enacted Art. 339
4466 12/18/2007 933.09
4471 2/05/2008 Added 1703.04(e)(1)
2008-20 7/01/2008 Replaced 913.01; added 913.09;
added 913.10
2008-24 9/02/2008 Added 121.08(d)
2008-42 12/16/2008 342.06
2008-43 12/16/2008 933.01; 933.02; 933.03; 933.04; Added
933.05; Renumbered and amended
933.06; 933.07; 933.08; 933.09; 933.10
2009-1 1/06/2009 923.01; 923.02(a)(10); 923.02(d);
923.02(i); 923.02(j); 923.03; 923.04(g);
923.04(m)(1); 923.04(m)(3); 923.04(m)(4);
923.04(n); 923.04(r);
923.04(u); 923.04(w); 923.08
2009-2 1/06/2009 1324.03; 1325.04(a)(2)
2009-6 3/03/2009 129.01 repealed and replaced
2009-11 4/07/2009 1120.02; 1120.03 (A) 1120.03 (B);
1120.04 (E); 1120.05 (B); 1120.05 (C);
1120.05 (D)
2009-12 5/20/2009 107.03; 107.04; 107.06
2009-13 5/20/2009 109.03
2009-14 5/20/2009 111.03
2009-23 9/01/2009 941.01(h) added; 941.05(g)
2009-39 12/22/2009 Art. 721 Replacement
2010-1 1/19/2010 911.09(g)
2010-3 3/16/2010 1701.02
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
28
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
2010-4 3/16/2010 1702.01
2010-8 4/06/2010 121.11 added
2010-10 5/19/2010 531.99
2010-11 5/19/2010 538.01(a); 538.01(b)
2010-12 5/19/2010 146.01; 146.09
2010-13 5/19/2010 Estab. Art. 738
2010-18 7/06/2010 531.99(c)
2010-19 7/06/2010 533.99(b)(1)
2010-26 12/07/2010 342.06
2010-27 12/07/2010 1733.01; 1733.02
2010-28 12/21/2010 1113.05(b)(1); 1113.05(b)(2)
2010-29 12/21/2010 1731.01; 1731.02
2010-30 12/21/2010 721.06; 721.08
2010-31 12/21/2010 903.05
2010-32 12/21/2010 907.01
2010-33 12/21/2010 909.04; 909.06
2010-34 12/21/2010 910.05
2010-35 12/21/2010 925.28(c) added
2010-36 12/21/2010 933.10
2010-37 12/21/2010 1735.04; 1735.06
2010-38 12/21/2010 1739.03; 1739.04
2011-4 3/01/2011 Art. 735 Replacement
2011-8 3/01/2011 121.12 added
2011-9 3/01/2011 Estab. Art. 112
2011-12 5/18/2011 531.04(f)
2011-13 7/01/2011 Estab. Art. 145
2011-19 7/19/2011 121.08 (d)
2011-25 11/01/2011 Re-enact Art. 333
2011-40 12/21/2011 521.01
2011-41 12/21/2011 Estab. Art. 1501
2012-3 2/21/2012 913.01(a)(e)
2012-4 2/21/2012 927.02(a)(b)
2012-6 3/06/2012 135.01(a)(b)(c)
2012-7 3/06/2012 1703.01(c)(d)(f); 1703.02(c), 1703.04(e)(1);
1703.04(e)(2) added; 1703.08; 1703.12(c);
1703.13
2012-11 3/20/2012 Repeal Art. 738
2012-12 3/20/2012 721.05
2012-14 5/01/2012 107.02
2012-22 8/07/2012 111.01, 111.02
2012-24 9/19/2012 531.99 (c)
2012-25 9/19/2012 1739.03 B 3.4 added
2012-28 10/02/2012 342.01(a)(2); 342.06
2012-30 11/20/2012 911.09 (g); 911.09 (h) added
2012-42 12/20/2012 1703.04 (e) (1); 1703.04 (e) (2) added
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
29
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
2013-1 1/15/2013 Estab. Art. 304
2013-13 5/07/2013 908.06; 908.07; 908.08
2013-19 8/06/2013 Estab. Art. 1732
2013-26 10/01/2013 151.05; 151.09; 151.11; 151.16
2013-27 10/01/2013 153.03; 153.04; 153.07; 153.08; 153.12
2014-1 1/06/2014 145.05 B
2014-2 1/06/2014 146.02; 146.03; 146.06
2014-3 2/18/2014 927.02(a)(b)
2014-5 3/04/2014 1120.05 C; 1120.05 D; 1120.06 added
2014-10 4/16/2014 135.01(a)(b)(c)
2014-11 4/16/2014 139
2014-15 6/03/2014 307.06 deleted
2014-21 8/05/2014 1701.02
2014-22 8/05/2014 149.06(b)(c)
2014-25 8/19/2014 913.01
2014-27 8/19/2014 121.05
2014-28 9/16/2014 717.01(b)
2014-30 10/21/2014 157.01; 157.02; 157.03
2014-33 11/18/2014 Art. 941 Replacement
2014-34 12/02/2014 Art. 940 Replacement
2014-46 12/16/2014 309.03
2014-47 12/16/2014 Art. 1113 Replacement
2014-48 12/16/2014 1731.02; 1731.99
2014-49 12/16/2014 304.03; 304.06
2015-1 01/20/2015 112.01; 112.03
112.04 added
112.99 added
2015-2 02/03/2015 133.01; 133.03
2015-3 02/17/2015 303.01(a)
2015-11 03/17/2015 725.01
2015-12 03/17/2015 941.05
2015-14 03/17/2015 927.02(c)
2015-22 05/05/2015 117.01(b)
117.01(c) added
2015-23 05/05/2015 531.01(a)(11) added
531.99(b)(9) added
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
30
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE.docx
Updated 12.31.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Codified Ordinance Article(s)/Section(s)
Number in Council Referenced
2016-01 01/04/2016 933.10 Annex A
2016-09 04/19/2016 121.07
2016-10 04/19/2016 Art. 122 Replacement
2016-11 04/19/2016 941.01; 941.04(f); 941.05(a), (d)(1), and (d)(3);
941.05(h) added; 941.06(a) and (g); 941.06(j) added
2016-14 06/07/2016 Established Art. 1162; Repealed Art. 931;
Repealed Article 935
2016-15 06/07/2016 Deleted 1161.08; renumbered remaining sections
2016-21 07/19/2016 146.02 and 146.06
2016-22 08/02/2016 Established Art. 742
2016-23 09/06/2016 342.01(a)(2); 342.06
2016-24 09/06/2016 Deleted/Re-enacted Art. 149
2016-28 10/18/2016 153.01; 153.04
2016-29 10/18/2016 Added 531.01(b)(9)
2016-32 11/15/2016 107.01; 107.04; 107.06
2016-33 11/15/2016 927.02
FEES FOR SUBDIVISION AND/OR SITE PLAN REVIEW
BY CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
EFFECTIVE MAY 23, 1989
SUBDIVISION WHICH CREATE NEW STREETS,
WATER MAINS, OR SEWER MAINS AND/OR
CONTAIN OVER ONE (1) ACRE
$ 200 + $25 PER LOT
P.U.D. $ 400 + $20 PER
DWELLING UNIT
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS $ 50 + $25 PER LOT
SITE PLAN RESIDENTIAL
SIZE
1 - 8 UNITS
$ 50 + $10 PER UNIT
9 - 25 UNITS $ 75 + $ 8 PER UNIT
26 - 50 UNITS $ 100 + $ 7 PER UNIT
51 - 100 UNITS $ 200 + $ 5 PER UNIT
OVER 100 UNITS $ 400 + $15 PER ACRE
SITE PLAN, NON-RESIDENTIAL $ 200 + $15 PER ACRE
ZONING ORDINANCE (INCLUDING MAP) $ 15
SUBDIVISION & DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE $ 10
ZONING MAP $ 2
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
REVIEW FEE FORM
Title of Plan
Major Subdivision-------------------------------------- $200 + $25 per lot
PUD------------------------------------------------------- $400 + $20 per D.U.
Minor Subdivision------------------------------------- $ 50 + $25 per lot
Site Plan Residential
1 – 8 Units---------------------------------------------------------- $ 50 + $10 Per Unit
9 – 25 Units-------------------------------------------------------- $ 75 + $ 8 Per Unit
26 to 50 Units------------------------------------------------------ $100 + $ 7 Per Unit
51 – 100 Units----------------------------------------------------- $200 + $ 6 Per Unit
Over 100 Units---------------------------------------------------- $400 + $ 5 Per Unit
Site Plan Non-Residential-------------------------------------- $200 + $15 Per Acre
Fee:
Checked by:
(THIS FORM IS THREE PART NCR)
EDITOR'S NOTE
The arrangement and numbering of the Codified Ordinances into
component codes, titles, articles and sections is based on an adaptation of a
decimal numbering system, and is in accordance with the best accepted
practice in instituting a codification. Each section is self-identifying as to
code, article and section number. For example, 1505.06 indicates that the
code number is 15, the article number is 1505 (or the 5th chapter within code
15), and the section number is .06. The code and article numbers appear left
of the decimal, with the code number preceding the first two digits left of the
decimal, and the article number being all digits left of the decimal. The
section number appears right of the decimal. As another example, 113.I0
indicates the code number is 1, the article number is 113 (or the 13th article
within code 1), and the section number is .10.
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
TAX BUREAU
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR
TAX ON EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS
NOTICE
All taxpayers are subject to these Rules and Regulations and to the Earned
Income Tax Resolutions/Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, levying a tax on earned
income and net profits and requiring resident employers to withhold the tax from their
employees.
The Tax Resolutions/Ordinances and these Rules and Regulations are continuing
ones, applicable until changed by the City of Bethlehem.
Copies of the original Tax Resolutions/Ordinances may be examined at City Hall,
10 East Church Street, Bethlehem, Pa. 18018.
1
INDEX
ARTICLE SECTION PAGE
I GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 Definitions 3-5
II IMPOSITION OF TAX
201 Persons Subject to Tax 5
202 What Is Taxed 6
203 What is Included in "Earned Income" 6-8
204 What is Included in "Net Profits" 8-9
205 Exclusions from Tax 9-10
206 Resident Taxation 10
207 Nonresident Taxation 10
208 Credits 11
209 Deductions and Losses 11-12
III COLLECTION AT THE SOURCE
301 Employers Required to Withhold 12
302 Voluntary Withholding 12
303 Registration of Employers 12
304 Liability of Employee 12
IV PAYMENT OF TAX AND RETURNS
401 Annual Returns by Taxpayers 13-14
402 Declaration and Payment of Tax 14
403 Returns of Employers and Payment of Withheld Tax 15-16
404 Fiscal Years 16
405 Cash or Accrual Basis 16-17
406 Penalty, Interest and Late Filing Fees 17-18
407 Extensions 18-19
408 Change in Federal or Pennsylvania Taxable Income 19
V ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
501 Income Tax Officer 19
502 Administrative Appeals 19-20
503 Examination of Books and Records of Taxpayers and Employers 20
504 Records to be Kept by Taxpayers and Employers 21
505 Refunds and Credits 21-23
506 Fines and Penalties for Violations 23
507 Concurrent Remedies 23
508 Failure to Receive Forms 23
509 Return Completion - General 23-25
510 Who Must File 25-26
511 Registration of Taxpayers 26
512 Installment Plans for Delinquent Amounts 26-27
513 Suit for Collection of Delinquent Amounts 27
514 Wage Attachments 28
2
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101. DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in the Tax Ordinances and Resolutions and in these Rules
and Regulations have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
“Assessment” The determination by a local taxing authority of the amount of
underpayment by a taxpayer.
"Association." A partnership, limited partnership, or any other unincorporated group
of two or more persons. - *
"Business." An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an
unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a
person, partnership, association, or any other entity. - *
"Corporation." A corporation or joint stock association organized under the laws of the
United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency. - *
"Current Year." The calendar year for which the tax is being levied. - *
"Domicile." The place where one lives and has his or her permanent home and to
which he or she has the intention of returning whenever he or she is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of abode which, in
the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory. Domicile is the
voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event
occurs to induce him or her to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of
businesses, or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the center of business
affairs and the place where its functions are discharged. - *
"Earned Income." Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments, fees, tips
and other compensation received by a person or his or her personal representative for
services rendered, whether directly or through an agent, and whether in cash or in
property; not including, however, wages or compensation paid to persons on active
military service, periodic payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages
received during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising under
workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar legislation, or
payments commonly recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or pensions paid to
persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of
employment or payments commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment
compensation payments by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses
or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary supplemental
programs, including, but not limited to, programs covering hospitalization, sickness,
disability or death, supplemental unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security
and retirement. - *
"Employee." A person employed by an "employer" on a salary, wage, commission or
other compensation basis. Any person who renders services to another for financial
consideration or its equivalent, under an express or implied contract, and who is under the
control and direction of the latter and shall include temporary, provisional, casual, or
part-time employment.
3
"Employer." A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or more persons
for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation. - *
"Income Tax Officer or Officer" Person, public employee, or private agency designated by the
governing body to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net profits. - *
"Independent Contractor" A person who, while performing services for another person, is not
subject to the direction and control of the other as to the details, methods and means by
which a result directed by the other is accomplished. Where the independent contractor
is in the permanent or part-time employment of an employer, however, that contractor
will be considered an employee of said employer for the purpose of withholding the tax
due under the Ordinances and Resolutions.
“Local taxing authority” A political subdivision levying an eligible tax. The term shall include
any officer, agent, agency, clerk, income tax officer, employee or other person to whom
the governing body has assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment, determination or
administration of an eligible tax. The term shall not include a tax collector or collection
agency who has no authority to audit a taxpayer or determine the amount of eligible tax
or whose only responsibility is to collect an eligible tax on behalf of the governing body.
"Net Profits." The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other
activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses incurred in the
conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the
accounting system used in such business, profession, or other activity, but without
deduction of taxes based on income. - *
"Office." City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau - an office established by the City of
Bethlehem, to collect and receive earned income and net profit taxes and administer
earned income and net profit tax ordinances or resolutions of City of Bethlehem, and any
political subdivisions, including school districts, with which it may enter into collection
agreements. The Office performs the function of the "Income Tax Officer".
“Overpayment” Any payment of tax which is determined in the manner provided by
law not to be due.
"Nonresident." A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled outside the
taxing district. - *
"Person" or "Individual." A natural person. - *
"Preceding Year." The calendar year before the current year. - *
"Resident." A person, partnership, association, or other entity domiciled in the
taxing district. - *
"Resolution" As adopted by the taxing district levying and or "Ordinance" assessing
an earned income and net profits tax.
"Succeeding Year." The calendar year following the current year. - *
"Taxing District" or "District" The political subdivisions, including school districts, levying and
assessing an earned income and net profits tax, which have appointed or commissioned
the City of Bethlehem's Tax Bureau to collect and administer the tax on earned income
and net profits.
4
"Taxpayer." A person, partnership, association, or any other entity, required
hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay a tax thereon. - *
“Underpayment” The amount or portion of any tax determined to be legally due in the
manner provided by law for which payment or remittance has not been made.
“Voluntary payment” The payment of an eligible tax made pursuant to the free will of the
taxpayer. The term does not include a payment as a result of distraint or levy or pursuant
to a legal proceeding in which the local taxing authority is seeking to collect its
delinquent taxes or file a claim therefor.
[* - NOTE: Pursuant to Section 13 of the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Act 511, "The Local Tax
Enabling Act" (herein "Act 511"), 53 P.S. 6913, as amended, definitions contained therein "shall be
exclusive for any tax upon earned income and net profits levied and assessed pursuant to this act, and shall
not be altered or changed by any political subdivision levying and assessing such tax." Definitions
contained herein and marked "*" are those set forth in Act 511 as of the date of the adoption of these Rules
and Regulations. Amendments to Act 511 revising definitions shall supersede those contained herein.]
ARTICLE II IMPOSITION OF TAX
SECTION 201. PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAX:
All persons who are:
(a) residents of City of Bethlehem and coterminous Taxing Districts, who are employed or
engaged in the operation of a business, profession, or other activity for income or profit;
(b) non-residents of City of Bethlehem and coterminous Taxing Districts, who are employed
in City of Bethlehem or coterminous Taxing Districts, or engaged in the operation of a
business, profession, or other activity for income or profit in City of Bethlehem or
coterminous Taxing Districts, are subject to this tax.
A "resident" is an individual who is domiciled in City of Bethlehem or a coterminous Taxing District, as
evidenced, among other things, by one or more of the following:
a. By customarily being physically present, sleeping, and eating there.
b. By holding him or herself out as residing there, i.e. giving address in registration for
licenses, voting, a nd payment of personal or property taxes.
c. By his or her spouse and minor children living there.
d. By maintaining religious, civic, and club affiliations there.
e. By the center of his or her affairs appearing to be there.
Normally it is not difficult to determine the domicile of a person because most of the determining factors
point to one conclusion. Obviously, if a person has all of the foregoing factors occurring in one district, he
or she is a resident of that district. Of more difficulty is the situation concerning persons for whom some of
the factors occur in one district and others take place elsewhere. In such cases the residence or domicile of
an individual shall be determined by the Officer based on all of the legally relevant factors which affect the
issue. Each case shall be determined solely on its own facts.
5
SECTION 202. WHAT IS TAXED:
A. The tax is imposed on earned income and net profits as both are defined in Article I of these Rules
and Regulations. These items are subject to the tax whether a taxpayer received them directly or
through an agent.
B. The earned income and net profits tax shall be applicable to earned income received and net
profits earned in the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year, or in the
fiscal year of taxpayers electing a fiscal year basis under Section 404.B. The tax shall continue in
force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate
of tax is subsequently changed. Changes in the rate shall become effective on the date specified in
the Ordinances or Resolutions.
C. Trusts or Estates. Every estate or trust must pay the tax:
(1) on net profits resulting from its engagement in any business, trade or other activity which
would require the filing of a return by an individual or partnership, and (2) on income which
would be subject to the tax if received by an individual or partnership.
SECTION 203. WHAT IS INCLUDED IN EARNED INCOME:
Examples of earned income (without intending in any way to limit the provisions of the Ordinances or
Resolutions to these examples) are:
A. Gross Salaries.
B. Gross Wages.
C. Commissions.
D. Bonuses.
E. Drawing Accounts. (If amounts received as a drawing account exceed the salary or
commissions earned, the tax is payable on the amounts received. If the employee
subsequently repays to the employer any amounts not in fact earned, the tax shall be
adjusted accordingly).
F. Incentive Payments.
G. Tips and gratuities.
H. Fees.
I. Honoraria.
J. Benefits accruing from employment, including but not limited to, annual leave, vacation,
holiday, sickness, and severance or separation pay or benefits; excluding, however,
benefits referred to in Section 205.A.
K. Fair market value of non-cash fringe benefits accruing by virtue of employment
recognized as taxable by the Internal Revenue Code or the Pennsylvania Department of
Revenue are also to be included as taxable earned income.
6
EXAMPLES: (taxable non-cash fringe benefits)
(1) Personal use of a vehicle provided by the taxpayer's employer.
(2) Taxpayer A receives a salary of $ 70,000. In addition to this salary, Taxpayer A
has exercised a non-qualified stock option as reported on Form W2, of $ 11,000,
and was compensated for spouse's travel expenses in the amount taxable noncash
fringe benefits of $ 3,100. Therefore Taxpayer A's total taxable
compensation is $ 84,100.
(3) Taxpayer B receives a salary of $ 55,000, of which $ 9,000 is deferred to a
401(k) plan for retirement. Taxpayer B's local taxable earned income is
$ 55,000. Any plan which serves to reduce gross taxable wages for federal tax
purposes is not recognized as an exclusion for earned income tax purposes.
(4) Taxpayer C is a minister, employed by a church, but he does not live in a church
provided parsonage. Taxpayer C receives a salary of $ 30,000, a housing
allowance of $ 10,000, and a car\travel expense allowance of $ 3,000. The total
taxable compensation is $ 43,000. To claim unreimbursed business expenses,
Taxpayer C can file a Pennsylvania Department of Revenue Schedule UE as a
deduction from the taxable compensation.
(5) Taxpayer D has recently moved into the City of Bethlehem. In addition to a
salary of $ 43,000, Taxpayer D received $ 10,000 in moving expense
reimbursements from his\her employer. The total taxable compensation for
Taxpayer D is $ 53,000. Taxpayer D can file a Pa. Department of Revenue
Schedule UE for moving expenses in excess of the reimbursed amount. Federal
Form 3903 must accompany the Schedule UE.
L. Taxes assumed by the employer for the employee.
M. Regular wages received during a period of sickness or disability.
N. Employee contributions to deferred compensation plans and old age or retirement benefit
programs, or cafeteria plans.
O. Value of meals and lodging furnished by employers to domestics or other employees
unless provided for the convenience of the employer on the employer's premises.
P. National Guard Pay and Military Reserve Pay (except active duty).
Q. Stipends paid to Graduate Assistants. (Also see Section 205.U).
R. Parsonage/Housing allowance payments received by the taxpayer.
S. Profit Distributions.
T. Moving Allowances.
U. A Cafeteria or Flexible Benefit Plan is one in which an employee may choose from a
package of employer-provided fringe benefits, some of which may be taxable and some
of which may be non-taxable. Employer contributions to a Cafeteria Plan or Flexible
Benefit Plan are included in gross compensation only to the extent the employee has
elected taxable benefits.
7
Generally, a plan that provides for deferred compensation is not a Cafeteria Plan.
However, certain profit sharing or stock bonus plans, and certain life insurance plans can
be offered through a cafeteria plan even though they provide for deferred compensation.
Where an employee has elected to participate in a cafeteria plan or flexible benefit plan
that provides for deferred compensation, the cafeteria plan or flexible benefit plan will be
considered as taxable compensation for earned income tax purposes.
V. All other forms of compensation or remuneration for an employee's services rendered,
whether in cash, property or services.
W. Back pay awards when the payment represents salary, wages, commissions, bonuses,
incentive payments, fees, tips, or other compensation to which the employee is entitled
for services rendered.
X. Guaranteed Payments received by Individual Partners of a Partnership.
Neither the kind nor the rate of payment, nor the manner of employment, exempts an employee
from the tax. Compensation received in the form of property shall be taxed at its fair market value
at the time of receipt.
SECTION 204. WHAT IS INCLUDED IN NET PROFITS:
Examples of "net profits" (without intending in any way to limit the provisions of the Ordinances or
Resolutions to these examples) are:
A. The net profits of a business, profession or farm conducted by a sole proprietor as
computed according to the laws, regulations and procedures for computing Federal
Income Tax "net profits" or "net farm profits" and required to be reported on Federal
Income Tax Form 1040 (Schedules C, E, or F of the current year edition).
B. The net profits of a business, profession or farm conducted as a partnership as computed
according to the laws, regulations and procedures for computing Federal Income Tax "net
earnings from self employment" and as required to be reported on Federal Tax Form
1065 (Schedule 1 of current year edition).
C. Royalties and patent or copyright fees received by authors, composers, inventors and
other such individuals.
D. Net profits from the operation of hotels, motels, trailer camps, tourist homes, boarding
houses, bed and breakfast establishments, mobile home parks and other similar
businesses.
E. Net profits from the business of renting personal property.
F. Real estate rentals received in the course of a trade or business are taxable.
G. All other net profits of business activities except any portion thereof resulting from items
not taxed under the provisions of the Ordinances or Resolutions as set forth in Section
205 hereof.
H. In determining net profits subject to tax under the provisions of the Ordinances and
Resolutions, the net profit of each business activity is to be determined separately with
reference only to the gross income and expenses of that business and without mixing the
income of one activity with the expenses of another. Persons engaged in more than one
8
business activity during the tax year may not offset a loss in one activity against the gain
in another. The tax is imposed on the net profit of each business activity separately. A
loss incurred from a profession, business activity or venture, regardless of the nature, may
not be deducted from the net profit of any other business activity. (See Aronson vs. City
of Pittsburgh, 86 Pa. Cmwlth. 591, 485 A.2d 890 (1985).
EXAMPLE:
A person who receives net profits from the operation of a sole proprietorship may not
offset against such profits the net losses incurred as a partner in another business activity.
I. Each resident partner or member of a non-resident partnership, association or other entity
must pay the tax on his or her share of the net profits whether or not it is actually
distributed to him or her.
J. In the calculations utilized to determine the correct net profits, the following items are to
be included as they shall be considered to be part of the business income:
(1) Interest received on business checking and/or savings accounts.
(2) Interest received on credit sales.
(3) Interest received on withheld employee taxes.
(4) Discounts received from Pennsylvania for timely remitting of sales taxes.
(5) Damages, awards and settlements received when such damages, awards and
settlements represent compensation for income lost.
SECTION 205. EXCLUSIONS FROM TAX:
The following are not considered to be earned income and are not subject to the tax:
A. Sickness, disability, or retirement benefits paid, other than regular wages as provided in
Section 203.M.
B. Benefits paid under any public assistance, unemployment or worker's compensation
legislation, including supplemental unemployment benefits (SUB pay), or strike pay.
C. Death benefit payments to an employee's beneficiary or estate, whether payable in a lump
sum or otherwise.
D. Proceeds of Life Insurance policies or annuities.
E. Cash or property received as a gift, by will, or by statutes of descent and distribution.
F. Personal interest and dividends. (Interest earned on business accounts must be included in
the calculations of net profits and may not be deducted).
G. Value of meals and lodging furnished by the employer to domestics or other employees
for the convenience of the employer on the employer's premises.
H. Capital gains.
I. Social Security benefits.
9
J. Veterans administration allotments for subsistence or disability.
K. Income from pensions or old age and retirement benefit plans upon retirement.
L. Active duty military service pay.
M. Lottery winnings.
N. Cost of group term life insurance.
O. Individual Retirement Account (I.R.A.) payments received upon retirement.
P. S Corporation income. (This does not include compensation paid to the officers of an S
corporation nor does this include any salaries, wages, commissions, fees, or other
compensation received by an officer, director, stock holder, or employee of an S
Corporation).
Q. Profits from limited partnerships engaged in real estate, oil, gas, mining leases or other
similar passive investments.
R. Distributions from deferred compensation plans to the extent that such distributions
represent a return of the taxpayer's own contribution upon which he originally paid the
tax.
S. Damages for personal injuries.
T. Payments received for child support and alimony.
U. Scholarships and fellowships awarded from detached generosity on the basis of financial
need or academic achievement for the sole purpose of encouraging or allowing the
recipient to further his or her educational development and not as compensation for past,
present or future services. A scholarship or fellowship shall constitute earned income if
the recipient must apply his or her skills and training to advance research, creative work
or some other project or activity.
V. Prizes and awards unless the recipient must render substantial service as a condition to
receiving the prize or award.
The items listed and described within Section 205 are not to be listed as deductions against income (except
paragraph N), as they are a list of non-taxable income sources.
SECTION 206. RESIDENT TAXATION:
The entire earned income and net profits received and/or earned by a resident of City of Bethlehem is
subject to this tax. Neither the source of the earned income or net profits nor the place where it is received
and/or earned exempts a resident from the tax.
SECTION 207. NON-RESIDENT TAXATION:
The entire earned income and net profits received and/or earned by a non-resident of the Taxing District
who is employed in the Taxing District or engaged in the operation of a business, profession, or other
activity for income or profit in the Taxing District, is subject to this tax; provided, however, that nonresidents
are not subject to taxation by school districts.
10
SECTION 208. CREDITS:
Credit for earned income or net profits tax paid for the concurrent time period to another state or political
subdivision will be allowed as a deduction from the liability of taxpayers for tax imposed under the
provisions of the Ordinances and Resolutions and as provided by Act 511. Such allowable credit will be
available up to the maximum effective rate of the tax levied by the Taxing District; provided, however, that
this same credit has not already been applied towards the taxpayer's liability for the Pennsylvania Personal
Income Tax for the same period. Evidence of the amount of gross earnings and payments of the applicable
tax on earned income or net profits is required before this credit is allowed.
SECTION 209. DEDUCTIONS AND LOSSES:
A. Deductions:
Employee's Unreimbursed Business Expenses - Business Expenses for which an employee has not been
reimbursed are allowed as a deduction from earned income provided such expenses meet the "four part
test" as established by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue. That is, the expense must be "ordinary,
actual, reasonable, and necessary" in order to be deducted from earned income. This means that any
expense claimed as a deduction from gross earnings must be:
1. Customary and accepted in the industry or occupation in which the taxpayer works.
2. Directly related to the taxpayer's present occupation as opposed to an occupation in
which he plans to enter in the future.
3. Reasonable in amount and not lavish or excessive.
4. Necessary to enable the taxpayer to properly perform the duties of his present
employment.
Those expenses not meeting the "four part test" are not allowed as a deduction from earned
income. The taxpayer has the burden of proving that any expense claimed is ordinary, actual,
reasonable and necessary and must maintain adequate and sufficient records to substantiate any
such deduction taken.
Examples of expenses which may not be deducted from earned income include (but are not limited to):
Travel (commuting) to and from work; meals and lodging unless the "away from home overnight test" is
met; capital expenditures; moving, educational and office-in-home expenses except as allowed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue; and personal expenses such as medical, dental, life insurance
premiums, contributions, interest, other taxes, gifts and entertainment, dues to professional or fraternal
societies, club memberships, subscriptions to publications, alimony, babysitting, books, casualty or theft
losses, license fees, clothing suitable for everyday use, employee deferred compensation plan contributions,
Federal Form 1040 tax credits and other taxes, individual retirement account (IRA) contributions, employee
contributions to Simplified Employee Pension Plans (S.E.P.), Federal State or Local income taxes, gift
estate or inheritance taxes and personal taxes, penalties or interest paid on delinquent income taxes, tools
for use at home, Federal Form 1040 itemized deductions or the Occupational Privilege Tax.
B. Losses:
Taxpayers are allowed to offset a gain in one class of income against a loss in another class of income.
O’Reilly v. Fox Chapel Area School District, 555 A.2d. 1288, 521 Pa. 471, 1989
11
If a net loss is incurred from the operation one or more business activities, the amount of the net loss or
losses must be listed separately (not combined with the net profit of any other business or businesses).
Aronson v. City of Pittsburgh, 485 A.2d. 890, 86 Pa. Cmwlth. 591, 1985
Losses may only be applied in the year in which the loss was actually incurred, and may not be carried
forward to subsequent years.
One person's losses may not be deducted from his or her spouse's earnings.
S Corporation losses may not offset the earned income or net profit of any taxpayer.
ARTICLE III COLLECTION AT THE SOURCE
SECTION 301. EMPLOYERS REQUIRED TO WITHHOLD:
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business
located within the Taxing District and who employs one or more persons (other than domestic
servants in a private home) for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation, shall deduct
the tax from the employee's wage at the time of payment thereof.
B. Fiduciary Status - Employers who withhold earned income tax from employees, and the person
responsible for the transmission of earned income tax withheld by a corporate employer, shall be a
fiduciary charged with all the responsibilities of a fiduciary with respect to taxes withheld, and
shall be subject to all duties imposed by law on fiduciaries, including criminal penalties for breach
of duties.
SECTION 302. VOLUNTARY WITHHOLDING:
Any employer located outside the Taxing District may voluntarily withhold the tax from employees who
are residents of Taxing District but are employed outside the Taxing District. Such employers assume the
fiduciary responsibilities as outlined in Section 301.B.
SECTION 303. REGISTRATION OF EMPLOYERS:
A. Each employer withholding or required to withhold tax pursuant to Sections 301 and 302 shall
register with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau such employer's name and address and such other
information as the Officer may require within fifteen (15) days after becoming a withholding
employer.
B. All employers who have a place of business located within the Taxing District shall maintain
complete records of all employees for a period of six (6) years in such form as to enable the
Officer to determine the employers' liability to withhold for each employee, the amount of taxable
income for each employee, the actual amount of tax withheld, the actual amount transmitted to the
Officer and such other information available to such employers as will enable the Officer to carry
out his or her responsibilities.
SECTION 304. LIABILITY OF EMPLOYEE:
Failure or omission of any employer to withhold the tax shall not relieve the employee from payment of the
tax, or from complying with the requirements relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
12
ARTICLE IV PAYMENT OF TAX AND RETURNS
SECTION 401. ANNUAL RETURNS OF TAXPAYERS:
A. On or before April 15 of each year, every person who was:
(1) a resident of the Taxing District who was employed or engaged in the operation of a
business, profession, or other activity for income or profit; or
(2) a non-resident of the Taxing District who was employed in the Taxing District or
engaged in the operation of a business, profession, or other activity for income or profit
in the Taxing District, for all or any part of the preceding calendar year; shall file with
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau an Annual Tax Return showing all earned income and
net profits received and/or earned for the previous year.
B. Persons residing in more than one taxing district during the calendar year must file an Annual Tax
Return with the Officer for each district in which they resided during the year.
C. If a person receives an Annual Tax Return from the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau and has no
earned income to report, the word "none" shall be entered on the Annual Tax Return, and the
return shall be signed, dated, and returned to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau with an
explanation (Military Service, Retired, Disability Income Only, Unemployment Compensation
Only, S Corporation Only, Housewife, Unemployed Student, or Deceased).
D. If net profits are received, the type of business, profession or activity shall be indicated on the
Annual Tax Return and the amount of the profit shall be shown on the appropriate line of the
return. If a net loss is incurred in the operation of a business activity, it may not be offset against
the net profit of other business activities. Losses shall be indicated as zero in all calculations
involving net profits, and zero shall be entered on the appropriate line of the Annual Tax Return.
There shall also be attached to the Annual Tax Return a copy of the appropriate Pennsylvania or
Federal Income Tax Schedules (e.g., C, E, F, or K1) to substantiate profits and/or losses indicated.
E. When a return is made for a fiscal year, the return shall be filed within one hundred and five (105)
days from the end of said fiscal year.
F. The Annual Tax Return shall also show the taxpayer's name, Social Security number, address,
place or places of employment or business, the amount of tax due, the amount of credit claimed
for tax withheld by an employer (with a copy of the Earnings and Tax Statement showing the
amount of tax withheld) and such other information as may be indicated on the return form or as
may be required by the Officer.
G. Every person subject to the tax shall file such return regardless of the fact that his or her wages
may have been subject to withholding of the tax by his or her employer and regardless of whether
or not any tax is due.
H. At the time of filing the annual return, the taxpayer shall pay any tax due. Total balances less than
$ 1.00 need not be paid.
I. The annual tax return must be signed and dated by the taxpayer in the space provided.
J. JOINT FILING of an annual return by husband and wife shall be allowed, provided that there is
no combining of earned incomes, net profits (losses), taxes paid by taxpayers, taxes withheld by
employers, or unreimbursed business expenses. Each taxpayer shall report his or her earned
income(s), net profits(s), taxes paid by the taxpayer, taxes withheld by the taxpayer's employer,
and business expenses, individually, in the columns on the annual tax return headed by their social
13
security number.
K. Taxpayers with S Corporation income shall file an Annual Tax Return and attach a copy of their
Federal Tax Form 1120S. There is no tax due on S Corporation Income at this time, however the
filing of Federal or State tax forms is required for audit purposes only.
L. Remittances shall be made payable to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
M. Third party checks in payment of the tax due may be refused by the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau.
N. Bad Checks - A $25.00 charge will be levied each time a check is returned from the bank unpaid.
Checks issued in violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code will be referred to appropriate
authorities for possible criminal prosecution.
SECTION 402. DECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF TAX:
A. Net Profits:
(1) Every taxpayer making net profit(s) shall, on or before April 15, of the succeeding year,
make and file with the officer an annual tax return setting forth the amount of net profit(s)
earned during the period beginning January 1, and ending December 31, of the current
year, the amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the balance of tax
due, and all supporting documentation required with the filing of an annual tax return. At
the time of filing the annual tax return, the taxpayer shall make payment of the tax due as
shown thereon or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Declarations of Estimated Net Profits and Estimated Quarterly Installments by taxpayers
are encouraged and accepted by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
(3) Every taxpayer is required to file an annual return, pursuant to SECTION 401, whether or
not a declaration and/or quarterly installments have been filed and/or paid.
B. Earned Income Not Subject to Withholding:
(1) Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission, or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at
the source, shall make and file with the Officer on an annual tax return setting forth the
aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding by him or her during the
period beginning January 1, of the current year and ending December 31, of the current
year, the amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the balance of tax
due, and all supporting documentation required with the filing of an annual tax return. At
the time of filing the annual tax return, the taxpayer shall make payment of the tax due as
shown thereon or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Declarations of Estimated Earnings and Estimated Quarterly Installments by taxpayers
are encouraged and accepted by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
(3) Every taxpayer is required to file an annual return, pursuant to SECTION 401, whether or
not a declaration and/or quarterly installments have been filed and/or paid.
14
SECTION 403. RETURNS OF EMPLOYERS AND PAYMENTS OF
WITHHELD TAX:
A. Every employer required to withhold the tax shall file a quarterly return (form 511) on the
PROPER FORM setting forth the name, Social Security number, address, municipality of
residence, gross earnings, and the amount of tax withheld for each employee, and shall remit the
total sum thereof to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau at the following times:
For Quarter Comprising the Following Employer’s Quarterly Return and payment
Months in which Wages are paid: DUE on or BEFORE:
Jan, Feb, Mar April 30
Apr, May, Jun July 31
Jul, Aug, Sep October 31
Oct, Nov, Dec January 31
B. Employers may utilize computer printouts or similar listings to transmit quarterly and/or annual
employee withholding data provided the required information is furnished in a manner acceptable
to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. By prior arrangement with the Administrator, employers
with less than 250 employees may furnish quarterly and/or annual employee withholding data via
magnetic media. In such cases an Employer's Quarterly Return "Header" shall be completed and
attached as a cover sheet to transmit the data and withheld tax to the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau quarterly. The annual employee withholding Form W-2 data shall be reported to the City
of Bethlehem Tax Bureau during February of the succeeding calendar year and shall be
accompanied by the annual reconciliation Form 512.
C. Every employer with 250 or more employees shall be required to submit employee quarterly and
annual withholding data via acceptable magnetic media. This reporting requirement shall become
effective with the tax year beginning January 1, 2000. Such employers shall complete an
Employer’s Quarterly Return “Header” and attach it as a cover sheet to transmit the data and
withheld tax to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau quarterly. The annual employee withholding
Form W-2 data shall be reported to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau during February of the
succeeding calendar year and shall be accompanied by the annual reconciliation Form 512.
D. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has failed to deduct the proper
tax, or any part thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the City of Bethlehem
Tax Bureau, may be required by the Officer to file the return and pay the tax monthly. In such
cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before the last day of the month
succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
E. On or before February 28, of the succeeding year, every employer shall file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return (form 512) showing the employer's name, address and identification
number, the total number of withholding statements transmitted with the annual return,
the total income tax withheld from wages during the year as shown by withholding tax
statements and the total income tax withheld as reported on the quarterly returns. Any
differences between the total income tax withheld from wages as shown on the
withholding statements and the total income tax withheld as reported on the quarterly
returns must be fully explained in an attached note.
(2) A withholding tax statement (form 525 or W2) for each employee employed during all or
any part of the period beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending December 31,
of the current year, setting forth the employee's name, address and Social Security
number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period, the
amount of tax deducted, the political subdivision imposing the tax upon such employee,
15
and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of
form 525 or at least four copies of form W2 to each employee for whom it is filed.
F. Every employer who discontinues business prior to the completion of taxable year, shall, within
thirty (30) days after the discontinuance of business, file and furnish the returns required by this
section covering the periods between the last such return and the discontinuance of business, and
remit to the Officer all remaining tax due.
G. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not
relieve any employee from the payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of the
Ordinances or Resolutions relating to the filing of Declarations and Returns.
H. Bad Checks - A $25.00 charge will be levied each time a check is returned from the bank unpaid.
Checks issued in violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code will be referred to the appropriate
authorities for possible criminal prosecution.
SECTION 404. FISCAL YEARS
A. Normally taxpayers shall use the calendar year method for reporting and paying the tax.
B. A taxpayer, by filing with the Officer his written election to do so, may make and file returns and
pay tax on the same Fiscal Year basis used for Federal Tax purposes. (See Section 401.E).
SECTION 405. CASH OR ACCRUAL BASIS:
A. A taxpayer may calculate income on the cash or accrual basis as those terms are used for Federal
Income Tax purposes. The basis used by the taxpayer shall be the same as used by the taxpayer
for the Federal Income Tax.
B. Illustrations of Computations of Net Profits - As amplification of the definition contained in
Section 405 A, but not a limitation thereof, the following information and requirements for the
determination of net business profits are furnished:
(1) "Cash Basis" Method - A taxpayer employing the cash basis of accounting includes in
gross income all income subject to tax received during the year in cash or its equivalent.
He or she deducts all disbursements made during the year in cash or its equivalent,
provided deduction for such expenditures is authorized by law.
(2) The use of the "Cash Basis" is mandatory where no books or records of account are
maintained.
(3) Items of income and expenditure which, as gross income and deduction, are elements in
computing taxable income need not necessarily be in the form of cash. It is sufficient
that such items, if otherwise properly included in the computation, can be valued in terms
of money.
EXAMPLE: A taxpayer on the "Cash Basis" received shares of stock in payment of services.
Assuming that the stock has a fair market value, the taxpayer has received the
equivalent of cash to the extent of its value and that amount must be included as
income.
16
(4) If a return is made on the "Cash Basis", gross profit shall include receipts from
commissions, fees and interest, as well as the gross profit or loss from sales of
merchandise, chattels, goods, wares, securities, notes, chooses-in-action and services.
(5) "Accrual Basis" - If income is taken into consideration when earned, even though not
received in cash, and expenses are considered as soon as incurred, whether paid or not,
the system of accounting is said to be on the "Accrual Basis". These are the basic rules:
(a) the right to receive an item of income (as distinguished from actual receipt)
determines its inclusion in gross income under the "Accrual Basis"; and (b) a deduction
cannot be accrued until an actual liability is incurred.
EXAMPLE: In September of last year a contractor performed work for a customer. Payment
for this work was not received until this year. If the taxpayer reports on the
"Accrual Basis", the income will be included in last year's return (when earned).
If the taxpayer reports on the "Cash Basis", the payment will be included in this
year's return (when received).
C. A taxpayer engaged in more than one business activity may, in computing taxable income, use a
different method for each trade or business activity.
D. Methods of accounting must clearly reflect income. No method of accounting is allowed unless it
clearly reflects income. Thus, even if the taxpayer's accounts are kept and the return made on the
"Cash Basis", unusual cases way arise in which a payment made during the year is not deductible.
EXAMPLE: Commissions, fees and costs paid in one year by a taxpayer in securing a loan
for ten or fifteen years covered by a mortgage on property to be leased are not
deductible in full in the year of payment but should be spread over the period of
the loan, even though the taxpayer's accounts are kept and the return made on
the "Cash Basis."
SECTION 406. PENALTY, INTEREST AND LATE FILING FEE
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of six percent (.06) per annum on the
amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of one-half of one percent (.005) of the amount of the unpaid
tax for each month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected.
Where suit shall be brought for recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefore shall, in addition, be
liable for the cost of collection and the interest and penalty herein imposed.
If a taxpayer fails to file a valid Annual Return (see Section 509) on or before the Due Date, of the
succeeding year, or on or before the date to which an extension has been granted pursuant to Section 407,
the taxpayer shall at all times remain responsible for the filing of a valid Annual Return and shall be liable
for a ten dollar ($10.00) late filing fee pursuant to Section 509. This late filing fee shall be paid by the
taxpayer in addition to any tax balance due, including any fines, penalties and interest, and shall be paid
whether or not all earned income tax may have been withheld by his or her employer and whether or not
there is any tax balance due.
Abatement of certain interest and penalty will be considered under the following conditions:
A. Errors and delays – In the case of any underpayment, the Tax Bureau may abate all or any part of
interest for any period for the following:
(1) Any underpayment of tax finally determined to be due attributable in whole or in part to
any error or delay by the Tax Bureau in the performance of a ministerial act. For the
17
purposes of this paragraph, an error or delay shall be taken into account only if no
significant aspect of the error or delay can be attributed to the taxpayer and after the Tax
Bureau has contacted the taxpayer in writing with respect to the underpayment of tax
finally determined to be due or payable.
(2) Any payment of a tax to the extent that any error or delay in the payment is attributable to
an officer, employee or agent of the Tax Bureau being erroneous or dilatory in the
performance of a ministerial act. The Tax Bureau shall determine what constitutes timely
performance of ministerial acts performed under this subsection.
(3) The timely performance of ministerial acts shall mean that the Tax Bureau shall contact
the taxpayer or employer within 60 days of receiving a properly filed tax return. If the
Tax Bureau fails to notify the taxpayer or employer of an underpayment of tax within 60
days of the receipt of a properly filed return, that taxpayer or employer shall be given 30
days to satisfy the underpayment without the accrual of penalty and interest. If that
taxpayer or employer fails to satisfy the underpayment within 30 days penalty and
interest shall be applied from the date the tax was originally due.
(4) A “properly filed return” shall be defined as a return that has been prepared in accordance
with these Rules and Regulations and contains all supporting documents, forms,
schedules, etc.
B. Abatement due to erroneous written advice by the Tax Bureau:
(1) The Tax Bureau shall abate any portion of any penalty or excess interest attributable to
erroneous advice furnished to the taxpayer in writing by and officer, employee or agent
of the Tax Bureau acting in the officer’s, employee’s or agent’s official capacity if:
(i) the written advice was reasonably relied upon by the taxpayer and was
in response to a specific written request of the taxpayer, and
(ii) The portion of the penalty or addition to tax or excess interest did not
result from the failure by the taxpayer to provide adequate or accurate
information.
(2) This subsection shall not be construed to require the Tax Bureau to provide written
advice to the taxpayer.
SECTION 407. EXTENSIONS:
A taxpayer who requires an extension of time in which to file his or her Annual Tax Return shall make
written application to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau no later than one hundred and five (105) days
from the end of the calendar or fiscal year for which the Return will be filed. A taxpayer who is granted an
extension of time for filing his or her Federal or Pennsylvania Income Tax Return shall not automatically
be entitled to a similar extension of time for filing his or her local income tax return. A copy of the
taxpayer's Federal or Pennsylvania tax extension form must be received by the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau on or before April 15, of the succeeding year, for the extension to be approved. Such approved
extension shall be valid through August 15, of the succeeding year.
Any taxpayer who, after receiving an approved extension to August 15, of the succeeding year, finds that
he or she needs additional time for proper completion of the Annual Tax Return, shall make written
application to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau on or before August 15, of the succeeding year, requesting
an additional extension of time to file. Such approved second extension shall be valid through October 15,
of the succeeding year and will only be approved if a first extension was filed and approved on or before
April 15, of the succeeding year. Under no circumstances will extensions be approved after October 15, of
the succeeding year.
18
Interest and penalty, as outlined in Section 406, will be added and collected on tax not received by its due
date, even though an extension of time for filing has been granted.
SECTION 408. CHANGE IN FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME:
If the amount of a taxpayer's earned income or net profits reported on his or her annual Federal or
Pennsylvania Income Tax Return is changed or corrected either by action of the Internal Revenue Service
or Pennsylvania Department of Revenue or by the individual's filing of an amended annual Federal or
Pennsylvania Return, the taxpayer shall report to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau such change or
correction within thirty (30) days after the date when the change or correction was determined, by filing an
amended tax return indicating the applicable tax year on the return.
ARTICLE V ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 501. INCOME TAX OFFICER:
A. The Officer is charged with the administration and enforcement of the Ordinances and Resolutions
and these Rules and Regulations, and is authorized to act on behalf of the City of Bethlehem
Taxing District in such administrative and enforcement matters.
B. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau shall keep a record showing the amount received by it from
each person paying the tax and, if paid by such person in respect of another person, the name of
such other person, and the date of receipt for seven (7) years.
C. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau has prepared a “DISCLOSURE STATEMENT” which sets
forth the following in simple and non-technical terms:
(1) The rights of a taxpayer and the obligation of the local taxing authority during an audit or
administrative review of the taxpayer’s books and records.
(2) The administrative and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer may appeal or seek
review of any adverse decision of the local taxing authority.
(3) The procedure for filing and processing refund claims and taxpayer complaints.
(4) The enforcement procedures.
SECTION 502. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
A. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau encourages any taxpayer or employer desiring a specific ruling
concerning the Ordinances, Resolutions or these Rules and Regulations to submit all pertinent
facts in writing to the Tax Administrator who shall issue a written ruling.
B. The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau has established an administrative process to receive and make
determinations on petitions from taxpayers relating to the assessment, determination and refund of
eligible taxes as required by ACT 50 of 1998. The Hearing Officer shall rule on all petitions
submitted based on the regulations set forth governing the practice and procedures of the
Administrative Appeal Process.
C. Any taxpayer who is aggrieved by an assessment or determination or delinquency of any of the
eligible taxes would have 90 days from the date of the assessment or determination notice to file a
petition for reassessment or re-determination with the Hearing Officer.
19
D. The petition shall be double spaced, typed or legibly handwritten on plain paper. The petition
should contain a brief summary of the action and the “legal basis” that precipitated the filing for
reassessment or re-determination, along with any pertinent information (copies of tax returns,
supporting information, tax schedules, expense records, etc.)
E. The petition shall be mailed via First Class Mail, or delivered in person to the Hearing Officer c/o
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Hand delivered petitions will be receipted by the Tax Bureau
and will be considered filed as of the date receipted. Petitions received by mail will be considered
filed as of the United States Postal Service postmark stamped on the envelope.
F. Petitions will be photocopied by the Tax Bureau and immediately forwarded to the Hearing
Officer. Within 10 days of the petition'’ filing date the Tax Bureau will submit its position and all
relevant facts pertaining to the action that precipitated the petition to the Hearing Officer.
G. Within 60 days of the petition’s filing date a “Final Decision” must be issued by the Hearing
Officer. Failure to issue a “Final Decision” within 60 days will result in the petition being deemed
approved.
H. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Hearing Officer, who has a direct interest in the
decision shall have the right to appeal to the court vested with the jurisdiction of local tax appeals
by or pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.
I. Decisions under this SECTION 502 may be made according to the principles of law and equity.
SECTION 503. EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS OF
TAXPAYERS AND EMPLOYERS:
A. The Officer and agents or staff members of the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau designated in
writing by him are authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any taxpayer or
supposed taxpayer of any employer or supposed employer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return; or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due, if any. Every taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer and every employer or supposed employer is required to give the Officer or any agent or
staff member so designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are authorized. In addition to all other powers, the Officer and agents or staff
members of the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau shall have the power, on behalf of the taxing
jurisdiction to examine any person under oath concerning salaries, wages, commissions, and other
compensation listed on the annual tax return, or which should have been listed on the annual tax
return for taxation hereunder; to compel the production of books, papers and records, and the
attendance of persons (whether as parties, principals, agents or witnesses) before him.
Pursuant to the foregoing, the Officer and agents or staff members of the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau are authorized to require the production of federal and/or state tax returns for purposes of
determining the accuracy of a taxpayer's local tax return and/or of assessing the earned income and
net profits tax. [See Borough of Brookhaven v. Century 21, 57 Pa. Cmwlth. 211 (1981)].
B. Minimum time period for taxpayer response to requests for information shall be 30 days from the
mailing of the audit notice. The Tax Bureau shall grant reasonable extensions upon application for
good cause and shall notify the taxpayer of the procedure to obtain an extension in its initial
request for information.
An initial inquiry by the Tax Bureau regarding a taxpayer’s compliance with any eligible tax may
include taxes required to be paid or tax returns required to be filed no more than three years prior
to the mailing date of the notice.
20
The Tax Bureau may make a subsequent request for a tax return or supporting information if, after
the initial request, the Bureau determines that the taxpayer has failed to file a tax return,
underreported income or failed to pay a tax for one or more of the tax periods covered by the
initial request. Note that this requirement shall not apply if the Bureau has sufficient information
to indicate that the taxpayer failed to file a required return or pay an eligible tax which was due
more than three years prior to the date of the notice.
C. Any information gained by the Tax Bureau as a result of any audit, return, report, investigation,
hearing or verification shall be confidential tax information. It shall be unlawful, except for
official purposes or as provided by law, for the Tax Bureau to:
(1) Divulge or make known in any manner confidential information gained in any return
investigation, hearing or verification to any person.
(2) Permit confidential tax information or any book containing any abstract or particulars
thereof to be seen or examined by any person.
(3) Print, publish or make known in any manner any confidential tax information.
SECTION 504. RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY TAXPAYERS:
Taxpayers and employers subject to the Ordinances or Resolutions are required to keep such records as will
enable the filing of true and accurate returns, whether taxes are withheld at the source of earned income or
of taxes payable upon earned income or net profits, or both; and such records shall be preserved for a
period of not less than six (6) years in order to enable the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau to verify the
correctness and accuracy of the returns filed.
SECTION 505. REFUNDS AND CREDITS:
A valid Annual Tax Return must be filed before a request for a refund or credit can be considered.
Depending on the nature of the refund or credit, additional documentation to substantiate the request may
be required by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Refund and credit requests will not be processed until
the necessary documentation is provided. Requests for refunds and credits will be considered based upon
the relevant facts and circumstances pertinent to each case. Unsupported or unexplained expense amounts
will be denied and removed from the tax calculations. Amounts less than one dollar ($1.00) will be
refunded only upon written request of the taxpayer, addressed to the Officer, and accompanied by a
stamped, self-addressed envelope. Credits of less than one dollar ($1.00) will be extended only upon
written request of the taxpayer, addressed to the Officer, and accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed
envelope.
A. A taxpayer who has paid an eligible tax to the Tax Bureau may file a written request with the
Bureau for a refund or credit of the eligible tax. A request for refund shall be made within three
years of the due date for filing the report as extended or one year after the actual payment of the
tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the request shall be made within three years after
the due date for the eligible tax or within one year after actual overpayment of the eligible tax,
whichever is later.
(1) For purposes of this section, a tax return filed by the taxpayer with the Tax Bureau
showing an overpayment of tax shall be deemed to be a written request for a cash refund
unless otherwise indicated on the return.
(2) A request for refund under this subsection shall not be considered a petition under
SECTION 502 of these Rules and Regulations and shall not preclude a taxpayer from
submitting a petition under SECTION 502 of these Rules and Regulations.
21
(3) For amounts paid as a result of a notice asserting or informing a taxpayer of an
underpayment, a written request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Bureau within one
year of the payment.
B. All overpayments of tax due a local taxing authority shall bear simple interest from the date of
overpayment until the date of resolution.
Interest on overpayments shall be allowed and paid at the same rate the Commonwealth is
required to pay pursuant to 72 P.S. Section 806.1 known as the Fiscal Code. Exceptions are as
follows:
(1) No interest shall be allowed if an overpayment is refunded or applied against any other
tax, interest or penalty due the Tax Bureau within 75 days after the last date prescribed
for filing the report of tax liability or within 75 days after the date the tax return is filed or
the report of liability is filed, whichever is later.
(2) Overpayments of interest and penalty shall not bear any interest
C. The taxpayer’s acceptance of the Bureau’s check shall not prejudice any right of the taxpayer to
claim any additional overpayment and interest thereon. Tender of a refund check by the Tax
Bureau shall be deemed to be acceptance of the check by the taxpayer for the purposes of this
SECTION.
D. As used in this SECTION 505 of these Rules and Regulations, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings given to them in this Subsection D.
“Date of overpayment” The later of the date paid or the date tax is deemed to be overpaid as follows:
(1) Any tax actually deducted and withheld at the source shall be deemed to have been
overpaid on the last day for filing the report for the tax period, determined without regard
to any extension of time for filing.
(2) Any amount overpaid as estimated tax for the tax period shall be deemed to have been
overpaid on the last day for filing the final report for the tax period, determined without
regard to any extension of time for filing.
(3) An overpayment made before the last day prescribed for payment shall be deemed to
have been paid on the last day.
(4) Any amount claimed to be overpaid with respect to which lawful administrative review
or appellate procedure is initiated shall be deemed to have been overpaid 60 days
following the initiation of the review or procedure.
(5) Any amount shown not to be due on an amended income or earned income and net profits
tax return shall be deemed to have been overpaid 60 days following the date of the filing
of the amended income tax return.
“Date of resolution” The date the overpayment is refunded or credited as follows:
(1) For a cash refund, a date preceding the date of the Tax Bureau’s refund check by not
more than 30 days.
(2) For a credit for an overpayment:
(a) The date of the Tax Bureau’s notice to the taxpayer of the determination of the
credit; or
(b) The due date for payment of the tax against which the credit is applied,
22
whichever first occurs. For a cash refund of a previously determined credit,
interest shall be paid on the amount of the credit from a date 90 days after the
filing of a request to convert the credit to a cash refund to a date preceding the
date of the refund check by not more than 30 days whether or not the refund
check is accepted by the taxpayer after tender.
SECTION 506. FINES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates any provision of the Ordinances or Resolutions shall upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense plus costs, and in default of payment
thereof, to be imprisoned in the County Prison for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Some of the
violations which may result in such conviction are:
A. Failure, neglect, or refusal on the part of any person, to make and file any declaration or return
required by the Ordinances or Resolutions.
B. Failure, neglect, or refusal of any employer, required to withhold the tax under Article III of these
Rules and Regulations, to register with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
C. Failure, neglect, or refusal of any employer to deduct or withhold the tax from his or her
employees.
D. Failure, neglect, or refusal to maintain or to reveal to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau or its
authorized representative, by any person, any partner of a partnership, or any officer of a
corporation or association, books, records, papers (including Federal or State tax forms) relevant
to the tax imposed hereunder.
E. Knowingly making any incomplete, false or fraudulent report or return or attempting to do any
other thing to avoid full disclosure of net profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax imposed by the Ordinances or Resolutions.
SECTION 507. CONCURRENT REMEDIES:
Imposition of any fine or imprisonment shall not bar either civil liability for tax, penalty or interest or late
filing fee or prosecution for embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, theft, or other offense under the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code, or failure to file a properly prepared tax return under Act 511.
SECTION 508. FAILURE TO RECEIVE FORMS:
Failure of a taxpayer or employer to receive forms or returns required by the Ordinances or Resolutions
does not excuse any failure to file any reports or returns required or to pay any tax due.
SECTION 509. RETURN COMPLETION - GENERAL:
A. Each taxpayer shall account for all twelve (12) months of the calendar year as to their place of
domicile and, in the case of more than one place of domicile, the months in each place of domicile
and also provide the name of each Borough, Township, or City in which they were domiciled
during the year.
B. Figures are not to be rounded off. Actual figures are to be used.
23
C. All appropriate schedules (Federal and State tax forms and schedules, as well as taxpayer prepared
worksheets referenced on Federal or State tax forms and schedules), W2 forms, and 1099 forms
shall be filed with the annual tax return. Annual tax returns received without the appropriate
schedules, W2 forms, or 1099 forms shall be considered incomplete and are not a valid filing of
the annual return.
D. Taxpayers with earnings in another State who have paid tax on those earnings to the other State,
and are applying for credit for tax paid to the other State, must provide a copy of the State tax
return for that State, plus their Pennsylvania personal income tax return. If the aforementioned
State tax returns are not provided with the annual tax return, it will be considered as being
incomplete and not a valid filing of the annual tax return.
E. Estimates of income and or expenses by the taxpayer are not acceptable unless approved by the
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
F. Should the taxpayer omit the required expense deduction forms or if the expense deduction forms
are not fully completed, the expense deductions shall be disallowed and systematically denied
without notification to the taxpayer. In the case where the omission of the required expense
deduction forms and the subsequent denial of the expense deduction results in a balance of tax
due, the taxpayer will be notified of the balance due.
G. Taxpayers may not submit Federal Schedule SE in lieu of Federal Schedule E to the City of
Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Annual tax returns received with a copy of Federal Schedule SE in lieu of
Federal Schedule E will be considered as an incomplete and invalid filing of the annual tax return.
H. Taxpayers may not submit Federal Schedule E in lieu of the applicable Federal K1 form to the
City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Annual tax returns received without the applicable K1 will be
considered as an incomplete and invalid filing of the annual tax return.
J. Annual tax returns received by the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau that are not signed and dated by
the taxpayer filing the annual tax return will be considered as an incomplete and invalid filing of
the annual tax return.
K. Where no annual tax return is filed on or before the date due for the filing of the return, the
taxpayer shall be liable for a ten dollar ($10.00) late filing fee. Where an annual tax return is filed
on or before the date due, but is considered as an incomplete and invalid filing because of the
failure of a taxpayer to comply with the requirements of this Section 509, and the taxpayer fails to
amend or otherwise complete the return so as to comply with this Section 509 on or before the
date due for the filing of the return, the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau shall give the taxpayer
written notice by United States certified mail of the reasons why the return is considered
incomplete and invalid. The notice shall inform the taxpayer that he or she shall have fifteen (15)
days from the date the notice is postmarked within which to amend or otherwise complete the
return so as to comply with this Section 509, and file it with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. If
the taxpayer fails to amend or otherwise complete the return within said fifteen (15) day period,
the taxpayer shall be liable for the ten dollar ($10.00) late filing fee. The late filing fee shall be
paid by the taxpayer in addition to any tax balance due, including any fines, penalties, interest, and
postage expenses shall be paid whether or not all earned income tax may have been withheld by
his or her employer and whether or not there is any tax balance due. It is the responsibility of each
taxpayer to carefully review his or her return for compliance with this Section 509 before filing.
The volume of returns filed with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau prevents it from reviewing all
returns for completeness within such time as will permit it to communicate with individual
taxpayers that a return is incomplete before date on which the return is due. The late filing fee
shall be paid to the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau notwithstanding claims that the incomplete
return was filed sufficiently in advance of the due date such that the taxpayer should or could have
been notified that the return was incomplete for the purpose of amending or completing the return
24
on or before the due date.
In the case where a taxpayer remits a voluntary payment towards tax liability, unless specified by
the taxpayer otherwise, the payment shall be prioritized as follows:
(1) Tax
(2) Interest
(3) Penalty
(4) Any other fees or charges
In the case where a taxpayer remits a payment towards the tax due as calculated on the annual tax
return and that annual tax return is found to be incomplete or not a valid filing of the annual tax
return, as outlined above, the payment will be deposited towards the taxpayer's liability as an
estimated tax payment to be reconciled upon the receipt of a complete and valid filing of the
annual tax return by the aforementioned taxpayer.
The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau may acquire Pennsylvania Department of Revenue Individual
Income Tax information regarding earned income and net profits for audit and compliance
purposes.
L. The Tax Bureau shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the basis for any underpayment that the
Bureau has determined to exist. The notification shall include:
(1) The tax period or periods for which the underpayment is asserted.
(2) The amount of underpayment detailed by tax period.
(3) The legal basis upon which the Tax Bureau has relied to determine that an underpayment
exists.
(4) An itemization of the revisions made by the Tax Bureau to a return or report filed by the
taxpayer that results in the determination that an underpayment exists.
SECTION 510. WHO MUST FILE:
A. Every person who was:
(1) a resident of City of Bethlehem who was employed or engaged in the operation of a
business, profession, or other activity for income or profit; or
(2) a non-resident of City of Bethlehem who was employed in City of Bethlehem or engaged
in the operation of a business, profession, or other activity for income or profit in City of
Bethlehem for all or any part of the preceding calendar year;
shall file with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau an annual tax return showing all earned income
and net profits received and/or earned for the previous year.
B. Partial year residents are required to file an annual tax return for the applicable portion of the
calendar year they resided in City of Bethlehem.
C. Taxpayers must file an annual tax return even though they may have had earned income tax
withheld by an employer.
D. Taxpayers who are on active military duty must file an annual tax return for the year in which they
first entered the military on active duty and inform the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau of their
active duty military status. Upon completion of active duty military status, taxpayers shall resume
filing annual tax returns.
25
E. Taxpayers who are retired or permanently disabled and have no taxable earned income or net
profits may be coded on the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau's files so as not to receive an annual
tax form. The taxpayer must notify the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau in writing and must also
provide the effective date of retirement or permanent disability.
F. Approximately every three to five years the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau will send annual tax
forms to all residents for the purpose of updating and verifying taxpayer files.
SECTION 511. REGISTRATION OF TAXPAYERS:
Every taxpayer who receives, or anticipates that he or she will receive, taxable earned income or net profits
during the calendar year must register his or her name and resident address, his or her social security
number and the name and address of his or her place of employment or business with the City of
Bethlehem Tax Bureau. All taxpayers will thereafter be responsible for reporting changes in their name,
place of residence or place of employment or business with the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau.
SECTION 512. INSTALLMENT PLANS FOR DELINQUENT AMOUNTS:
The Tax Bureau may enter into written agreements with any taxpayer under which the taxpayer is allowed
to satisfy liability for any eligible tax in installment payments if the Tax Bureau determines that the
agreement will facilitate collection. The following terms and conditions shall apply to installment plans:
A. The taxpayer must file an annual tax return for the current tax year and any delinquent tax years to
be covered under the installment plan. These annual tax returns must include a copy of the
taxpayer’s Federal tax Return and all supporting documentation as verification that all taxable
income has been reported. In cases where a Federal tax Return cannot be produced, the taxpayer
must complete a Federal Form 4506 “Request for Copies Of Tax Return” naming the City of
Bethlehem Tax Bureau as recipient of the requested copy. The costs to procure the Federal Tax
Return and related information are the sole responsibility of the taxpayer.
B. Installment plans will not be approved for tax amounts less than $ 100.00.
C. Installment Plans will not be approved for more than 4 months. Payment amounts will be
calculated by dividing the total tax liability by 4 and adding the applicable penalty, interest, fines,
and costs to each payment.
D. Taxpayers will be required to verify that their current year’s tax liability has been satisfied to date
either by proof of employer withholding or by direct payment from the taxpayer.
E. Installment Plans will be granted only 1 time to any taxpayer.
F. Installment Plans will be revoked and immediate civil action or garnishment of wages for
collection of the tax due will be initiated if any of the aforementioned terms and conditions are not
met.
G. The Tax Bureau may terminate any prior agreement if:
(1) The information the taxpayer provided to the Tax Bureau prior to the date of the
agreement was inaccurate or incomplete, or
(2) If the Tax Bureau believes that collection of any eligible tax under the Installment Plan is
in jeopardy.
26
H. If the Tax Bureau finds that the financial condition of the taxpayer has significantly changed, the
Tax Bureau may alter, modify or terminate the agreement, but only if:
(1) Notice of the Tax Bureau’s finding is provided to the taxpayer no later than 30 days prior
to the date of such action; and
(2) The notice contains the reasons why the Tax Bureau believes a change has occurred.
I. The Tax Bureau may alter, modify or terminate an Installment Plan agreement if the taxpayer fails
to do any of the following:
(1) Pay any installment at the time the installment is due.
(2) Pay any other tax liability at the time the liability is due.
(3) Provide a financial condition update as requested by the taxpayer.
J. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent a taxpayer from prepaying in whole or in part any eligible
tax under any installment agreement with the Tax Bureau.
SECTION 513. SUIT FOR COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT AMOUNTS:
A. The Officer may sue in the name of the City of Bethlehem Taxing District for the recovery of
taxes, penalties, interest, and late filing fees due and unpaid under the Ordinances or Resolutions.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax, penalty, interest, and late filing fees imposed by the
Ordinances or Resolutions shall be begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three
years after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later: Provided, however, that
this limitation shall not prevent the institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or
determined to be due in the following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a declaration or return
was required to be filed by him or her under provisions of the Ordinances or Resolutions,
there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any person, or of any other
evidence relating to such declaration or return in the possession of the Officer, reveals a
fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of twenty-five percent or more
and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of the Ordinances or
Resolutions, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer, or where any
person has willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required by the Ordinances
or Resolutions, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by Act 511.
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund or credit provided such suit is begun two
years after making such refund or credit, except that such suit may be brought within five years if
it appears that any part of the refund or credit was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact.
27
SECTION 514. WAGE ATTACHMENTS:
The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau shall demand, receive and collect from all corporations, political
subdivisions, associations, companies, firms, or individuals, employing persons owing delinquent earned
income taxes, or whose spouse owes delinquent earned income taxes, or having in possession unpaid
commissions or earnings belonging to any person or persons owing delinquent earned income taxes, or
whose spouse owes delinquent earned income taxes, upon the presentation of a written notice and demand
certifying that the information contained therein is true and correct and containing the name of the taxable
or the spouse thereof, and the amount of tax due. Upon presentation of such written notice and demand, it
shall be the duty of any such corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to
deduct from the wages, commissions, or earnings of such individual employees, then owing or that shall
within sixty (60) days thereafter become due or from any unpaid commissions or earnings of any such
taxable in its or his or her possession, or that shall within sixty (60) days thereafter come into its or his or
her possession, a sum sufficient to pay the respective amount of the delinquent earned income taxes,
penalties, interest, late filing fees, and costs, shown upon written notice or demand, and to pay the same to
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau sixty (60) days after such notice shall have been given. No more than
ten percent of the wages, commissions or earnings of the delinquent taxpayer or spouse thereof may be
deducted at any one time for delinquent earned income taxes, penalties, interest and late filing fees and
costs. Such corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual shall be entitled to deduct
from the moneys collected from each employee the costs incurred from the extra bookkeeping necessary to
record such transactions, not exceeding two percent of the amount of money so collected and paid over to
the City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau. Upon the failure of any such corporation, political subdivision,
association, company, firm, or individual to deduct the amount of such taxes, penalties, interest, late filing
fees, and costs or to pay the same over to the tax collector, less the cost of bookkeeping involved in such
transaction, as herein provided, within the time required, such corporation, political subdivision,
association, company, firm or individual shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax, penalty, interest, late
filing fee, and costs for each such taxable whose taxes, penalties, interest, late filing fees and costs are not
withheld and paid over, or that are withheld and not paid over together with a penalty of ten percent added
thereto, to be recovered by an action of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the City of Bethlehem Tax
Bureau, or by the proper authorities of the taxing district, as debts of like amount are now by law
recoverable, except that such person shall not have the benefit of any stay of execution or exemption law.
The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau shall not proceed against a spouse or his or her employer until he has
pursued collection remedies against the delinquent taxpayer and his or her employer under this section.
Upon presentation of a written notice and demand under oath or affirmation, to the State Treasurer or any
other fiscal officer of the state, or its boards, authorities, agencies or commissions, it shall be the duty of the
treasurer or officer to deduct from the wages then owing, or that shall within sixty days thereafter become
due to any employee, a sum sufficient to pay the respective amount of the delinquent earned income tax,
penalty, interest, late filing fee, and costs shown on the written notice. The same shall be paid to the City
of Bethlehem Tax Bureau which said delinquent tax, penalty, interest, late filing fee was levied within sixty
(60) days after such notice shall have been given.
The City of Bethlehem Tax Bureau shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of a written
notice and demand to the State Treasurer or other fiscal officer of the State, or to any corporation, political
subdivision, association, company or individual, notify the taxpayer owing the delinquent tax, penalty,
interest, late filing fee, and costs by registered or certified mail that a written notice and demand shall be
presented to his or her employer unless such tax, penalty, interest, late filing fee and costs are paid. The
return receipt card for certified or registered mail shall be marked delivered to addressee only, and the cost
of notification by certified or registered mail shall be added to the costs for collecting taxes, penalties,
interest, and late filing fees.
28
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
1
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
GENERAL INDEX – CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
EDITOR’S NOTES: References are to individual code sections rather
than page numbers. As additional aids for locating material,
users are directed to the Comparative Section Table, which sets
forth the disposition of the ordinances within this compilation of
the Codified Ordinances.
- A -
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY 1732
ABANDONED VEHICLES 1733.02
ABANDONMENT
non-conforming use of building or land 1323.06
ABSENTEE LANDLORD 1733
ACCIDENTS
investigation, Traffic Division 503.05
studies 503.06 ACCOUNTS AND FINANCE DEPARTMENT 107.03
ACTIVITIES ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 721.04
Adoption by Reference 101.05
BOCA Building Code 1701.01
BOCA Plumbing Code 1705.01
BOCA Property Maintenance Code 1733.01
Fire Prevention Code (NFPA1) 1501.01
National Electrical Code
Retail Food Store Sanitation Code 1114.01
ADULT BOOK STORES 1318.26
ADVERTISING
littering 701.03
parks, in 941.07
Pedestrian Malls 951.12
penalty 701.99
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
2
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
posting a nuisance 701.02
posting on public property 701.01
yard sales 301.06
AIR CONDITIONING OR REFRIGERATION
compliance, existing systems 915.10
contamination protection 915.06
definitions 915.01
direct water cooling 915.03
electrical wiring and equipment 915.09
existing installations 915.08
manufacturing process, use of water 915.11
penalty 915.99
permit 915.02
plumber, violation 915.13
pressure/temperature protection 915.07
provisions for prior installations 915.10
purpose 915.12
sewer connection, sanitary sewer 915.05
water use and conservation 915.04
AIRPORT AUTHORITY 139
AIRPORT ZONING 1360
ALARMS, FALSE - See: Fire Prevention Code
emergency alarm system 735
ALCOHOLIC Beverages in Parks 941.06
ALCOHOLIC Beverages in Public Places 723
AMBULANCE SERVICE 107.05
Fees 30.01
emergency medical service fees 1120.05
AMENDMENTS
BOCA Basic Building Code 1701.02
BOCA Property Maintenance Code 1733.02
Codified Ordinances 101.03
Fire Prevention Code 1501
zoning
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
3
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
changes 1326.04
initiation 1326.02
notice of hearings 1326.03
power of amendment 1326.01
AMUSEMENT DEVICES 305
AMUSEMENT TAX /FIRST RESPONDER’S FEE 304
ANIMALS (see also DOGS) 1159
additional enforcement remedies-all animals 1159.14
additional enforcement remedies-dogs 1159.15
application for permit – more than six (6) animals 1159.04
animal control officer 1159.05
behavior in parks 941.06
cattle, sheep, swine, goats in city prohibited 1159.07
coops 1159.09
distance of coops from occupied dwellings;
distance of animals from food stands 1159.10
dog license required 1159.12
fees 1159.13
interference with officer 1159.18
limitation on number of animals 1159.03
noises 717.01
nuisances 1159.06
observation for rabies 1159.16
Pedestrian Malls 951.05
petting zoos 1159.11
penalty 1159.99
proclamation of hydrophobia (Rabies) by Mayor 1159.17
rabbits and guinea pigs at large 1159.08
treatment, in parks 941.02
wild and exotic 1160
ANTENNA SYSTEMS
Compliance with standards 908.14
Franchise payments 908.07
Franchise Required 908.03
Franchise revocation 908.18
Franchise rules 908.11
Franchise term 908.05
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
4
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
Grant of authority 908.04
Indemnification 908.15
Installation 908.08
Programming 908.10
Regulatory Action 908.12
Standards of service 908.09
Street occupancy 908.13
ANTI-GRAFFITI (see GRAFFITI) 742
APARTMENT (see ROOMING HOUSE)
APPEALS
Airport zoning 1360.11
blighted property 149.06
building 1701.02
Codes Board of 150
impounded vehicle 538.07
Historic Bethlehem, building permit 1713.15
mercantile tax 341.06
APPROPRIATIONS 121.01
AUCTION 301.01
AUTHORITIES 139
- B -
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
5
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
BAMBOO (Running Bamboo) prohibition 1161.07
BED and BREAKFAST HOMES 1735
Bed and Breakfast Home 1302.06
Home Occupation 1302.37
Use Regulations 1306.02
Required Off-Street Parking Space 1319.01
Special Conditions 1325.08
BETHLEHEM AUTHORITY 139
BETHLEHEM LIBRARY
Board of Directors, appointment 135.01
BICYCLE
defined 543.01
fee, registration 543.02
pedacycle, Pedestrian Mall 951.06
penalty 543.99
registration required 543.02
BILL POSTING 701
Pedestrian Malls 951.12
BLIGHTED PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
BOARDING HOUSE (see ROOMING HOUSE)
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, and AUTHORITIES 139
appointment to
by Mayor 117.01(a)
by Council 117.01(b)
removal from 117.02
BOARD OF APPEALS
appeal procedure 150.03
board membership 150.02
decision of board 150.04
judicial remedies 150.05
purpose; establishment 150.01
BOARD OF HEALTH
establishment; members 131.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
6
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
director 131.05
meetings 131.03
personnel 131.06
powers and duties 131.02
secretary 131.04
BOARD OF HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 1713.04;1714
BOARDED UP BUILDINGS 1733.02
BOCA BUILDING CODE (see BUILDING CODE)
BOCA PLUMBING CODE (see BUILDING CODE)
BOCA PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
adoption 1733.01
amendments 1733.02
violations 1733.02
BOND
antenna systems 908.06
City Controller 111.03
employees, blanket bond 117.03
Police Pension Treasurer 153.03
Treasurer 109.03
BOTTLED GAS (see FUEL, SALE)
BOUNDARIES
Historic Bethlehem 1713.02
Pedestrian Malls 951.02
BUDGET 121.06
BUILDINGS
boarded up 1733.02
construction noise 717.04
coverage of lot 1318.21
defined 1302.10
demolition 1701.02
dimensional requirements 1318
maximum height of 1318.19
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
7
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
unfit, nuisance 1161.04
toilet facilities 1161.03
vacant 149.05
BUILDING CODE, BOCA
adoption 1701.01
amendment, appeals, fees 1701.02
board of appeals Art. 150
penalty 1701
BUILDING INSPECTOR 1731
Civil Service Board 157.02
Historic Bethlehem, powers 1713.14
vaults, existing, registration 1715.01
vaults, inspection 1715.03
BUILDING OFFICIAL 1701.02
BUILDING PERMIT (see ZONING-BUILDING PERMIT)
permit fees 1702.02
BUREAU OF HEALTH
Civil Service Board 157.03
BUREAU OF LAW 113.02
BUREAU OF PLANNING 115.02
BURNING, GARBAGE (See Fire Prevention Code)
BUS
fee 303.01
stopping, standing, parking 540.02
stop, designation 540.01
stop, use by other vehicles restricted 540.03
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR
duties 107.03
five percent (5%) rule 121.01
powers 121.01
tax collection 341.06
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
8
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
BUSINESS LICENSE OR PERMIT
fees 303.01
penalty 303.99
term 303.02
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE AND MERCANTILE TAX
business administrator's duties 341.06
computation of volume of business 341.02
confidential nature of returns 341.07
continuing offense 341.05
definitions 341.01
exemptions 341.02
license 341.04
penalty 341.99
rate, basis, computation 341.02
return 341.03
savings and severability clauses 341.09
suit on collection and penalty 341.08
treasurer's duties 341.06
BUY AMERICAN 122
B.Y.O.B. CLUBS
club permit 736.05
club requirements 736.04
definitions 736.02
penalty 736.99
purpose 736.01
shopping center district (C-S) 1313.02(a)(15)
unlawful activities 736.03
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
9
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- C -
CABLE TV COMPANIES (see ANTENNA SYSTEMS)
CAMPAIGN FINANCE REPORTS
filing and posting of campaign finance reports 112.01
filing and posting of statements of financial 112.02
interest
filing and posting of contributions received 112.03
after pre-election filing date
CARNIVAL
fee 303.01
C-B COMMERCIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
purpose 1310.01
use regulations 1310.02
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 1713.08
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
General regulations 1702.02
rooming house 1735.03
CESSPOOL 921.12
C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1311.01
use regulations 1311.02
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES, LICENSING AND REGULATION
definitions 1119.01
License
display 1119.05
fees 1119.04
procedures 1119.03
required 1119.02
revocation 1119.07
penalty 1119.99
prohibition and restrictions 1119.06
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
10
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
CIRCUS
fee 303.01
CITIZENS TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE 505
CITY CENTER AUTHORITY
editor's note 139
CITY CENTER PLAZA
Defined 951.01
CITY CLERK
appointment 103.04
duties 103.04
rules and regulations 103.04
CITY CONTROLLER
bond 111.03
powers and duties 111.01
warrants, duties 111.02
CITY ENGINEER
books, maps, and plans 119.02
excavations, supervision 903.07
street map 901.02
CITY FORESTER 910.03
CITY OF BETHLEHEM PENSION FUND 156
establishment 156.01
purpose 156.02
board of managers 156.03
duties 156.04
aggregation of funds 156.05
effective date of aggregation 156.06
appointment of trustees 156.07
administrative expenses 156.08
termination 156.09
CITY PLANNER 115.01,
115.02
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
11
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
CITY SOLICITOR
appointment 113.01
claims of City, unpaid 113.02
contracts 908.11
enter lien 1161.09
sewer charges, nonpayment 927.09
CIVIL SERVICE
Building Board 157.02
Electrical Board 157.02
eligibility lists 157.03
Engineering Board 157.02
Fire Bureau 157.03
Health Bureau 157.03
Police Board 157.01
C-L LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1312.01
use regulations 1312.02
C-M OFFICE RESEARCH CENTER DISTRICT
purpose 1314.01
use regulations 1314.02
COAL (see FUEL SALE)
CODES BOARD OF APPEALS
board membership 150.02
decision of board 150.04
judicial remedies 150.05
procedure for appeal 150.03
purpose, establishment 150.01
CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Accounts and Finance Dept. 101.05
adoption 101.01
amendments 101.03
citing 101.02
Codes designated 101.02
definitions 101.04
interpretation 101.04
numbering 101.03
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
12
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
penalty 101.99
prior ordinances 101.05
procedure, adoption 101.01
Separability 101.06
supplements 101.03
title 101.02
COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY PERMIT PARKING
application for and duration of permit 536.07
College/University Permit Parking Program 536.02
designation criteria 536.03
display of permit 536.05
issuance of parking permits 536.04
penalties 536.99
permit fees 536.08
permit parking exemption 536.06
purpose 536.01
revocation of permit 536.09
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
defined 1302.20
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE (see DISEASE)
COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 107.05
CONDITIONAL USES
Court appeals 1322.03
listed, with requirements 1322.04
procedure 1322.02
purpose of article 1322.01
CONDUCT, DISORDERLY (see DISORDERLY CONDUCT)
CONTRACTS 121.05
antenna systems 908.11
beyond current year 111.02(b)
COUNCIL
annual audit 121.04
defined 101.04
ethics training 104
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
13
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
fees 119.03
Historic Bethlehem, building approval 1713.12
legislative power 103.01
meetings 103.03
members, election, etc. 103.02
police pension grievance 153.15
rules and regulations of departments, etc. 103.05
water service application 911.02
C-R COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT
Purpose 1313
use regulations 1313
CROSSWALK
designation 503.12
parking in 531.02
C-S SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
purpose 1313.01
use regulations 1313.02
CULTURAL EVENTS
promotion 143.02
CURBS (see STREET IMPROVEMENTS)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
14
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- D -
DAY CARE CENTERS 1165
DEFINITIONS
air cooling equipment 915.01
amusement devices 305.01
bicycle 543.01
business privilege and mercantile tax 341.01
Codified Ordinances 101.01
day care center 1165.02
dog regulations 709.01
dwellings 1702.01
employees' pension system 155.01
excavations 903.01
Fire Prevention Code 1501.02
food vending machines 1117.01
fuel, sale 315.01
general zoning 1302.01
income tax 333.01
industrial waste 923.01
municipal waste 1162.01
obscenity 733.03
Occupation Privilege Tax 339.02
parks 941.01
Pedestrian Malls 951.01
Realty Transfer Tax 335.02
sewer, sanitary 921.01
snow emergency 523.01
solid waste 935.01
Subdivision and Development 1343
swimming pools 1711.01
Traffic Code 501.02
trees and shrubs 910.01
video amusement devices 307.01
Zoning Code 1302
DEPARTMENT (see also under INDIVIDUAL DEPARTMENT)
annual report 107.02
directors 107.02
heads 107.02
listed 107.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
15
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
powers of directors 107.02
rules and regulations 103.05
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION
Accounts and Finance Departments 101.05
budget supervision 121.07
duties 107.03
341.06
DEPOSITORIES 121.02
DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
parking meter 533.12
water system 911.11
DETERIORATED AREA (LERTA) 342;343
DISCRIMINATION 1737.02
DISEASE
food handling 1115.01
food vendor 1117.13
DISORDERLY CONDUCT (see also NOISE)
defined 705.01
disorderly house 705.04
enticing minor into vehicle 705.03
fights 705.02
intoxication 705.02
loitering 705.05
obstructing sidewalks, etc. 705.05
peace disturbances 705.01
Pedestrian Malls 951.07
penalty 705.99
prohibited 705.01
DISPOSAL AND DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE 923
DISTURBING THE PEACE
(see DISORDERLY CONDUCT; NOISE) 709.01;
DOGS (see also ANIMALS)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
16
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
DOOR-TO-DOOR SELLING 311.01, 311.02
DRAINAGE (see PLUMBING)
DRIVEWAY
insurance required 909.06
parking in 531.02
penalty 909.99
permit 909.06
safety during construction 909.08
DRIVING
funeral or procession 521.01
penalty 523.99
play street, on 521.03
snow emergency
definitions 523.01
penalty 523.99
restrictions 523.02
traffic control device, avoiding 521.04
DWELLING (see also HOUSING CODE)
conversion to two-or multi-family 1325.08
defined 1302.28
off-street parking, required space 1319.01
vacant and boarded up 149.05
1733.02
DWELLING, UNFIT (see also BOCA PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE)
compliance 1161.09
condemnation 1733.02
insanitary and unfit buildings 1161.04
nuisance 1161.01
placarding 1161.06
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
17
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- E -
EARNED INCOME TAX (see INCOME TAX)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE REPORTING AND EVALUATION 349
ELECTRICAL BUREAU
Civil Service Board 157.02
ELECTRICAL CODE
administrative provisions; additions 1703.02
adoption 1703.01
penalty 1703.99
permits; fees 1703.03
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM 735
Definitions 735.01
list of installations required, owner 735.02
direct keying 735.03
indirect keying 735.04
list of installations required, supplier 735.05
operation requirements 735.06
operating instructions required 735.07
repair service 735.08
disconnecting devices 735.09
registration permit 735.10
fee 735.11
penalties 735.99
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Charges 1120.02
Billing 1120.03
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
See - ENHANCED 9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM 971
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
18
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
EMPLOYEES, CITY
appointment or 105.02
removal 117.01
bond, blanket 117.03
Editor's note 123
removal 117.02
residence requirement (repealed) 117.04
EMPLOYEES' PENSION
Administrative Expenses 155.27
Admission into System
Beginning Date of 155.22
Termination Date of 155.21
Appropriation by Council for Fund 155.11
Benefits, Application of 155.18
Board, O&E Retirement 155.03
Business transacted in Board's name 155.08
Officers, election; reimbursement 155.04
Duties of Board 155.05
Record of Proceedings 155.06
Contributions
Required for 20 years 155.15
Return of Contributions without interest 155.16
Definitions 155.01
Disability, Permanent 155.14
Establishment 155.02
Fund, O&E
Borrowing from Fund 155.07
Payments from Fund 155.06
Interest in Investments 155.07
Payments into Fund 155.10
Information to be furnished by Department Heads 155.09
Library Employees
Credit for prior service 155.23
Payment for prior service 155.24
Payroll Deductions 155.10
Pensions not subject to execution, attachment 155.20
assignment
PMRS – see individual ordinance
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
19
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
Retirement
Mandatory 155.17
Voluntary 155.12
Service time, computation of 155.19
State law incorporated 155.25
Social Security offset, elimination of by joint 155.26
coverage members
Social Security offset, elimination of by active 155.28
joint coverage members
Termination of Service, Involuntary 155.13
ENHANCED 9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Coin Operated Telephones 971.02
Contribution Rate 971.01
Penalty 971.99
ENFORCEMENT
false reports to police 711.02
Historic Bethlehem 1713.16
industrial waste 923.05
park regulations 941.09
trees and shrubs 910.02
Zoning Ordinance 1324.01
ENGINEER
Civil Service Board 157.02
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL (EAC) 146
appointment of members 146.03
chairperson 146.06
composition 146.02
establishment 146.01
non-compensation 146.04
powers 146.07
records and reports 146.08
renewal 146.09
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION 147
See – Environmental Advisory Council
Ethics Training (for City Council members) 104
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
20
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
EXCAVATIONS
City Engineer, supervision 903.07
City performing work 903.09
construction, compliance 903.06
definitions 903.01
degradation fee 903.05
fee 903.05
insurance required 903.04
parking restrictions 531.02
penalty 903.99
permit
application 903.03
required 903.02
refilling 903.11
shallow, safety measures 1701.02
safety precautions 903.08
specifications, compliance 903.06
warning lights, etc. 903.08
EXPLOSIVES
storage 1501.18(3)
EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES 125
defined 125.01
administration 125.02
explosive device removal fee 125.05
litigation 125.03
emergency services not to be refused 125.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
21
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- F -
FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE 1737
FALSE FIRE ALARM SYSTEM - See: Fire Prevention Code
FEES
911 telephone system 971.01
activities on streets and sidewalks 721.04
alarm equipment 303.01
alarm systems, emergency 735.10
ambulance (see Emergency Medical Services)
amusement devices 305.05
antenna system franchise 908.07
bicycle registration 543.02
building permits 1702.01
bus companies 303.01
business privilege license 341.04
cable companies 908.14
carnivals 303.01
circuses 303.01
college university parking permit 536.08
commissary inspection 1113.05
curb 905.02
degradation, street 903.05
dog carcass, disposition 709.05
driveway permit 909.05
electrical permits 1702.01
emergency alarm systems 735.11
Emergency Medical Services 1120
excavation 903.05
extraordinary expenses 125.02
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
22
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
fire code and permits 1501.20
inspection fees:
billiard halls
bowling alleys
movie theatres
roller skating rinks
permit fees:
bonfires/open burning
fire systems - alterations to and new systems
detection system, fire, automatic
extinguishing systems, special
fire alarm system
hood fire suppression system
sprinkler system, automatic
standpipe system
fireworks
flammable finishing processes
fumigation and insect fogging
hazardous materials
open flames
solid fuel appliance installation
storage and use:
compressed and liquified gases
flammable/combustible liquids
pyroxylin plastics
tanks, liquid, flammable/combustible (stationary/
underground)
tents or air supported structures
firearms 303.01
first responder 304.01
food service establishments, inspections 303.01
1113.03
food vending machines 1117.09
food vending, mobile 1113.03
fuel sale 315.02
garbage disposal 1717.02
gasoline pump inspection 303.01
golf fees-set by resolution
grade, warrant of survey 909.03
gutter 905.02
industrial waste 923.03
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
23
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
inspections, housing 1731.02
mercantile license 341.04
movers, moving of household goods 309.03
on-site sewerage system 1163.02
peddlers and solicitors 303.01
plumbing permits; plumbing exams 1705.02
poles, installing removal 907.01
public exhibitions 303.01
real estate records copy 119.03
recreation fees-set by resolution
recycling 933 Annex A
rental property inspection 1731.02
restaurants 1113.03
retail food stores, inspections 1114.03
rooming house 1735.06
RPP appeals 535.03
security systems - see Alarm Systems
septic tank 303.01
sewer permits 921.04
sewerage systems, on-site 1163.02
shows, exhibitions 303.01
sidewalk construction 909.05
see also 905.02
sidewalk signs 1324.03
signs 1701.02
street, degradation 903.05
streets 905.01
Subdivision and/or Site Plan reviews 1351.05
swimming pool 1711.03
tax certifications - set by Resolution 11,948
taxicab companies 303.01
temporary food stands, inspections 1113.04
temporary structures 721.04
towing and storage charges 538.04
tree planting, treatment, removal permit 910.05
tree surgeon license 910.10
utility companies 303.01
vault permit 1715.04
video amusement arcades 307.05
warrant of survey (curbs, gutters, sidewalks) 909.03
water certifications - set by Resolution 11,948
water and sewer assessment 905.03
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
24
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
water meter test 911.08
Zoning Board appeals 1324.03
FENCE
defined 1302.30
fees 1702.01
front yards, in 1318.12
side yards, in 1318.16
FIGHTS 705.02
FINANCE
annual audit 121.04
appropriations 121.01
bond issues, general obligation notes and lines 121.12
of credit
budget 121.06; 121.07
contracts 121.05
deficits, prohibition against 121.09
depositories 121.02
funds, temporary investment 121.03
personal property purchase 121.05
transfers, restrictions on 121.08; 121.10
FINE ARTS COMMISSION
established 143.01
membership 143.01
powers and duties 143.02
FINES – See PENALTY
FIREARMS (see WEAPONS)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Civil Service Board 157.03
responsibility 107.08
traffic, directing 509.02
FIRE HYDRANT
parking near 531.01
water rates 913.01, 913.02
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
25
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
FIRE INSPECTION/PERMIT FEES (see FEES)
FIRE INSURANCE ESCROW Art. 127
FIRE SAFETY AND CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTION FEES
authority 1501.01
inspection 1501.03
permits required 1501.02
FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND
administrative expenses 151.14
age requirements 151.11
appropriation from taxes 151.03
benefits
computation 151.05
eligibility 151.04
inviolate 151.13
payments from Fund only 151.05
reduction, outside employment 151.08
uniformity 151.10
vested rights 151.06
Board of Managers 151.09
contributions, rate 151.02
eligibility provisions 151.10
employment after retirement 151.08
established 151.01
maintenance of Fund 151.02
mandatory retirement 151.12
payments from Fund only 151.02
Pick-up Plan 151.15
reinstatement 151.12
right to collect benefits 151.06
service requirements 151.11
FIRE PREVENTION CODE – See UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE 1701.02
adoption 1701.02
amendments 1701.02
appeals 150
fireworks 1701.02
fees 1702.01
parks 941.06
hydrants, fees 913.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
26
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
parks, fireworks 941.06
permit fees 1702.01
bonfires 1702.01
fireworks 1702.01
helicopter landings 1702.01
open burning 1702.01
open flame 1702.01
storage tank removal 1702.01
storage tanks 1702.01
FIRE STATION
parking near 531.01
FIREWORKS – See UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE 1701.02
FIRST RESPONDER’S FEE – See AMUSEMENT TAX 304
FIVE YEAR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 121.06
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
liquefied petroleum gas, storage 1702.01
storage 1702.01
FLOODWAY DISTRICTS (FLOOD PLAIN)
activities and uses 1327.09
defined 1302.32
district classification 1303.06
liability 1327.02
nonconformity 1327.08
provisions 1327.04
purpose of provisions 1327.01
special exceptions 1327.07
FOOD CODE 1113
additions 1113.02
adoption of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture:
"PA Food Code" 1113.01
"Food Employee Certification Act"
food vending machine, pedestrian malls 951.22
inspection charges 1113.03
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
27
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
late fees 1113.06
license fees 1113.05
penalty 1113.99
repealer 1113.07
temporary food establishment administrative fee 1113.04
FOOD WASTE DISPOSALS, MECHANICAL 1717
FRATERNITY HOUSE (see ROOMING HOUSE)
FRAUD
fuel, sale 315.15
FUEL, SALE
anthracite requirements 315.11
arrest 315.13
bottled gas, containers 315.07
definitions 315.01
delivery ticket 314.12
enforcement 315.13
equipped dealer 315.08
equipped dealer, scales, approval 315.17
fee 315.02
fee, weighing 315.10
fraud 315.15
inspector, duties 315.13
license
display 315.02
nontransferable 315.03
required 315.02
license plate, display 315.03
liquid fuel, exceptions 315.06
liquid fuel, metered 315.05
Mayor's duties 315.16, 315.17
penalty 315.99
permit, delivery time 315.14
scales
approval 315.17
places designated 315.16
regulations 315.08
solid fuel, delivery ticket 315.12
solid fuel, sale by weight 315.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
28
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
Treasurer, powers 315.03
unequipped dealer 315.09
unequipped dealer, weighing fee 315.10
vehicles, license 315.03
weight
certificates required 315.09
fee 315.10
fraud 315.15
required, fee 315.13
scale regulations 315.08
solid fuel 315.04
FUNDS (see FINANCE)
FUNERAL
Police escort, fee 521.01
right of way 521.01
FURNITURE ON PORCHES 1161.08(g)
penalty 1161.99
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
29
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- G -
GAMBLING
amusement devices 305.02
participant 713.02
penalty 713.99
premises
allowing use 713.03
using for 713.01
visiting 713.02
video amusement devices 307.02
GARAGES, STORAGE 538.01
GARBAGE OR RUBBISH (see SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT)
accumulation 1161.08
cans, noisy 717.02
sidewalk, removal from 721.02
GARBAGE DISPOSALS
fees 1717.02
locations prohibited 1717.05
operation 1717.03
permit required 1717.01
single-family unit, use 1717.04
GAS PUMPS (see MOTOR FUEL METERS)
inspection fee 303.01
GIFTS (restriction on acceptance by City officers
and employees 117
GRAFFITI 742
definitions 742.02
prohibitions 742.03
proof of violation 742.04
owners’ duty to abate 742.05
standards for abatement and removal of graffiti 742.06
owner failure to comply 742.07
penalty – fines and imprisonment 742.99
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
30
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
GROUP HOMES Ord. 3173
(See Part 13)
GUNS (see WEAPONS)
GUTTER, requirements 905, 909
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
31
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- H -
HANDICAPPED PARKING 531.03
HAZARDOUS SPILLS - See Extraordinary Expenses (Article 125)
HEALTH BOARD (see BOARD OF HEALTH)
HEALTH NUISANCE (see NUISANCE)
HEIGHT REGULATIONS
airport zone height limitations 1360.05
exceptions 1318.19
maximum for buildings 1318.19
HELICOPTER, Landings 1702.01
HIGHWAY FRONTAGE DEVELOPMENT 1318.25
HISTORIC BETHLEHEM
appeal, building permit 1713.15
architectural appropriateness 1713.11
Board of Architectural Review 1713.04, 1713.05
Board of Architectural Review, report 1713.13
Board member; interest in property 1713.06
boundaries 1713.02
Building Inspector, powers 1713.16
building permit
application 1713.09
considering 1713.10
Council approval 1713.14
denial 1713.15
building plans, changing 1713.12
certificate of appropriateness required 1713.06
certification 1713.03
enforcement 1713.16
established 1713.01
facade improvements 1713.07
penalty 1713.99
purpose 1713.01
report by Board 1713.13
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
32
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
HISTORIC CONSERVATION DISTRICT – SOUTH BETHLEHEM AND
MOUNT AIRY 1714
activities requiring certificates of appropriateness 1714.09
application review procedure 1714.11
definitions 1714.04
delineation of historic conservation district 1714.05
design guidelines 1714.10
enforcement 1714.14
HISTORIC CONSERVATION DISTRICT – SOUTH BETHLEHEM AND MOUNT
AIRY(cont’d)
historic conservation membership 1714.06
legal authorization 1714.01
notice of violation 1714.13
powers and duties of City Council 1714.08
powers and duties of the historic conservation
commission 1714.07
penalty 1714.15
purposes 1714.03
short title 1714.02
unreasonable economic hardship 1714.12
HISTORIC RESOURCES AND LANDMARKS 1321
HOME OFFICE, OR HOME BUSINESS 1318.30
HORSES, POLICE 941.01(h)
HOTEL (see ROOMING HOUSE)
HOUSE, DISORDERLY 705.04
HOUSING CODE (BOCA Property Maintenance Code)
adoption 1733.02
amendments 1733.02
violations, penalty 1733.99
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
annual report 145.08
definition 145.02
establishment 145.05
exception 145.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
33
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
private right of action and nonlimitation of remedies 145.07
procedures; expanded procedures 145.06
purpose and declaration of policy 145.01
review of ordinance 145.09
unlawful practices 145.03
HUNTING (see WEAPONS)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
34
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- I -
ICE CREAM PEDDLER
fee 303.01
IMPOUNDING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES Art. 538
INCOME TAX, EARNED
construction 333.10
definitions 333.01
effective date 333.11
employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns 333.05
imposition of tax 333.02
imposition of tax 333.02
interest, penalties, costs and fines 333.07
no exemption from tax 333.03
purpose/repeal 333.09
severability 333.08
tax officer 333.06
taxpayer tax returns, declarations and payments 333.04
INDUSTRIAL WASTE 923
INDUSTRIAL WASTE HEARING BOARD 923.05
INSPECTIONS - See also FEES
Yard Sales 301.08
INSPECTIONS, HOUSING
(See also Article 119)
fees 1731.02
inspections required 1731.01
penalty 1731.99
registration 1731.03
regulated rental units 1739
I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
purpose 1309.01
use regulations 1309.02
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
35
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 1309.08
INSURANCE
City Council review of changes 128.03
coverage requirements 128.01
information submission 128.02
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
adoption 1733.01
additions, deletions and modifications 1733.02
INTERSECTION
parking in 531.02
INTOXICATION
disorderly conduct 705.02
parks 941.06
Pedestrian Malls 951.07
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
36
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- J -
JOINT AUTHORITY 101.04
JUKE BOX (see AMUSEMENT DEVICES) 305.01
JUNKYARD 1302.47
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
37
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- L -
LANDLORD
absentee 1733
licensing 1739
(see Regulated Rental Unit Occupancy)
LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC RESOURCES 1321
LEAVES, removal from sidewalks 721.02
LEAD POISON CONTROL
abatement of health hazard 1167.06
definitions 1167.01
determination of health hazard 1167.03
examination of children 1167.05
inspections 1167.02
notice of health hazard 1167.04
penalty 1167.99
protection of occupants 1167.07
remedy 1167.09
severability 1167.08
LEHIGH-NORTHAMPTON AIRPORT AUTHORITY 139
LEHIGH VALLEY SOLID WASTE AUTHORITY 139
LERTA (see Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance)
LIABILITY
building 1701.02
flood districts 1327.02
subdivision and development 1351.04
LIBRARY (see BETHLEHEM LIBRARY)
LIBRARY BOARD
appointments 117.01,
135.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
38
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
LIBRARY EMPLOYEES
pension, prior service 155.24
LIBRARY TAX 135.02
LICENSE (see also PERMIT)
amusement device 305.03
business 303.01
business privilege and mercantile tax 341.03
craft fair 341.06
dogs 1159.15
electrician 1703
fairs, festivals 341.06
food, vending machine 1113.05
fuel, sale 315.02
health, food, license fees 1113.06
plumber 1705
regulated rental units 1739.04
rooming house 1735.06
tree surgeon 910.10
video amusement arcade 307.03
LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1316.01
use regulations 1316.02
LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS
storage 1702.01
LIQUID FUEL (see FUEL, SALE)
LITTERING
Pedestrian Malls 951.10
sidewalks and streets 701.03
LOADING
vehicles 721.01
LOCAL ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION TAX ASSISTANCE (LERTA)
Enterprise Development Area 342
North Side Central Business District (Terminated Dec. 2006) 343
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
39
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
LOCAL SERVICES TAX (formerly Emergency and Municipal Services Tax) 339
Administration Of Tax 339.11
Dates For Determining Tax Liability And Payment 339.06
Definitions 339.02
Duty Of Employers 339.04
Employers And Self-Employed Individuals Residing
Outside The City 339.09
Exemptions 339.10
Individuals Engaged In More Than One Occupation 339.08
Levy, Assessment and Collection 339.03
Penalty 339.99
Returns 339.05
Saving Clause 339.14
Self-Employed Individuals 339.07
Suits For Collection 339.12
Validity 339.13
LOITERING
parks, in 941.06
sidewalks, etc., on 705.05
LOT (See ZONING ORDINANCE)
building coverage 1318.21
defined 1302.45
dimensional requirements
front, side yards of corner lot 1318.07
front yard
fences and terraces 1318.12
generally 1318.09
projections into 1318.11
reduction 1318.13
setback 1318.10
nonconforming 1302.53
rear yards
generally 1318.17
triangular lots, for 1318.18
recorded lot 1302.45
side yards
fences, terraces in 1318.16
generally 1318.14
projections into 1318.15
spacing nonresidential 1318.08
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
40
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- M -
MAP, STREETS
Airport Zoning 1360.04
real estate 119.02
zoning 1303.03
MAYOR
appointments or removals 105.02
executive power 105.01
fuel, sale, duties 315.16,
315.17
rabies proclamation 709.09
term of office 105.04
vacancy in office 105.03
MECHANICAL CODE – See UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE 1701.02
fees 1702.01
MINOR
enticing into vehicle 705.03
obscenity involving 733
video amusement arcade 307.06
MOTEL (see ROOMING HOUSE)
MOTOR FUEL METERS
inspection of 303.01(a)(11)
MOTOR VEHICLE
body work; repairing – on private property 1733.02
driving (see DRIVING)
impounding
appeal 538.07
authority 538.01
charges
amount 538.04
payment under protest 538.07
payment without protest 538.06
claiming, hours 538.11
fine or penalty, liability 538.09
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
41
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
owner, notice 538.05
records 538.08
redemption, unlawful 538.12
storage charge 538.04
storage garage, approved 538.02
storage garage, insurance 538.03
towing charge 538.04
minor, enticing into 705.03
noise, nuisance 509.03
parking 531
parking meters 533
parks, in 941.01, 941.04
Pedestrian Malls 951.20
repairing; greasing – on roadway 531.06
MOTOR VEHICLE - continued
unattended on private property 531.10
unregistered, uninspected on private property (pg. 3) 1733.02
MOUNTED POLICE 941.01(h)
MOVERS, MOVING OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS
fee 309.03
penalty 309.99
permit application 309.02
permit required 309.01
MOVING PERMITS 309
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS
collection procedures 347.03
related action 347.04
schedule of fees 347.02
statement of policies 347.01
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT Ord. 3163
MUNICIPAL PURCHASING POLICY 122
- N -
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
42
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
NOISE (see also DISORDERLY CONDUCT)
animal 717.01
building construction 717.01
building standards 1701.02
garbage or rubbish cans 717.01
motor vehicles 509.03
nuisance declared 717.01
peddler 717.02
penalty 717.99
protection 1347.13
sound reproduction devices 717.01
NONCONFORMING USES (See ZONING ORDINANCE)
abandonment 1323.06
additions and enlargements 1323.04
applicability to approved plans 1323.09
changes 1323.07
continuation 1323.03
definitions 1323.02
displacement 1323.08
district changes 1323.11
nonconforming lots 1323.12
prior violations continued 1323.10
purpose of article 1323.01
restoration 1323.05
NUISANCES
abatement 1161.05
accumulation of rubbish and garbage 1162.05
defined 1161.01
failure to comply 1161.09
owner, liability 1161.10
peddling 311.01
penalty 1161.99
placarding structure 1161.06
rules, establishing 1161.02
toilets 1161.03
trees and shrubs 910.12
unsanitary building or dwelling 1161.04
vectors 1161.08
weeds 1161.07
yard sales 301.07
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
43
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- O -
OBSCENITY
definitions 733.03
materials involving minors offers and
admission tickets 733.02
nudity, public 731
penalty 733.99
purveyance of obscene materials
(adult book stores) 1318.26
sale or exhibition 733.01,
1318.26
severability 733.04
OBSTRUCTING TRAVEL (see LOITERING)
OCCUPANTS, Number Of, Regulated Rental Units 1739.03
OCCUPATION PRIVILEGE TAX (replaced by Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax - Article 339)
OFFICE RESEARCH CENTER
(see C-M OFFICE RESEARCH CENTER)
OFFICERS' AND EMPLOYEES PENSION (see EMPLOYEES' PENSION)
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 117
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
commercial business district 1310.04
loading
required space 1319.04
parking
design standards 1319.03
general regulations 1319.02
required space 1319.01
ON-SITE SEWERAGE SYSTEM 1163.01
ONE-WAY STREETS
designation 503.13
temporary 503.14
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
44
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
OPEN DATA PROGRAM Stand-alone ordinance
Ord. 2017-34
OPENINGS (see VAULTS AND OPENINGS)
OUTDOOR DINING (See ZONING ORDINANCE)
OWNER-OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY
nuisance, liability 1161.09
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
45
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- P -
PARADE
permit 521.02
PARKING
angle 531.02
bus 540
commercial vehicle 531.04
double parking 531.01
front lawn, parking on 531.01(b)
garage exit, blocking 531.08
handicapped; disabled veterans 531.03
highways 531.02
off-street parking and loading 1319
overtime parking violations 533.99
parks, in 941.04
penalty 509.99, 531.99
permits, residential Article 534
prohibited places 531.01
repairing vehicle; greasing 531.06
Special Condition 531.99
taxicab 540
tow-away zone 531.07
trucks; trailers 531.04
unregistered vehicles 531.01
vehicle for sale 531.05
violations 531.99, 533.99
yard sales 301.09
PARKING AUTHORITY 139
PARKING METERS
coins, deposit 533.07
funds, disposition 533.13
installation 533.02
meter instructions 533.04
operation 533.03
other regulations 533.10
overtime parking
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
46
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
meter 533.08
zone 533.09
penalty 533.99
slugs, use 533.11
space, definition 533.05
spaces, rules for use 533.06
tampering with 533.12
time limits 533.07
tokens, use 533.02
zones established 533.01
PARKS
alcoholic beverages in 941.06
behavior 941.06
definitions 941.01
enforcement 941.09
merchandising, advertising signs, in 941.07
operating policy 941.08
park property 941.02
penalty 941.99
recreational activities 941.05
sanitation 941.03
traffic 941.04
PAWNBROKERS AND SECOND HAND DEALERS
reports to Bethlehem Police Department 715.01
penalty 715.99
PEDDLER
farm produce 311.02
fee 303.01
invitation required 311.01
noise 717.03
nuisance 311.01
penalty 311.99
PEDESTRIAN
signals, obedience 541.01
PEDESTRIAN MALLS
activities 951.03
alcoholic beverages 951.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
47
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
animals 951.05
boundary 951.01
conduct 951.07
definitions 951.01
existing ordinances 951.23
fountains 951.08
furniture 951.09
leasing 951.03
littering 951.10
mall structure - protection 951.11
musical instruments 951.16
pedacycles 951.06
penalty 951.99
roller skates, skate board 951.14
rules and regulations 951.02
selling goods 951.15
signs, posting 951.12
snow removal 951.19
sound amplification 951.16
storage of goods 951.17
sweeping 951.18
uses prohibited 951.13
vandalism 951.21
vehicles 951.20
vending machines 951.22
PENALTY
911 emergency telephone system 971.99
advertising 701.99
air conditioning and refrigeration 915.99
airport zoning 1360.99
alcohol in public places 723.99
amusement devices 305.99
animals 1159.99
1160.99
antenna systems 908.99
bicycle registration 543.99
Building Code 1701
Plumbing Code 1701
BOCA Property Maintenance Code 1733.02
business license 303.99
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
48
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
business privilege and mercantile tax 341.99
BYOB clubs 736.99
certificate of occupancy 1701
cigarette vending machines 1119.99
Codified Ordinances 101.99
college university permit parking 536.99
curb construction 909.99
day care regulations 1165.99
discharging industrial waste 923.99
disorderly conduct 705.99
dog regulations 1159.99
driving restrictions, snow 523.99
driveway construction 909.99
earned income tax 333.99
Electrical Code 1701
emergency alarm system 735.99
excavation 903.99
exotic animals 1160.99
fair housing ordinance 1737.06
Fire Code 1701
food handling 1115.99
food service establishment 1113.99
food vending machines 1117.99
food waste disposals, mechanical 1717.99
fuel, sale 315.99
furniture on porches 1161.99
gambling 713.99
garbage disposal 1717.99
general 101.99
gutter construction 909.99
health nuisances 1161.99
Historic Bethlehem 1713.99
illegally parked vehicles, removal without 538.99
payment of towing/storage charges
income tax 333.99
industrial waste discharge regulations 923.99
inspections, housing/rental properties 1731.99
juke box 305.99
law enforcement 711.99
lead poison control 1167.99
Mechanical code 1701
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
49
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
movers 309.99
nudity, public 731.99
noise 717.99
obscene materials 733.99
occupation privilege tax 339.99
on-site sewerage system 1163.99
parks 941.99
parking 531.99
parking meter 533.99
pawnbrokers 715.99
peddler 311.99
Pedestrian Malls 951.99
per capita tax 337.99
poles and wires 907.99
police lines, crossing 711.99
real estate registration 119.99
realty transfer tax 335.04(c)
335.14
recreation fees and charges 729.99
recycling 933.99
regulated rental units 1739.06
residence tax 331.99
residential code 1701
residential permit parking 534.99
Retail Food Store Sanitation Code 1114.99
rooming houses 1735.99
second hand dealers 715.99
security gates, grilles, shutters 1718.99
sewer rates, rental 927.99
sewer regulations 921.99
sewers, storm 925.99
sewerage systems, on-site 1163.99
sidewalk construction 909.99
sidewalk misdemeanors 721.99
snow emergency routes 523.99
snow, ice, rubbish, non-removal 721.99
solid waste collection and enforcement 1162.99
storm water management regulations 925.99
street misdemeanors 721.99
Traffic Code 509.99
trees and shrubs 910.99
vaults and openings 1715.99
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
50
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
vehicles abandoned on private property 1733.02
vehicles, impounded, nonpayment of charges 538.99
video amusement arcades 307.99
water bills 913.03
water regulations 911.99
weapons 725.99
weights and measures 317.99
yard sales 301.99
Zoning Ordinance 1324.04
PENNSYLVANIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE – See Uniform
Construction Code 1701
PENSION FUNDS
City of Bethlehem 156
Firemen's 151
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (PMRS)-
See Various Ordinances
Police 153
Officers' and Employees' 155
PER CAPITA TAX
penalty 337.99
rate established 337.01
rental units 337.02
PERFORMANCE STANDARD 1318.22
PERMIT (see also LICENSE; see also FEES)
air conditioning and refrigeration 915.02
alarm systems 735.10, 735.11
animals, keeping 1159.07
building 1701.02
building, historical district 1713.09
business 303.01
college university parking permit 536.07
driveway 909.06
electrical 1703.02, 1703.03
emergency alarm systems 735.10, 735.11
excavation 903.02
exhibit in park 941.06
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
51
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
fuel delivery, unusual time 315.14
garbage disposal 1717.01
industrial waste discharge 923.04
movers, moving of household goods 309.01
on-site sewerage system 1163.01
parade or procession 521.02
park activities 941.08
parking Art. 534, 536
pedestrian malls 951.03, 951.15
plumbing work 1705.02
poles, installation 907.01
rooming house 1735.02
sewerage systems, on-site 1163
sewers, sanitary 921.04
sidewalk construction 909.05
street, sidewalk activities 721.04
swimming pool 1711.03
temporary structures on streets/sidewalks 721.04
tree planting, treatment, removal 910.04
vaults, construction 1715.02
vaults, existing 1715.01
zoning-building 1324.02
PETTING ZOOS 1159.14
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
defined 1302.59
purpose 1315.01
use regulations 1315.02
PLANNED OFFICE DEVELOPMENT
defined 1302.60
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
defined 1302.61
purpose, procedure, plan, review 1318.24
PLAY STREET Repealed
PLUMBERS, licensing of 1705
PLUMBING
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
52
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
air cooling devices, violation 915.13
licensed plumbers to do work 1705
rooming house 1735.07
PLUMBING CODE – See UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE 1701.02
fees 1702.01
PMRS (See Individual Ordinance)
POLES AND WIRES
fee 907.01
penalty 907.99
permits 907.01
removal of pole 907.02
rules and regulations 907.01
sidewalk replacement 907.02
trees, damaging 907.03
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Civil Service Board 157.01
false reports to 711.02
mounted police (horses) 941.01(h)
responsibility 107.07
Traffic Code, enforcement 509.01
traffic, directing 509.02
Traffic Division (see TRAFFIC DIVISION)
POLICE LINES
crossing 711.01
penalty 711.99
POLICE PENSION FUND
active service, return to 153.10
administrative expenses 153.19
amendment 153.17
annual salary 153.12
Association 153.03
benefits
disability 153.09
excess, return 153.08
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
53
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
execution, exemption from 153.16
ineligibility 153.13
rates 153.12
scale 153.12
uniformity 153.03
vested rights 153.14
contributions
disposition 153.05
leave of absence, effect 153.11
returning 153.08
return on suspension 153.13
disability 153.09
eligibility 153.02
established 153.01
execution, exempt from 153.16
funds, disbursement 153.03
fund, keeping separate 153.06
gifts, rewards, etc. 153.05
grievance 153.15
ineligibility 153.13
insurance 153.06
joining 153.04
leave of absence 153.11
physical disability 153.09
physical examination 153.09
pick-up plan 153.20
rate of contributions 153.04
re-established 153.01
retirement, mandatory 153.07
return of contributions 153.08
rights, vested 153.14
scope of regulations 153.18
service requirements 153.07
suspension, effect 153.13
Treasurer, bond 153.03
warrants required 153.06
POLITICAL SIGNS 1320.08
POLLUTION
water, in parks 941.03
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
54
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
POOLS (see SWIMMING POOLS)
POOL TABLES (see Billiards)
PORTABLE SIDEWALK SIGNS 1320.10
POSTING OF BILLS 701
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES 313
PROCESSION
permit 521.02
PROPERTY DESTRUCTION
Pedestrian Malls 951.21
water system 911.07, 911.11
PROPERTY INSPECTIONS 1731
fees 1731.02
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, INTERNATIONAL 1733
(formerly BOCA BASIC EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE)
PROPERTY REGISTRATION (see Abandoned Real Property)
additional authority 1732.10
amendments 1732.13
applicability 1732.03
definitions 1732.02
effective date 1732.15
establishment of a registry 1732.04
fees and penalties 1732.99
immunity of enforcement officer 1732.12
inspections for violations 1732.09
maintenance requirements 1732.06
opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty 1732.11
public nuisance 1732.08
purpose and intent 1732.01
registration of abandoned real property 1732.05
security requirements 1732.07
severability 1732.14
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
55
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
PROPERTY TAX
payment 329.02
rates 329.01
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
City Center Authority 139
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
obstructions 909.09
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 107.06
PURCHASING POLICY 122
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
56
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- R -
RABIES (see DOGS)
RAILROAD
parking restrictions 531.01
REAL ESTATE
books, maps, etc., copies 119.03
books, maps, etc., preparation 119.02
deed, prerequisite to recording 119.05
department established 119.01
fee, copy of records 119.03
judicial sales 119.05
owner, duties 119.04
penalty 119.99
registration required 119.04
rules and regulations 119.07
sale 1731
seller's statement required 119.06
signs 1320.08
REALTY TRANSFER TAX
acquired company 335.08
authority 335.02
collection 335.17
collection agent 335.12
duties 335.12
consideration 335.06
credits 335.09
definitions 335.03
documents 335.07
enforcement 335.16; 335.17
excluded transactions 335.06
exempt parties 335.05
interest 335.04
judicial sale 335.11
lease, extension 335.10
lien 335.15
Local Tax Enabling Act 335.04(c)
payment, when made 335.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
57
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
penalty, civil 335.14
property partly outside City 335.04
rate 335.04
real estate company 335.08
Recorder of Deeds 335.04
duties 335.12
regulations 335.17
severability 335.18
stamp 335.04
Statement of Value 335.13
RECREATION BOARD
appointments 117.01
duties and responsibilities 133.02
members, appointment 133.01
organization 133.03
RECREATION BUREAU DUTIES 107.04
RECREATION FEES AND CHARGES (Set by Resolution)
payment required 729.01
penalty 729.99
proof of payment 729.02
transfer prohibited 729.03
RECYCLING
collection program 933.03
commercial, municipal or institutional establishments 933.05
definitions 933.01
Director of Community Development to regulate recycling 933.02
effective date 933.08
fees schedule 933.09
hauler requirements 933.06
penalties 933.99
residential source separation 933.04
unlawful activities 933.07
REFRIGERATION
(see AIR CONDITIONING OR REFRIGERATION)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
58
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT OCCUPANCY
code violations 1739.02 J
definitions 1739.01 B
designation of manager 1739.02 B
disruptive conduct 1739.03 F
fee 1739.04 B
inspection 1739.03 I
1739.04 C
license 1739.04 A
non-renewal, suspension, revocation 1739.05
number of occupants 1739.03 B
occupant duties 1739.03
owner’s duties 1739.02
penalties 1739.06
purpose, scope, policy 1739.01 A
rental agreements, written 1739.02 E
trash containers 1739.03 B
RENTAL UNITS
registration
331.02;1731.03
regulations 1739
RESEARCH CENTER 1302.67
RESIDENCE TA
penalty 331.99
rate established 331.01
rental units 331.02
RESIDENCY, Employee (REPEALED) Article 117
RESIDENTIAL CODE, INTERNATIONAL – See UNIFORM
CONSTRUCTION CODE 1701.02
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING
Designation criteria 534.04
Designation of Central Business District 534.03
Designation process 534.05
Permits
Application 534.09
Display 534.07
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
59
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
Duration 534.09
Fees 534.10
Issuance 534.06
Revocation 534.11
Permit Parking Exemption 534.08
Regulations and Procedures 534.13
Residential Parking Permit Areas 534.12
Penalties 534.14
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING BOARD OF APPEALS
Board Membership 535.02
Decision of Board 535.04
Judicial Remedies 535.05
Procedure for Appeal 535.03
Purpose; Establishment 535.01
RESTAURANTS (see also FOOD CODE; Zoning Ordinance)
inspection fees 1113.05
license fee 1113.06
outdoor (see Zoning Ordinance)
penalty 1113.99
PA Food Code 1113.01
RETAIL BUSINESS (see MERCANTILE LICENSE)
RETAIL FOOD STORE SANITATION CODE (see FOOD CODE REGULATION –
Article 1113)
RETIREMENT SYSTEM (see EMPLOYEES' PENSION)
R-G RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1306.01
use regulations 1306.02
R-M RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1308.01
use regulations 1308.02
R-M RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE 1308.07
R-R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1304.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
60
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
use regulations 1304.02
R-RC RESIDENTIAL RETIREMENT COMPLEX
defined 1302.68
purpose 1308A.01
use regulations 1308A.02
R-R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE 1304.07
R-S RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1305.01
use regulations 1305.02
R-T RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
purpose 1307.01
use regulations 1307.02
ROOMING HOUSE
bedding and towels 1735.08
compliance 1735.02
defined 1735.01
egress 1735.11
fee 1735.06
food preparation 1735.15
hearing 1735.05
linens, responsibility 1735.08
notice of violation 1735.04
occupants, bedridden or infirmed 1735.14
permit
renewal 1735.06
required 1735.03
suspension 1735.04 plumbing facilities 1735.07
privacy 1735.13
sanitary facilities 1735.13
sanitary maintenance 1735.12
shades, drapes 1735.09
sleeping space, minimum 1735.10
violations, warning 1735.04
RUBBISH - See SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
61
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- S –
SAFETY ZONE
designation 503.12
parking restrictions 531.01
SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS
defined 1302.71
requirements 1318.28
SECOND HAND DEALERS 715
SECURITY GATES, GRILLES, SHUTTERS – STOREFRONTS, ETC 1718
SECURITY SERVICES, PRIVATE 313
SELLING
Door-to-Door 311.01
Pedestrian Malls 951.15
Real estate 119;1731
Sidewalk Sales 951.15
SEPTIC TANK WASTE
disposal fee 303.01
SEWER, SANITARY
air cooling equipment, connection 915.05
construction and installation 905.03, 905.04
905.05, 905.06
definitions 921.01
general sanitary regulations 921.02
hearing board 921.07
industrial waste 921.03
lines, assessments 905.03
manhole required 927.12
on-site sewerage system
application 1163.02
fees 1163.02,
1163.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
62
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
installation 1163.03
penalty 1163.99
permit 1163.01
outside City 923.09
penalty 921.99
permits 921.04
right of entry, City official 927.14
storm, assessments 905.08
swimming pool
connection 1711.04
drainage 921.05
unpolluted waste 927.11
waste; sampling, testing, inspecting 921.07
SEWER RATES 927.02
SEWER RENTAL
annual charge 927.01
apportionment 927.07
delinquent accounts 927.09
exempt property 927.10
industrial waste 927.13
notice of change 927.15
unusual 927.13
inspecting, testing, etc. 927.14
manhole 927.12
measuring device 927.05
payment, time and method 927.06
penalty 927.99
rates 927.02
Treasurer, duties 927.08
unpolluted drainage 927.11
water not discharged into sanitary sewer 927.04
water other than City use 927.03
SEWER, STORM
admission of unauthorized waste 925.03
definitions 925.01
impedances 925.05
penalty 925.99
swimming pool drainage 925.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
63
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
SHRUBBERY
injury or removal 941.02
planting 1349.08
screen 1302.71
SIDEWALK
activities on 721.02;721.08
awning 721.02
City performing work 909.05
construction by owner 909.01
construction permit, fee 909.06
defined 101.04
developments
existing, with 909.01
existing, without 909.02
new developments 905.02
dining, outdoor 721.06
dumpsters on 721.08
events, municipal sponsored or sanctioned 721.07
excavations (see EXCAVATIONS)
fees 909.04;909.06
grade 909.04
insurance required 721.05;721.08;909.07
littering 701.03
obstruction 721.02;909.09
parking on 531.01
penalty 721.99;909.99
permit 721.07;721.08;909.06
poles, installation 907.02
projection over 721.02;721.04
rubbish removal 721.03
safety during construction 909.08
sales, sidewalk 721.06
snow removal 721.03
vault or opening under (see VAULTS AND OPENINGS)
vending 721.05
warrant of survey 909.03
warrant of survey, fee 909.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
64
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
SIGNS (see also individual zoning district) 701
bond 1701.02
defined 1302.71
insurance 1701.02
parks, in 941.07
Pedestrian Malls 951.12
political signs 1320.08(b)(1)
portable sidewalk 1320.04
signs 1320
subdivision and development, street traffic
(see TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE) 1349.10
yard sales 301.06
SISTER CITY COMMISSION
duties 141.03
establishment, appointment, term and vacancy 141.01
officers, rules of procedure 141.02
SITE PLAN REVIEW
criteria 1321.03
procedure 1321.02
purpose 1321.01
SHORT TERM LODGING FACILITIES 1741
SMOKE DETECTORS 1733.02
SMOKING RESTRICTIONS - See: Fire Prevention Code
SNOW
emergency (see DRIVING)
emergency
coordinator 523.01
removal, Pedestrian Malls 951.19
sidewalks 721.02
tires 523.01
SOFAS, ON PORCHES, YARDS, OUTSIDE 1161.08
SOLICITOR (see CITY SOLICITOR)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
65
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
SOLID WASTE
disposal regulations (Zoning Ordinance) 1318.22
rubbish fires 1506.04
Solid Waste Collection and Enforcement 1162
Accumulation of Solid Waste, Rubbish and Garbage 1162.04
Container Standards 1162.03
Definitions 1162.01
Director of Community and Economic Development 1162.02
to regulate
Failure to comply; Cost of lien 1162.10
Hauler Responsibility 1162.06
Liability of Owner 1162.12
Owner Responsibility 1162.05
Penalty 1162.99
Placement of Containers 1162.07
Preparation of Solid Waste for Collection 1162.08
Time, Frequency and Manner of Collection 1162.09
SPECIAL CONDITION
Parking Violations 531.99
STORAGE GARAGES 535.02
STORAGE TANKS - See UNDERGROUND TANKS
STORAGE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES 538
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 925
STREET
activities 721.02;721.08
defined 101.04,1302.75
degradation fee 903.01
door or gate, projecting into 721.04
dumpsters 721.08
excavation (see EXCAVATIONS)
littering 701.03
obstruction 721.02
penalty 721.99
plan and map, Engineers duty 901.02
plan and map established 901.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
66
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
projection over 721.02
snow 721.03
vault or opening under(see VAULTS AND OPENINGS)
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
assessments
basis 905.06
frontage 905.01
new street 905.01
payment 905.07
construction 905.05
abutting owner
construction costs of City 905.04
curb
City performing work 909.04
insurance 909.06
penalty 909.99
required 905.02,
909.01
safety during construction 909.07
warrant of survey 909.02
gutter required 905.02
owner, abutting, liability 905.01
sewer lines 905.03
sidewalk (see SIDEWALK)
water main 905.03
STUDENT APARTMENTS – See REGULATED RENTAL UNITS 1739
SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
adoption 1341.05
authority 1341.03
definitions 1343
development standards
alleys 1347.09
blocks 1347.07
environmental controls 1347.11
flood plains 1347.12
generally 1347.01
land suitability 1347.02
lines, lots and buildings 1347.08
parks, playgrounds 1347.10
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
67
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
street alignment 1347.04
street grades 1347.05
street intersections 1347.06
street systems 1347.03
utility easements 1347.09
enforcement 1351.02
flood plains 1347.12
floodproofing
sewer facilities 1349.03
utilities 1349.12
general procedure 1345.01
geodetic control 1343.02
GIS, plan compatibility with; Autocad 1345.06
jurisdiction 1341.04
modification 1351.03
municipal liability 1351.04
plans
approval 1345.02
development sketch 1345.03
final 1345.04
minor subdivision 1345.05
purpose 1341.02
recreation land and fees 1347.10
required improvements
curbs, gutters and walks 1349.06
fencing 1349.09
final acceptance 1349.13
monuments; markers 1349.01
planting 1349.08
sanitary sewers 1349.03
storm sewers 1349.04
street grading 1349.02
street lights 1349.11
street paving 1349.07
street signs 1349.10
utilities, floodproofing 1349.12
water 1349.05
sewers
sanitary 1349.03
storm, surface drainage 1349.04
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
68
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT (continued)
streets
alignment 1347.04
grades 1347.05,
1349.02
intersections 1347.06
lights 1349.11
paving 1349.07
signs 1349.10
systems 1347.03
title 1341.01
utilities
floodproofing 1349.12
validity 1351.01
water 1349.05
SWIMMING POOL
drainage 921.05
fee 1702.01
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
69
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- T -
TANKS – See UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE 1701.02
abandonment 1701.02
fees 1702.01
removal 1701.02
underground 1701.02
TAPPING FEE – Sewer System 921.08
TAX INCREMENTAL FINANCING PLAN
agreements for financial security for project costs 345.12
amendments to TIF proposal and district 345.13
application of tax increment revenue 345.10
approval of TIF plan and project financing 345.06
boundaries of the district 345.02
creation and term of district 345.03
creation of tax increment fund 345.08
definitions 345.01
designation of authority as project authority 345.07
legislative findings 345.05
name of district 345.04
procedures for collection of tax increment revenues 345.11
tax increment revenues to be held in trust for project 345.09
TAXES (see also individual tax)
business privilege and mercantile tax 341
earned income tax 333
Emergency and Municipal Services Tax (EMST) 339
employees' pension appropriations 155.11
Firemens' Pension Fund appropriations 151.03
library 135.02
local economic revitalization tax assistance (LERTA)
enterprise development area 342
north side central business district 343
municipal claims for delinquent accounts 347
- schedule of attorney fees to be added
occupation privilege tax – replaced by EMST
per capita tax 337
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
70
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
property tax 329
realty transfer tax 335
residence tax 331
tax incremental financing plan 345
unpaid 347
TAXICAB
fee 303.01
stands, designation 540.01
stands, use by other vehicles 540.03
stopping or parking 540.02
TELEPHONE SYSTEM, 911 971
TELEVISION ANTENNA SYSTEMS (see ANTENNA SYSTEMS)
TEMPORARY FOOD STANDS 1113.04
THEFT OF WATER 911.11
TIME
computation 101.04
TOKEN
parking meters 533.02
TIRES
mud and snow 523.01
TOW-AWAY ZONE
parking in 531.07
penalty 509.99
TOWING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES 538
approved garages 538.02
authority to remove 538.01
hours for claiming vehicles 538.11
insurance requirement 538.03
towing and storage charges 538.04
penalty for removal without payment of towing 538.99
and storage charges
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
71
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
TRAFFIC CODE
definitions 501.02
directing traffic 509.02
enforcement, Police Department 509.01
penalty 509.99
prosecutions 503.05
title 501.01
violation, record 503.04
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE
conformity 503.09
driving across property to avoid 521.04
installation 503.03,
503.09
parking restrictions 531.02
pedestrian obedience 541.01
signs, erecting 503.10
TRAFFIC DIVISION
accidents (see ACCIDENTS) 503.05; 503.06
crosswalk, designation 503.10
direction of traffic, restriction 503.12; 509.02
emergency regulations 503.07
enforcement powers 503.02
established 503.01
experimental regulations 503.07
funeral processions 521.01
one-way streets, designation 503.11
prosecutions 503.05
record of violations 503.04
safety zones, designation 503.10
signs, erection 503.09
studies 503.06
traffic devices, installation 503.03, 503.08,
503.09
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES 1347.14
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE 505.01
TRASH CONTAINERS, Regulated Rental Units 1739.03 B
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
72
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
TREASURER
bond 109.03
fuel sale, powers 315.03
funds, disbursement 109.02
insurance 109.03
powers and duties 109.01
sewer charges, collection 927.08
TREES AND SHRUBS
Assessments for public improvements 910.17
City Departments, cooperation 910.14
control 910.03
damaged trees, installing poles 907.03
damaging or injuring 910.08
prohibited
definitions 910.01
Director, interference with
planting of trees by the City 910.16
property owner's privileges 910.11
protection 910.08
public nuisances 910.12
public utilities
permits
affecting 910.13
roots, obstructing 910.07
spraying materials permitted 910.09
trimming by public utilities 910.13
work to be done by tree surgeon 910.10
TREE SURGEON
license and fee 910.10
TRESPASS
watchman arresting 313.02
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
73
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- U -
UNDERGROUND TANKS 1702.01
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE, PENNSYLVANIA 1701
Adoption 1701.01
Additions and Modifications 1701.02
USE REGULATIONS
C-B Commercial Business District 1310.02
C-G General Commercial District 1311.02
C-L Limited Commercial District 1312.02
C-M Office Research Center District 1314.02
C-R Commercial Recreation District 1313.02
C-S Shopping Center District 1313.02
H-I Heavy Industrial District 1713.02
I Institutional District 1309.02
L-I Light Industrial District 1316.02
P-I Planned Industrial District 1315.02
R-G Residential District 1306.02
R-M Residential District 1308.02
R-R Residential District 1304.02
R-RC Residential Retirement Complex 1308A.02
R-S Residential District 1305.02
R-T Residential District 1307.02
UTILITIES
fee 303.01
permits affecting trees 910.13
poles (see POLES AND WIRES)
(see Zoning Ordinance)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
74
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- V -
VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE (see BLIGHTED PROPERTY REVIEW
COMMITTEE)
VANDALISM (see PROPERTY DESTRUCTION)
VAULTS AND OPENINGS
accident responsibility 1715.03
duty to safeguard 1715.01
existing, permit 1715.01
existing, registration 1715.01
inspection 1715.03
penalty 1715.99
permit
conditions 1715.04
construction 1715.02
fee 1715.04
registration required 1715.01
VEHICLE (see MOTOR VEHICLE)
VENDING MACHINE - See FOOD VENDING MACHINE; CIGARETTE
VENDING MACHINE
VENDORS
street and sidewalk 721.05
VIOLATION (see individual subject)
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
75
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- W –
WARRANT OF SURVEY 909.02
fees 909.03
WATCHMEN
power of arrest 313.02
registration required 313.01
WATER
Rates 913.01
bills, when payable 913.02
charge, restoration of service
in-City 913.05
out-of-City 913.06
charge, shutting off service
out-of-City 913.06
delinquent bills, collection of 913.04
fire hydrant 913.01
late payment 913.03
meter (water service) 913.01
out-of-City users 913.01
penalty, late payment 913.03
private fire service 913.01
sales for resale 913.01
Regulations 911
WATER AND SEWER ASSESSMENT, Cost 905.03
WATER REGULATIONS
application for new service 911.02
cross connection control and backflow prevention 911.14
customer’s service line 911.04
damage to system and theft of water 911.11
definitions 911.01
discontinuance of service 911.05
fire service 911.09
main extensions 911.10
meters 911.08
penalty 911.99
restoration of service 911.06
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
76
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
service connections 911.03
water conservation contingency plan 911.12
water used for building purposes 911.07
water use standards for certain plumbing fixtures 911.13
WEAPONS
discharging prohibited 725.01
penalty 725.99
WEEDS 1161.07
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
fuel (see FUEL, SALE)
house-to-house sales 317.03
Inspector, enforcement 315.13
Inspector, powers and duties 317.02
penalty 317.99
right of entry, 317.02
Inspector
seizure of device 317.02
standards 317.01
tests 317.02
vehicle, selling from 317.03
violation, arrest 315.13
WIRES (see POLES AND WIRES)
WINDOWS
boarded-up 1733.02
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
77
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- Y -
YARDS
buffers 1318.23
definitions 1302.88
YARD SALES 301
advertising; signs 301.06
arrest authority of inspector 301.08
definitions 301.01
display of sale property 301.05
exemption from ordinance 301.10
hours of operation 301.04
inspection, arrest authority of inspector 301.08
number of yard sales allowed per year 301.03
parking 301.09
penalty 301.99
property permitted to be sold 301.02
public nuisance 301.07
GENERAL INDEX
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
78
INDEX OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES 02282018.docx
Updated 2.28.2018
- Z -
ZONING
titles, purpose and interpretation 1301
definitions 1302
classification of districts 1303
allowed uses in primarily residential districts 1304
allowed uses in primarily non-residential districts 1305
dimensional requirements in each district 1306
workforce housing incentive 1307
additional requirements in the IR & IRR districts 1308
open space development option in the RR district 1309
additional requirements for the RR-T and RR-F
overlay districts 1310
design guidelines in the CL, CB and RT districts 1311
additional requirements in the I-O institutional
overlay district 1312
additional requirements for the CMU district 1313
additional requirements for the CM-LTN district 1314
additional requirements in the IN-O industrial
overlay district 1315
steep slope provisions 1316
floodway and flood fringe districts 1317
general regulations 1318
off-street parking and loading 1319
signs 1320
reserved 1321
additional requirements for specific uses 1322
procedures and controls governing non-conformities 1323
administration, permits and penalties 1324
zoning hearing board 1325
amendments 1326
PART01.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART ONE - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
TITLE ONE - Administrative Code
Article 101. Codified Ordinances.
Article 103. Council; City Clerk.
Article 105. Mayor.
Article 107. Departments.
Article 109. City Treasurer.
Article 111. City Controller.
Article 112. Campaign Finance Reports.
Article 113. City Solicitor; Bureau of Law.
Article 115. City Planner; Bureau of Planning.
Article 117. Officers and Employees.
Article 119. Registration, Sale and Transfer of Real Estate.
Article 121. Finance.
Article 122. Municipal Purchasing.
Article 123. Employment Provisions.
Article 125. Reimbursement for Extraordinary Expenses.
Article 127. Fire Insurance Escrow.
Article 128. Insurance.
Article 129. Municipal Bond Issues.
TITLE THREE - Boards, Commissions and Authorities
Article 131. Board of Health.
Article 133. Recreation Board.
Article 135. Bethlehem Area Public Library.
Article 137. Shade Tree Commission.
Article 139. Authorities.
Article 141. Sister City Commission.
Article 143. Fine Arts Commission.
Article 145. Human Relations Commission.
Article 146. Environmental Advisory Council.
Article 147. Environmental Conservation Commission.
Article 149. Blighted Property Review Committee.
Article 150. Board of Appeals.
TITLE FIVE - Employment Provisions; Pensions
Article 151. Firemen's Pension Fund.
Article 153. Police Pension Fund.
Article 155. Officers' and Employees' Retirement and Pension System.
Article 156. City of Bethlehem Pension Fund.
Article 157. Civil Service Board.
PART03.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART THREE - BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
TITLE ONE - Business and Licensing
Article 301. Yard Sales.
Article 303. General Business Licenses and Permits.
Article 304. First Responder’s Fee/Amusement Tax.
Article 305. Amusement Devices.
Article 307. Video Amusement Arcades.
Article 309. Moving of Household Goods.
Article 311. Peddlers and Solicitors.
Article 313. Private Security Services.
Article 315. Solid and Liquid Fuel Sales.
Article 317. Weights and Measures.
TITLE THREE - Taxation
Article 329. Property Tax.
Article 331. Residence Tax.
Article 333. Earned Income Tax.
Article 335. Realty Transfer Tax.
Article 337. Per Capita Tax.
Article 339. Local Services Tax.
Article 341. Business Privilege and Mercantile Tax.
Article 342. Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance.
Article 343. Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance - North Side Central Business District.
Article 345. Tax Incremental Financing Plan.
Article 347. Municipal Claims for Delinquent Accounts - Schedule of Attorney Fees.
PART05.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART FIVE - TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE ONE - Administration
Article 501. Short Title and Definitions.
Article 503. Traffic Division.
Article 505. Citizens' Traffic Safety Committee.
Article 509. Enforcement and General Penalty.
TITLE THREE - Traffic Regulations
Article 521. Operation of Vehicles.
Article 523. Snow Emergency Routes.
TITLE FIVE - Stopping, Standing and Parking
Article 531. Parking Generally.
Article 533. Parking Meters.
Article 534. Residential Permit Parking.
Article 535. Residential Parking Permit Board of Appeals.
Article 536. College/University Permit Parking
Article 538. Impounding Illegally Parked Vehicles.
Article 540. Buses and Taxicabs.
TITLE SEVEN - Pedestrians and Bicycles
Article 541. Pedestrians.
Article 543. Bicycle Registration.
PART07.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART SEVEN - GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
Article 701. Advertising.
Article 705. Disorderly Conduct.
Article 711. Law Enforcement.
Article 713. Gambling.
Article 715. Pawnbrokers and Second Hand Dealers.
Article 717. Noises.
Article 721. Streets and Sidewalks.
Article 723. Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places.
Article 725. Weapons.
Article 729. Recreation Fees and Charges.
Article 731. Public Nudity
Article 733. Obscene Material Involving Minors.
Article 735. Emergency Alarm System.
Article 736. Rules and Regulations for B.Y.O.B. Clubs Not Licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board within the City of Bethlehem
Article 742. Anti-Graffiti.
PART09.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART NINE - STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
TITLE ONE - Street and Sidewalk Areas
Article 901. Street Plan Map.
Article 903. Excavations.
Article 905. Street Improvements; Assessments.
Article 907. Poles and Wires.
Article 908. Antenna Systems.
Article 909. Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutter and Driveways.
Article 910. Trees.
TITLE THREE - Water
Article 911. Water Regulations.
Article 913. Water Rates and Charges.
Article 915. Air Conditioning and Refrigeration.
TITLE FIVE - Sewers
Article 921. Sanitary Sewer Regulations.
Article 923. Disposal and Discharge of Industrial Waste Regulations.
Article 925. Stormwater Management Regulations.
Article 927. Sewer Rental.
TITLE SEVEN - Municipal Waste and Recycling
Article 933. Recycling.
TITLE NINE - Recreation
Article 941. Parks.
Article 951. Pedestrian Malls.
TITLE ELEVEN - Emergency Telephone System
Article 971. Enhanced 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System.
PART11.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART ELEVEN - PUBLIC HEALTH CODE
TITLE ONE - Food
Article 1113. Food Code Regulation.
TITLE THREE - Other Regulations
Article 1119. Licensing and Regulation of Cigarette Vending Machines.
Article 1120. Emergency Medical Services (EMS).
Article 1159. Animals.
Article 1160. Wild and Exotic Animals.
Article 1161. Health Nuisances.
Article 1162. Solid Waste Collection and Enforcement.
Article 1163. On-Site Sewerage Systems.
Article 1165. The Regulation of Day Care Centers.
Article 1167. Lead Poison Control.
PART13.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART THIRTEEN - PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
TITLE ONE - Zoning Ordinance*
TITLE THREE - Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance*
TITLE FIVE - Airport Zoning
* Editor's Note - Titles 1 and 3 are issued and managed by the Planning Bureau, but are nonetheless
part of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. The reason for the
separation of the two titles is that citizens often require only ordinances dealing
with zoning or subdivision matters. Both the Zoning Ordinance and the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance may be obtained directly from the
Planning Bureau, Room A-101, City Hall, 10 E. Church Street, Bethlehem,
Pennsylvania 18018, telephone (610) 865-7088.
1
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF BETHLEHEM
PART FIFTEEN - FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Article 1501. BOCA National Fire Prevention Code.
(1996)
PART17.docx
Updated 2.2.2017
CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM
PART SEVENTEEN - BUILDING AND HOUSING
TITLE ONE - Standards Adopted
Article 1701. Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
Article 1702. Fees for the Enforcement of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code.
Article 1703. Requirements and Qualifications to Obtain Licenses to Perform Electrical Work within
the City of Bethlehem.
Article 1705. Requirements and Qualifications to Obtain Licensing to Perform Plumbing Work within
the City of Bethlehem.
TITLE THREE - Local Provisions
Article 1713. Historic Bethlehem.
Article 1714. Historic Conservation District - South Bethlehem and Mount Airy.
Article 1715. Vaults and Openings.
Article 1717. Mechanical Food Waste Disposals.
Article 1718. Security Gates, Grilles and Solid Shutters on Storefronts/Businesses.
TITLE FIVE - Housing
Article 1731. Inspections.
Article 1732. Abandoned Real Property.
Article 1733. International Property Maintenance Code. (2003).
Article 1735. Rooming Houses.
Article 1737. Fair Housing Ordinance.
Article 1739. Regulated Rental Unit Occupancy.
B/36/74
ORDINANCE NO. 2458
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM, COUNTIES OF LEHIGH AND
NORTHAMPTON, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, SETTING FORTH
RULES, PROCEDURES, AND REGULATIONS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND/OR
DEVELOPMENTS; PROVIDING FOR SUBMISSION OF PLANS, SETTING
FORTH STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR DEVELOPING AND/OR
SUBDIVIDING LAND; PROVIDING FOR INSPECTION; OUTLINING
JURISDICTION OF VARIOUS CITY DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION; SETTING FORTH RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
APPLICANT; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES; AND REPEALING ALL
ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES INCONSISTENT HEREWITH.
Sponsored by (s) Lawrence E. Kisslinger
(s) Dolores W. Caskey
ADOPTED by Council this 21st day of February, 1975.
(s) Paul M. Marcincin
ATTEST:
(s) Donald C. Cressman
City Clerk
This Ordinance approved this day of
Not signed by Mayor Mowrer
Mayor
AMENDMENTS
The following amendments have been made to the Subdivision and Development
Ordinance since January 21, 1975.
Date Ordinance No. Section Amended
1. Oct. 8, 1976 2531 1343.02(F)(2)G
1349.08
2. Oct. 19, 1977 2581 1351.03
3. May 24, 1978 2614 1341.02(a)(10)(11)
1343.02(d)
1343.02(f)(2)Q.
1343.02(f)(3)R.
1345.02
1347.02(a)
1347.05(d)
1347.12
1349.03(c)
1349.03(d)
1349.04(a)
1349.05(h)
1349.12
1349.13
1351.04
4. June 19, 1979 2661 1351.03
5. March 4, 1980 2696 1349.07
6. May 27, 1981 2777 1347.10(a)
1347.10(b)
7. May 26, 1982 2839 1343.02(f)(2)
1343.02(f)
1349.02
8. Oct. 20, 1982 2849 1347.13
9. Dec. 2, 1986 3090 1347.11(a)
1351.02
10. Apr. 7, 1987 3118 1349.11
Date Ordinance No. Section Amended
11. Sep. 20, 1988 3211 1349.08(e)(f)(g)
12. Feb. 7, 1989 3244 1351.02
13. May 23, 1989 3265 1351.05
14. May 6, 1992 3477 1349.04
15. September 3, 2002 4140 1345.02
16. March 15, 2005 4316 1347.14
17. July 3, 2007 4439 1343.02(g)
1347.10
18. September 5, 2007 4441 1343.02(f)
1343.02(g)(2)(R-U)
1343.02(g)(3)(R-V)
19. September 5, 2007 4442 1345.06
20. July 7, 2015 2015-26 1347.10
SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
FORWARD
The decision to convert open land to a different use is a step that should receive utmost
consideration. Our land is limited, therefore, it is something which we must preserve and use
wisely.
When the decision is made to build a home, a street, a school, or a factory, it must be
realized that an indelible mark is placed on the land and a pattern of growth is started. How well
these patterns tie together determines whether the City will reap the problems or advantages of
such development. Although the actual transaction in the sale of land is a private matter, the results
are a vital concern to the whole community.
In adapting and administering these regulations, the primary purpose is to encourage the
best possible development.
Anyone who contemplates subdividing land in the City of Bethlehem should become familiar
with these regulations. They are designed to achieve equal treatment for all and to provide clearcut
procedures for the preparation, submission, and approval of subdivision and/or development
plans.
It is the function of the Department of Community Development to confer, advise, and
cooperate with the applicant, but not to do the work of preparing the plans. Best products will result
when the applicant retains a qualified technician to prepare the subdivision or development plan.
All subdivision plans, as well as all development plans for uses specified for site plan review
by the Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board or the City Planning Commission in the City Zoning
Ordinance, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer or the Planning Director as appropriate for
review and approval or disapproval. These regulations were prepared and adopted to regulate the
development of land in the City of Bethlehem, Lehigh and Northampton Counties, Pennsylvania,
requiring and regulating the preparation and presentation of plans; establishing minimum design
standards; providing minimum improvements to be made; and setting forth the procedure to be
allowed by the City in applying these rules, regulations and standards.
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1341 TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION 1
AND ADOPTION
Section 1341.01 Title 1
Section 1341.02 Purpose 1
Section 1341.03 Authority 2
Section 1341.04 Jurisdiction 2
Section 1341.05 Adoption 2
ARTICLE 1343 DEFINITIONS 3
Section 1343.01 Inclusions 3
Section 1343.02 Additional Definitions 3
ARTICLE 1345 PROCEDURE 10
Section 1345.01 General 10
Section 1345.02 Submitting Plans For Approval 10
Section 1345.03 Development Sketch Plan Submission 10
Section 1345.04 Final Plan 10
Section 1345.05 Minor Subdivision 11
ARTICLE 1347 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 12
Section 1347.01 General 12
Section 1347.02 Suitability Of Land 12
Section 1347.03 Street Systems 12
Section 1347.04 Street Alignment 13
Section 1347.05 Street Grades 14
Section 1347.06 Street Intersections 14
Section 1347.07 Blocks 15
Section 1347.08 Lots And Building Restriction Lines- 15
Residential Districts
Section 1347.09 Utility Easements And Alleys 15
Section 1347.10 Recreation Lands and Fees 16
Section 1347.11 Environmental Controls 23
Section 1347.12 Flood Plains 23
Section 1347.13 Noise Protection 23
Section 1347.14 Traffic Impact Studies 24
ii
Page
ARTICLE 1349 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AT THE SOLE COST AND 29
EXPENSE OF THE APPLICANT
Section 1349.01 Monuments And Markers For Subdivisions 29
Section 1349.02 Street Grading
Section 1349.03 Sanitary Sewers 29
Section 1349.04 Storm Sewers And Surface Drainage 30
Section 1349.05 Water 30
Section 1349.06 Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, Crosswalks 31
And Cross Drainage Gutters
Section 1349.07 Street Paving 31
Section 1349.08 Planting 35
Section 1349.09 Fencing 38
Section 1349.10 Street Signs 38
Section 1349.11 Street Lights 38
Section 1349.12 Utility Flood-Proofing 38
Section 1349.13 Final Acceptance Of Improvements 38
ARTICLE 1351 VALIDITY, ENFORCEMENT, VARIANCES AND 39
LIABILITY
Section 1351.01 Validity 39
Section 1351.02 Enforcement 39
Section 1351.03 Variances 39
Section 1351.04 Municipal Liability 40
Section 1351.05 Fees 40
iii
ARTICLE 1341
TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION & ADOPTION
1341.01 Title
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as "The Bethlehem City
Subdivision and Development Ordinance."
1341.02 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to assure harmonious development of the City by:
( 1) Ensuring suitable sites for building purposes and human habitation.
( 2) Assisting in orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions.
( 3) Coordinating existing and proposed public improvements.
( 4) Facilitating adequate space for efficient movement of traffic.
( 5) Securing sites for adequate open space for recreation, light and air.
( 6) Safeguarding water resources and drainage ways.
( 7) Encouraging the retention of whatever natural features the land to be
developed may possess which, in the view of the City Zoning Hearing
Board or City Planning Commission, are worth protection. These may
include, but need not be limited to: topography, water areas, plantings,
rock formations, historic landmarks, etc.
( 8) Providing for the proper distribution of population.
( 9) Promoting conditions favorable to the general health, safety, morals, and
welfare of the citizens of the City.
(10) Requiring that each subdivision lot in flood plains be provided with a safe
building site and that private and public facilities which serve such uses be
designed and installed to preclude flood damage to the subdivision or
adjacent property.
(11) Protecting individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards.
1
1341.03 Authority
The City of Bethlehem is vested by law with the control of the subdivision and
development of land as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, 53 Purdons 10101 et seq.
1341.04 Jurisdiction
The City Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, and/or the City Planning
Commission shall have jurisdiction and control of all subdivision of land, as well as
any use of land requiring site plan review as specified in the City Zoning
Ordinance.
1341.05 Adoption
The following regulations have been proposed by the Bethlehem City Planning
Commission on February 28, 1974 and enacted by the Council of the City of
Bethlehem on January 21, 1975, signed by the Mayor on NOT SIGNED BY
MAYOR MOWRER, and shall remain in effect until amended, modified or
rescinded.
2
ARTICLE 1343
DEFINITIONS
1343.01 Inclusions:
All definitions stated in Article 1302 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Bethlehem shall represent the usage of those words when used in this Ordinance.
1343.02 Additional Definitions:
(a) Crosswalk: An extension of the sidewalk, usually ten (10) feet wide, which
is meant to provide a concrete walkway from the street curb to the sidewalk
on the planting strip between the curb and the sidewalk.
(b) Cul-de-sac: A City street with one end open for vehicular and pedestrian
access and the outer end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
(c) Developer: A person who is the registered owner, or authorized agent of
the registered owner, of land to be developed. In this Ordinance he may
also be referred to as the applicant.
(d) Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
(1) Total Development Acreage: The aggregate of lands to be
developed.
(2) Net Development Acreage: The total development acreage minus
all watercourses, floodways and street right-of-way lands.
(e) Easement: A right granted by a property owner to use certain land for a
special public or quasi-public purpose not inconsistent with the general
property rights of the owner.
(f) Geodetic Control: All subdivisions and land development will require all
surveys to be tied into North American Datum (NAD) 1983 State Plane
Pennsylvania South (FIPS 3702) Coordinates in feet and performed to
third order control standards as set forth by the Federal Geodetic Control
Committee (as specified by the National Geodetic Survey). Coordinates
and scale factors/grid factors of existing permanent monuments will be
provided to the surveyor by the City of Bethlehem. In the event that any
points of the lands subject to subdivision are more than one half mile from
any given permanent monument, the developer shall construct a
new permanent monument.
[Section 1343.02(f) was added by Ordinance No. 4441 on September 4, 2007]
3
(g) Plans:
(1) Development Sketch Plan: A plan showing the dimensions of the
property to be developed and the location of all existing and
proposed structures, roads, driveways, parking spaces, and
adjacent properties. Show existing topography if considered
necessary by the Planning Director or City Engineer.
(2) Development Final Plan: A plan by a Licensed Professional Land
Surveyor and, if required by Commonwealth Law, a Licensed
Professional Engineer, which shows the following information
concerning the property to be developed:
A. Identification title, including: Name of development; date of
preparation with revision; scale (40 or 50); City Ward and
Block; street address; county; zoning classification; total
acreage; and net development acreage.
B. Number of dwelling units with listing according to type.
Further subdivide apartments into: efficiency, one or two
bedrooms, and three or more bedrooms.
C. Certification of Ownership signed by the record owner of the
property.
D. Bearings and distances of all lot lines. Show abandoned lot
lines as dotted lines. Show lot numbers.
E. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, garbage receptacles, driveways, parking and
loading areas. Show number of parking spaces.
F. Building restriction lines with offset distances to street lines.
G. Show all walkways, landscaping and planting, including the
following:
1. Location, size and species of existing trees over
three (3) inches in caliper.
H. Designate those areas of the plan which are to be
commonly owned and/or maintained.
I. If there is to be any commercial use, show its location and
the floor area in square feet.
J. Show number of employees.
K. All signs shall be shown in detail including location, size,
illumination and materials.
4
L. Names, widths, and curve data for all City streets in and
adjacent to the development. If the existing property
extends into a proposed street, dedication of the land back
to the street line is required, including all bearings and
distances to be dedicated and labeled "Dedicated to the City
of Bethlehem for street purposes." All monuments at point of
curve and point of tangent of curves and angle points shall
be shown with a circle. Show centerline dimensions
between streets.
M. Names of owners of all adjacent properties.
N. North Arrow and location plan.
O. Stamp or certification of person who designed plan and
phone number of person submitting plan.
P. All existing and/or proposed easements, utilities, and
grading.
Q. Show the location of the proposed development with respect
to the municipality's flood plain, including information on, but
not limited to, the regulatory flood elevations, boundaries of
flood plains, fills, floor or erosion protective facilities, and
areas subject to special deed restrictions.
R. All surveys shall be tied into North American Datum (NAD)
1983 State Plane Pennsylvania South (FIPS 3702)
Coordinates in feet and performed to third order control
standards as set forth by the Federal Geodetic Control
Committee, as specified by the National Geodetic Survey.
The City will provide the coordinates and scale factor/grid
factor of the permanent monumentation established in the
City.
S. Boundaries of tracts to be subdivided with their bearings
and distances, and acreage to the nearest tenth of an
acre. If applicable, a uniform reference grid showing
labeled NAD 1983 State Plane in feet both easting and
northing dimensions. The layout of the map grid should
coincide with the corners of the subdivision and land
development plan.
T. Location and description of all monuments including the
State Plane Feet Coordinates and scale factors/grid
factors of the starting Geodetic Station and ending
Geodetic Station. Identify City of Bethlehem coordinates
on the State Plane Feet Coordinates System of each
property corner showing the scale factor/grid factor used
for each point, if applicable.
5
U. GPS monuments shall be required for subdivisions or land
developments when determined to be appropriate by the
City Engineer or Planning Bureau.
[Section 1343.02(g)(2)(R-U) were added by Ordinance No. 4441 on September 4, 2007]
( 3) Subdivision Final Plan: A plan by a Licensed Professional Land
Surveyor and, if required by Commonwealth Law, a Licensed
Professional Engineer which shows the following information
concerning the property to be subdivided:
A. Identification title including: Name of subdivision, date of
preparation with revisions, scale (1" = 40' is preferred), City
Ward, zoning classification, county, and net development
acreage.
B. Certification of Ownership signed by the record owner of the
property.
C. Bearings and dimensions for all lot lines. Show old lot lines
(dotted) if different from future lot lines.
D. Lot numbers for all single family home subdivisions.
E. Location and dimensions of all existing structures,
driveways, parking and loading areas.
F. Building restriction lines with offset distances to street lines.
G. Names, widths, and curve data for all City streets in and
adjacent to the subdivision. If the existing property extends
into a proposed street, dedication of the land back to the
street line is required, including all bearings and distances to
be dedicated and labeled "Dedicated to the City of
Bethlehem for street purposes."
H. All monuments at point of curve and point of tangent of
curves and angle points shall be shown with a circle.
I. Centerline data between streets.
J. Names of owners of all adjacent properties.
K. North Arrow.
L. Stamp or certification of person who designed plan.
M. Phone number of person submitting plan.
N. All existing and/or proposed easements.
6
O. Proposed grading of the property.
P. Location of all utilities.
Q. Location plan.
R. Show the location of the proposed subdivision with respect
to the municipality's flood plain, including information on, but
not limited to, the regulatory flood elevations, boundaries of
flood plains, fills, flood or
erosion protective facilities, and areas subject to special
deed restrictions.
S. All surveys shall be tied into North American Datum (NAD)
1983 State Plane Pennsylvania South (FIPS 3702)
Coordinates in feet and performed to third order control
standards as set forth by the Federal Geodetic Control
Committee, as specified by the National Geodetic Survey.
The City will provide the coordinates and scale factor/grid
factor of the permanent monumentation established in the
City.
T. Boundaries of tracts to be subdivided with their bearings
and distances, and acreage to the nearest tenth of an
acre. If applicable, a uniform reference grid showing
labeled NAD 1983 State Plane in feet both easting and
northing dimensions. The layout of the map grid should
coincide with the corners of the subdivision and land
development plan.
U. Location and description of all monuments including the
State Plane Feet Coordinates and scale factors/grid
factors of the starting Geodetic Station and ending
Geodetic Station. Identify City of Bethlehem coordinates
on the State Plane Feet Coordinates System of each
property corner showing the scale factor/grid factor used
for each point, if applicable.
V. GPS monuments shall be required for subdivisions or land
developments when determined to be appropriate by the
City Engineer or Planning Bureau.
[Section 1343.02(g)(3) (R-V) was amended by Ordinance No. 4441 on September 4, 2007]
(h) Recreation Land. A parcel or parcels of land within a tract which
meets all of the following standards when the land is being used
to meet City requirements:
7
A. is designed, intended and suitable for non-commercial
active or passive recreation by residents of a development
or the general public, or another open space use that is
specifically approved by the City,
B. is covered by a system that ensures perpetual
maintenance, unless the land is intended to be publicly
owned,
C. will be deeded to the City and/or preserved by a deed
restriction or conservation easement to permanently prevent
uses of land other than "recreation land," and
D. does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum
recreation land requirements:
1. existing street rights-of-way,
2. vehicle streets or driveways providing access to other
lots,
3. land beneath building(s) or land within 20 feet of a
building (other than accessory buildings and pools
clearly intended for noncommercial recreation),
4. off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation),
5. area(s) needed to meet a requirement for an individual
building lot except for a community recreation building,
6. for land intended to be open to the public, that does
not have provisions for entry with a 15 foot minimum
width by pedestrians from a street open to the public
or from recreation land that has access to such a
street,
7. land that includes a stormwater detention basin,
except for a basin or portions of a basin that the
applicant, after a review by the City
Engineer, proves to the satisfaction of the City would:
a) be reasonably safe and useful for active or passive
recreation during the vast majority of weather
conditions or b) serve as a scenic asset resembling a
natural pond,
8. portions of land that have a width of less than 50 feet,
unless this requirement is specifically modified by the
City,
9. areas that are under water during normal
weather conditions, or
10. areas that are under or within 50 feet from electric
transmission lines or towers that are designed for a
capacity of 35 kilovolts or greater.
[Section 1343.02(h) was added by Ordinance No. 4439 on June 3, 2007]
8
(g) Street: See Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Street Specifications: Streets in Bethlehem are classified according
to their width as follows: Fifty (50) foot, sixty (60) foot, seventy (70)
foot, and eighty (80) foot streets.
(2) Streets are also classified according to their use as follows:
A. Local Street: A street whose main purpose is to provide
access to individual lots.
B. Arterial or Collector Street: A street which acts as a major
carrier of traffic between distant points in the City and which
may provide access to individual lots.
C. Limited Access Highway: A street whose main function is to
carry large volumes of traffic between distant points in the
City and beyond, and which provides no access to individual
lots.
(h) Subdivider: A person who is the registered owner, or authorized agent of
the registered owner, of land to be subdivided. In this Ordinance he may
also be referred to as the applicant.
(i) Subdivision: The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more
than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access,
shall be exempted.
(1) Minor Subdivision: A subdivision of one (1) acre or less which
creates no new streets, water mains, or sewer mains.
(j) "Subdivision and Development Ordinance" means Ordinance 2458 passed
January 21, 1975, as amended, which is codified as Articles 1341 to 1351
of this Part Thirteen.
9
ARTICLE 1345
PROCEDURE
1345.01 General: Land subdivision, residential development, institutional development,
industrial park, and/or shopping center development, as well as any other use of
land so specified in the City Zoning Ordinance, shall require the review and
approval of final plans as provided for in Sections 1345.04 and 1345.05 before the
applicant may apply for a building permit. The decision of the City Zoning Officer,
Zoning Hearing Board, or City Planning Commission to approve or disapprove
plans shall depend on three factors:
(1) Their adherence to this Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
(2) Their adherence to the pertinent regulations in the City Zoning Ordinance.
(3) The proper compliance of the applicant with whatever current soil and
sediment control regulations are prescribed and enforced by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, and/or the local
County Conservation District.
1345.02 Submitting Plans For Approval: All development and subdivision plans whether
sketch or final, shall be submitted to the City at least thirty (30) working days prior
to the next scheduled meeting of the City Zoning Board or Planning Commission
for consideration at that meeting. Submission of development sketch plans as a
preliminary procedure for City Planning Commission review shall be at the
discretion of the applicant. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested
that prospective developers consult with the Municipal Sewage Enforcement
Officer concerning soil suitability when on-site sewage disposal facilities are
proposed. When required by the City, prospective developers shall consult with the
County Conservation District Representative concerning erosion and sediment
control and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development. At the
same time, a determination should be made as to whether or not any flood hazard
either exists or will be created as a result of the subdivision or development.
1345.03 Development Sketch Plan Submission: If the applicant decides to apply for
development sketch plan approval, he shall submit to the City Planning Bureau four
(4) copies of the plan as defined under Section 1343.02(f)(1). Should the City
Planning Commission approve the sketch plan, such approval shall not compel the
Planning Commission to approve the project's final plan, but shall merely act as an
indication of the City Planning Commission's attitude toward the general purpose of
the project at the time of sketch plan approval.
1345.04 Final Plan: For final approval of a development or subdivision plan, the applicant
shall submit to the City eight (8) final plan prints as defined in Section 1343.02(f)(2)
and (3). Upon receipt of final plans, the Zoning Officer or Planning Director shall
distribute copies to all other City Departments which would normally be affected by
such a project. Their comments on the plan shall then be conveyed to the City
Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission during the meeting at which the
project is to be discussed.
10
For applications to the Planning Commission which are subsequently approved by
the Commission, the applicant shall submit three (3) cloth, one (1) transparent
mylar reproducible, and as many paper prints as are deemed necessary by the
Planning Bureau, for final stamping, signing, and distribution of the plans. Approval
of a final plan by the City Zoning Hearing Board of Planning Commission shall be
contingent upon the applicant signing a Development or Subdivision Agreement, to
be prepared by the Bureau of Law in conjunction with the Bureau of Engineering
and filing such security as shall be required by the City to guarantee compliance by
the applicant. The provisions of the Development or Subdivision Agreement shall
be based on, but not limited to, the information included on the final plans as
approved. The date of the signing of a Subdivision Agreement shall be the date of
final approval and the applicant shall then have ninety (90) days within which to file
the final plan with the County Recorder of Deeds. Should the applicant fail to
record a final subdivision plan within the ninety (90) day period, the approval of the
Commission shall be null and void. A development applicant shall be required to
commence and proceed with construction on any development plan approved by
the City Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission within one (1) year of said
approval, or one (1) year from the effective date of this Ordinance, whichever
comes later. An agreement between the applicant and the City Zoning Hearing
Board or Planning Commission shall also specify date of completion. If
construction has not been completed as per date in agreement, approval by the
City Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission and this agreement shall lapse
and become null and void. In such case, the City Zoning Hearing Board or
Planning Commission and applicant may enter into a new agreement.
1345.05 Minor Subdivision: The applicant for approval of a minor subdivision plan shall
submit to the Director of the Planning Bureau eight (8) paper final plan prints and
(1) reproducible final plan print as defined under Section 1343.02(f)(3).
After distributing copies of the plan to all other City Departments normally
interested in subdivision review, the Planning Bureau Director or his designated
agent shall have the authority to approve or disapprove all minor subdivisions.
Approval of the final plan shall be contingent upon the applicant signing a
Subdivision Agreement to be prepared by the Bureau of Law in conjunction with
the Bureau of Engineering and filing such security as may be required by the City
to guarantee compliance by the applicant. The provisions of the Subdivision
Agreement shall be based on, but not limited to, the information included on the
final plans as approved. The date of the signing of the Subdivision Agreement
shall be the date of final approval and the applicant shall have ninety (90) days
within which to file the final plan with the County Recorder of Deeds. Should the
applicant fail to record the Minor Subdivision Plan within the ninety (90) day period,
the approval of the Director shall be null and void.
1345.06 Plan Compatibility with GIS/AutoCAD: All plan submissions and plan revisions
shall include drawings and a digital file of the drawings. All final drawings shall
show North American Datum (NAD) (1983) State Plane Pennsylvania South
(FIPS 3702) Coordinates in feet and the digital file shall be in North American
Datum (NAD) (1983) State Plane Pennsylvania South (FIPS 3702) Coordinates
in Feet as applicable.
11
All digital files shall reside on a PC compatible CD-ROM containing the digital
representation of the final plan as presented on the twenty four (24) inch by thirty
six (36) inch sheets.
The digital map shall be AutoCAD compatible. All layers included in the digital
maps shall be the standardized layers prepared and utilized by the City of
Bethlehem to ensure compatibility with the City’s existing CADD standards and
as described in Appendix A of the City’s Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
[Section 1345.06 was added by Ordinance No. 4442 on September 4, 2007]
ARTICLE 1347
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1347.01 General: The following principles of land subdivision and good design shall be
observed by the applicant in all instances.
1347.02 Suitability of Land:
(a) Land within the floodway shall not be plotted for structural development nor
for such other uses as may involve danger to health, life or property, or
aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plan shall be set aside
for such uses as shall not be adversely affected by flood waters. Refer to
Section 1347.12 for further detail.
(b) Land situated on slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent shall not be used
for development purposes unless a geologic survey of the area is
undertaken by the applicant. This study shall identify any erosion, storm
water drainage or similar problems which might be created by the proposed
development. The applicant shall then propose adequate safeguards to be
used or implemented during and after the construction process which would
alleviate any such problems.
1347.03 Street Systems:
(a) The development plan shall conform to such plan or plans for the City as
shall have been prepared and adopted by the City Planning Commission.
(b) Local streets in a new development should be so laid out as to discourage
through traffic, but provision for the extension and continuation of arterial
streets into and from adjoining areas should be required. If the subdivision
abuts a present or proposed arterial street, the Commission may require
access streets running parallel to the thoroughfare.
(c) At all times, the street layout should be logically related to the topography of
the land.
12
(d) Center lines of local streets opening into opposite sides of collector or
arterial streets which are within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of each
other, shall be made to coincide by curving the local streets.
(e) Proposed streets will be designed to connect with existing street
stubs in adjacent subdivisions and suitable street openings shall be
provided to adjacent undeveloped properties. Proposed streets which
terminate at the applicant's property lines shall terminate in a temporary culde-
sac or turnaround built and maintained at the applicant's expense until
the adjoining property is developed and the proposed street extended, or
the City accepts the cul-de-sac as permanent. The applicant shall deposit
a sum sufficient to connect all temporary cul-de-sacs to any future
projection of the street. Should any temporary cul-de-sac be accepted as
permanent by the City, said sum shall be returned without interest to the
applicant.
(f) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway right-of-way, the City Planning Commission may require
streets approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a
distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land.
(g) Cul-de-sacs in the local street system shall not exceed five hundred (500)
feet in length from the centerline of the street to which the cul-de-sac
connects to the point of radius turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty
(50) feet on the street line.
(h) Half streets shall be prohibited.
(i) Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with existing
named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets.
(j) No new street names shall be used which may duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to
approval by the City Planning Commission.
1347.04 Street Alignment:
(a) The minimal radius at the centerline for curves on limited access highways
shall be five hundred (500) feet; for arterial streets, three hundred (300)
feet; and for local streets, it shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. Where
greater radii requirements have been established for streets planned prior
to subdivision, the established plans shall govern development. Super
elevation shall be provided for curves less than six hundred (600) feet
radius on all streets.
(b) Except for local residential streets there shall be a tangent of at least one
hundred (100) feet, measured at the centerline, between reverse curves.
13
(c) Between all horizontal curves on the street line and the radius at street
intersections, there shall be a tangent of at least ten (10) feet.
(d) Proper sight distance should be provided with respect to both horizontal
and vertical alignment. Measured along the centerline, said sight distance
should be four hundred (400) feet for limited access highways; two
hundred (200) feet for arterial streets; and one hundred (100) feet for local
streets.
(e) Proper sight lines should be maintained at all intersections of streets. See
Section 1318.06 of the City Zoning Ordinance.
(f) Street lines at street intersections shall have a minimal radius of fifteen (15)
feet on local streets; on arterial streets, the minimum radius shall be twentyfive
(25) feet on the street line.
(g) In the Central Business (CB) District, where the street cartways are
composed of driving lanes eighteen (18) feet or wider, street intersection
radii may be reduced or eliminated at the discretion of the City Planning
Commission.
1347.05 Street Grades:
(a) There shall be a minimum grade of at least three quarters of one percent
(0.75%) on all streets. The maximum grade for arterial and limited access
streets shall be six (6%) percent, and there shall be a maximum grade of
ten (10%) percent for distances not to exceed fifteen hundred (1,500) feet
for local residential streets.
(b) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding one (1%)
percent, and should be designed for maximum visibility.
(c) Intersections shall be approached from all sides by leveling areas wherever
possible. Where the grade exceeds seven (7%) percent, such leveling
areas shall have a minimum length of fifty (50) feet from intersection, within
which no grade shall exceed a maximum of four (4%) percent.
(d) The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be no more than one (1)
foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The City Engineer may require,
where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine
compliance with this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
1347.06 Street Intersections:
(a) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) roadways
shall be avoided, but where such avoidance is impossible, such intersections
shall be designed with adequate consideration for both vehicular
and pedestrian safety.
14
(b) Right angle intersections are required, unless, due to exceptional
conditions, the Commission approves a variation, in which case no
intersection angle, measured at the centerline, shall be less than seventyfive
(75) degrees.
(c) Street curb line intersections shall be rounded by an arc, with a minimum
radius of twenty-three (23) feet for local streets and thirty-three (33) feet for
intersections including arterial streets. These radii shall be computed on
the basis of the radius on the street line, plus the width of the narrowest
sidewalk area.
(d) In the Central Business (CB) Zoning District, where the street cartways are
composed of driving lanes eighteen (18) feet or wider, street curb line
intersection radii may be reduced at the discretion of the City Planning
Commission to a minimum equal to the widest sidewalk adjacent to the
intersection.
1347.07 Blocks:
(a) In general, all blocks in a subdivision should have a minimum length of at
least five hundred (500) feet and a maximum length of sixteen hundred
(1,600) feet. Also, such blocks containing individual lots shall be two (2) lot
depths in width.
(b) In large blocks with interior parks, in exceptionally long blocks at bus stops,
or where access to a school or shopping center is necessary, a crosswalk
shall be provided.
1347.08 Lots and Building Restriction Lines - Residential Districts:
(a) Lots and building restriction lines shall conform to the provisions of the
Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance of 1970, being Ordinance No. 2210 as
adopted September 25, 1970, and including any amendments thereto.
(b) All side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, unless
otherwise approved by the Commission due to exceptional conditions.
1347.09 Utility Easements and Alleys:
(a) If easements are used at the rear or side of lots to provide sewer facilities, a
minimum easement of twenty (20) feet from the rear or side of each lot must be
provided. However, where easements are to be installed to the rear or side of
adjoining lots, the total easement required will be twenty (20) feet. This width
for a sewer easement shall be considered a part of the overall lot depth as
required in the City Zoning Ordinance; except where necessary for safety and
convenience, the City may exclude the easement area in computing minimum
lot size requirements.
15
(b) If easements are used at the front, side, or rear of lots to provide for electric
or telephone service facilities, a minimum easement width of five (5) feet
from the front, side or rear of each lot must be provided. For any
development of five (5) or more lots and/or dwelling units, underground
installation of electric or telephone service facilities may be required by the
City Planning Commission. Said five (5) foot easement for service facilities
or poles shall be considered a part of the overall lot depth or width as
required in the City Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Service streets or alleys may be required by the City Planning Commission
in commercial districts, shopping centers or industrial districts where
deemed necessary. Said service streets or alleys shall have a minimum
width of thirty-three (33) feet, with a twenty-four (24) foot cartway. Where
such alleys dead-end, they shall provide a turnaround having a street
radius of not less than thirty-seven (37) feet. The street line radius shall be
determined by the City Planning Commission at the time of site plan review.
1347.10. Recreation Lands and Fees.
(a) Purposes. To provide adequate park and recreational lands and facilities
to serve inhabitants/occupants of new and expanded developments, for
both active and passive recreation. To recognize and carry out the City of
Bethlehem Parks and Recreation Plan.
(b) Applicability. This section shall apply to any subdivision or land
development for which a plan is submitted after the effective date of this
amendment.
1. This Section 1347.10 shall not apply to applications that:
a. the City Planning Bureau determines only involve adjustments or
corrections to an approved preliminary or final subdivision or land
development plan, provided the adjustments do not increase the
number of proposed dwelling units; or
b. only involve non-commercial recreation land or buildings,
primary or secondary schools, colleges, universities and
places of worship.
2. The City may waive these fees for any residential units that utilize
any federal, state, or local public funds, tax credits, or other similar
financial programs in which the owner agrees to keep the housing
units affordable for low and moderate income residents based on the
affordability guidelines in the specific program or programs used in
financing the housing units.
16
Financing programs would include but not be limited to the use of
Federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME
Investment Partnership funds, Pennsylvania Housing Finance
Agency tax credit or other financing programs, programs using public
housing funding, local or county affordable housing trust fund
projects, or programs using funding provided for low and moderate
income housing by foundations or not-for-profit organizations. The
specific term of affordability would be established under the terms of
the individual programs used in the financing of the units.
(c) Limitations on Use of Fees.
1. Fees collected under this section, upon their receipt by the City of
Bethlehem, shall immediately be deposited in an interest bearing
account, clearly identified as reserved for providing, acquiring,
operating or maintaining park or recreational facilities. Interest earned
on such accounts shall become funds of that account.
2. Such fees shall be used for providing, acquiring, operating or
maintaining park or recreational facilities that are reasonably
accessible to the development from which the fees were paid.
[Section 1347.10.c was amended by Ordinance No. 2015-26 on July 8, 2015]
(d) Land to be Preserved. Any subdivision or land development
regulated under this Section 1347.10 shall be required to dedicate the
specified amount of recreation land, unless: a) the City and the applicant
mutually agree that recreation fees shall be required in-lieu of land or b)
the applicant does not propose to dedicate recreation land meeting City
requirements and the City determines that fees should be required
instead of a land requirement.
The City Bureau of Planning and Zoning shall make this determination in
consultation with the Department of Parks and Public Property.
1. As a general non-binding guideline, it is the intent of this
Section that developments that would otherwise be required to
provide less than one acre of new recreation land should be
required to pay a recreation fee in lieu of dedicating land,
unless the recreation land would be connected to adjacent
recreation land.
2. The land and fee requirements of this section shall be based upon the
number of new dwelling units and the square feet of floor area within
new principal non-residential buildings that would be allowed on the
lots of a subdivision or land development after approval.
17
3. Prime Recreation Land. For the purposes of this section, the term
“Prime Recreation Land” shall mean land proposed to be established
as recreation land that would meet all of the following standards:
a. less than 6 percent slope,
b. not a “wetland” under Federal and/or State regulations,
c. be part of a contiguous tract of at least 2 acres (which may include
existing adjacent recreation land), and
d. not be within the “100 Year Floodplain” as defined by official
floodplain maps of the City.
4. Amount of Recreation Land. If a subdivision or land development is
required to include recreation land, the following amounts for each
permitted new dwelling unit shall apply:
______________________________________________________________
Percentage of the Total Required Minimum Required
Recreation Land that Would Meet the Recreation Land Per
Definition of “Prime Recreation Land”: Permitted Dwelling Unit
______________________________________________________________
0% to 25.0% 4,400 square feet
25.1% to 75.0% 2,200 square feet
75.1% to 100% 1,100 square feet
______________________________________________________________
5. Non-Residential Development. If a subdivision or land development is
required to include recreation land, a minimum of 5 percent of the total lot
area of all non-residential lots within the subdivision or land development
shall be required to be dedicated as Recreation land. (Note - In most
cases, the general intent is to seek fees in lieu of land for non-residential
development.)
E. Fees. If the City determines that a proposed subdivision or land development is
required to pay fees-in-lieu of dedicating recreation land, this fee shall be as
established by separate City resolution, which may be updated from time to time.
The appropriateness of any existing fees should be reviewed every three years.
Until such time as a different fee may be established or revised by resolution, the
following fees shall apply:
1. RESIDENTIAL – a fee of $1,500 per each additional approved new
dwelling unit, and
2. INDUSTRIAL – a recreation fee of $1,200, plus $0.10 a square foot of
building space up to 100,000 square feet, except the fee is reduced to
$0.05 a square foot for portions of building area greater than 100,000
square feet.
18
3. NON-RESIDENTIAL USES OTHER THAN INDUSTRIAL – a recreation
fee of $1,500 plus $0.25 per square foot of total building floor area.
No fee shall apply for a non-residential building of less than 1,000 square feet of
floor area or a building addition of less than 5,000 square feet of floor area, nor
for renovations or changes of use of existing buildings that do not result in new
dwelling units, nor for buildings/lots that are not required to be approved under
the subdivision or land development ordinance. The 5,000 square foot
exemption shall be measured in aggregate over time beginning with the
enactment of this ordinance.
F. Decision on Land vs. Fees. The determination of whether a land dedication or
fee should be required should, at a minimum, consider the following in this
decision:
1. Whether the land in that location would serve a valid public purpose.
2. Whether there is potential to make a desirable addition to an existing public
or School District recreation area or to create a greenway along a creek.
3. Whether the proposed land would meet the objectives and requirements of
this section and any relevant policies of the City Parks and Recreation
Plan.
4. Whether the area surrounding the proposed development has sufficient
existing recreation land, and whether it is possible for pedestrians and
bicyclists to reach those lands.
5. Any recommendations that may be received from the City Council, Mayor,
the City Engineer, the local School Board or School District staff and the
City Staff.
G. Recreation Land to be Preserved.
1. Suitability. Recreation land shall be suitable for its intended purpose, in the
determination of the City Planning Commission. The applicant shall state in
writing what improvements, if any, he/she will commit to make to the land to
make it suitable for its intended purpose, such as grading, landscaping, or
development of trails. Such land shall be free of construction debris at the
time of dedication.
2. Ownership. Required recreation land shall be dedicated to the City, unless
the City Planning Commission agrees to accept a dedication to any of the
following: the School District, Lehigh or Northampton County, a similar
governmental agency, an incorporated property-owner association (such
as a homeowner or condominium association) or an established
environmental organization acceptable to the City.
19
In the case of a rental development, the City may permit the recreation land
to be retained by the owner of the adjacent principal buildings.
a. If recreation land is to be owned by a property-owner association, the
developer shall be required to establish such association in a form
that requires all property owners within the development to annually
contribute to the maintenance of the recreation land.
1) Any property-owner association agreements regarding required
recreation land shall be subject to acceptance by the City, based
upon review by the City Solicitor.
2) Prior to the sale of any dwelling unit or lot, all deeds shall require
each property-owner to pay fees on a regular basis for the
maintenance and other expenses of owning such land. The
property-owners shall be incorporated with covenants and bylaws
providing for the filing of assessments. After providing notice to
affected owners, the City shall have the authority to establish
municipal liens upon all properties in the association to fund
maintenance of the land and City legal costs if the propertyowners
association does not fulfill its responsibilities.
3) An orderly process shall be established for the transfer of the land
to the association. The City may delay a dedication of
maintenance responsibilities by a developer to a property-owners
association until such association is incorporated and able to
maintain such land.
4) The property-owners association shall be established in full
compliance with applicable State law, including the Uniform
Planned Community Act.
b. Transfer to another Entity. If the approved plan states that
ownership of and/or responsibilities to maintain the recreation land
are limited to a particular entity, then any transfer of ownership or
responsibilities to another entity shall require pre-approval by the
City Planning Commission. Where land is to be owned by a
conservation organization, a process should be established for the
land to transfer to a different organization if the first organization is
not able to fulfill its obligations.
c. The City shall have the authority to refuse to accept an offer of
dedication of recreation land to the City.
20
3. Easements/Deed Restrictions. Any required common open space
dedication shall include deed restrictions or conservation easements to
permanently prevent its development for buildings, except buildings for
approved types of non-commercial recreation or to support maintenance of
the land. Such deed restrictions or conservation easements shall, at a
minimum, be enforceable by the City. The City may require that the
restrictions or easements also authorize their enforcement by a suitable
third party.
4. Priorities. Priority shall be given to dedication of land that would be suitable
for a) additions to existing public schools and public parks, or b)
preservation of woods, steep slopes or other important natural features or
land along a creek, or c) for centralized active recreation.
5. Suitability. Land that is not suitable for active or passive recreation shall not
be permitted to meet the requirements of this section. Any land area used
to meet the requirements of this Section 1347.10 shall meet the definition
of “Recreation Land” that is stated in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. Portions intended for active recreation shall be
well-drained, of less than 6 percent average slope and not require filling in
of a wetland for use.
6. Access and Contiguousness. Required recreation land shall be contiguous,
except as may be specifically exempted by the City Planning Commission,
and shall have adequate access for maintenance and by pedestrians.
7. Other Ordinances. Any required land dedication or fees under this Section
shall be in addition to any land dedication or improvement requirements of
any other City ordinance.
8. Residual Lands. If only a portion of a larger tract of land is currently
proposed to be subdivided, or the applicant owns one or more adjacent
tracts that are not currently proposed to be subdivided, the applicant shall
provide a sketch of a possible future land dedication on these adjacent
lands. The intent is to coordinate current plans with any future
development, even in the long-term.
9. Coordination With Future Adjacent Dedication. The City Planning
Commission may require that a required land dedication within a property
currently being subdivided be placed along an edge of the property so that
it may, in the future, be combined with a recreation land dedication on the
edge of an adjoining property when that adjoining property is subdivided or
developed.
H. Combination of Land and Fees. Upon mutual agreement of the City Planning
Commission and the applicant, the City may accept a combination of recreation
land and fees-in-lieu of land to meet the requirements of this section for a
subdivision or land development.
21
This combination shall be based upon the recreation land requirement applying
for a certain number of dwelling units or portions of a non-residential
development and the fee-in-lieu of land requirement applying for the remaining
development. For example, if a development included 25 dwelling units,
recreation land could be required for 15 dwelling units and fees could be required
for 10 dwelling units.
I. Timing of Residential Fees. Fees required by this Section for all of the dwelling
units shall be paid prior to the recording of the final plan, except if the City and
the applicant mutually agree to pay such fees in installments, then all such fees
shall not be considered to be “paid” for the purposes of any applicable time
limitations for utilization under the State Municipalities Planning Code until all
such fees are paid in full, including all installments and phases.
J. Timing of Non-Residential Fees. Fees required by this Section for any nonresidential
subdivision or land development shall be paid prior to the final
approval of a land development, except that, if the applicant establishes a legally
binding mechanism acceptable to the City Solicitor, the fees may be paid prior to
the time a land development plan is approved for each lot, as opposed to at the
time an entire subdivision is approved.
K. Facilities in Place of Land or Fees. An applicant may submit a written request for
a modification of the requirements of this section by offering to construct
substantial permanent recreation facilities within the proposed subdivision or land
development or on public parkland at another site. Such modification shall only
be approved if the applicant clearly proves to the satisfaction of the City Planning
Commission that the facilities will serve a valid public purpose, will be designed
following modern standards in a durable manner and will have a higher market
value than the land or fees that would otherwise be required.
1. A modification of these requirements may also be approved by the City
Planning Commission if the applicant donates or sells appropriate public
recreation land to the City or the School District. In such case, the applicant
shall provide a written appraisal from a qualified professional that the
market value of the donation or price reduction is greater than the value of
the fee or land requirement that is waived. In such case, the land shall be
determined to be suitable for public recreation by the City Planning
Commission.
L. Landscaping Plan. If one or more acres of recreation land are required, then the
applicant shall submit a landscape planting and preservation plan for the
recreation land.
1. Such plan shall show the locations, general species and initial sizes of
landscaping to be planted within the common open space and throughout
the tract.
22
2. Such plan shall also show that existing substantial healthy trees will be
preserved to the maximum extent reasonable. The methods to ensure
preservation during construction shall be described.”
[Section 1347.10 was added by Ordinance No. 4439 on July 3, 2007]
1347.11 Environmental Controls:
(a) No applicant shall strip (i.e., remove vegetation and top soil) at any one
time, an area of land greater than five (5) acres. Before additional stripping
may be accomplished, all previously stripped land must be stabilized (i.e.,
graded, reseeded, etc.) in such manner as to prevent any erosion over and
above that which normally took place prior to the stripping. Additional
stripping may be initiated only after the City Engineer has determined that
the previously stripped land has been stabilized.
(b) Provisions will be made by the applicant to insure that the development of
any land does not create health, safety, dust, drainage or attractive
nuisance problems which affect the quiet enjoyment of any adjoining tract
of land.
1347.12 Flood Plains:
(a) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or structure shall
not be permitted in any floodway area. Building sites may be permitted
outside the floodway area if the structures are constructed in conformance
with the requirements of the City Building Code. If fill is used to raise the
elevation of the site, the fill area shall extend out laterally for a distance of at
least fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of the proposed structures.
(b) If the City Planning Commission determines that only a part of the proposed
plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall
require that development proceed consistent with this determination.
(c) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the City
Planning Commission determines that additional controls are required to
insure safe development, it may require the developer to impose
appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be
inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
1347.13 Noise Protection:
Any residential land development which abuts an urban principle arterial road as
designated on the current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Functional
Classification Map for the Allentown/Bethlehem Urban Area, as revised from time
to time (available from the City Planner), shall be protected from sound levels
which exceed the following maximum levels:
23
Zoning District Sound Level Limit
Residential 60 dBA
Institutional 60 dBA
Commercial 67 dBA
Industrial 75 dBA
If sound levels exceed these standards, a noise barrier of a type shown in the
current U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration
Implementation Package 76-8 and Publication FHWA-RD-76-58, as amended from
time to time, (available from the City Engineer) or other suitable barrier acceptable
to the City, shall be constructed in such a manner as to theoretically reduce
the sound levels on the lot(s) to be developed to or below the levels listed above.
1347.14 Traffic Impact Studies
(a) Purpose.
(1) To allow the City of Bethlehem to determine the safety and
congestion impacts, and related costs, of proposed major traffic
generating uses.
(2) To require that applicants respond with reasonable proposals to
resolve the negative traffic impacts that their proposed uses will
cause on the public.
(3) To recognize that sufficient Federal, State and City funds are not
available to resolve traffic problems caused by private
development.
(4) To assist in carrying out Sections 503(2)(ii) and 503(3) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code as amended.
(5) To ensure that streets bordering a subdivision or land
development are coordinated and of such widths and grades and
in such locations as deemed necessary to accommodate
prospective traffic and to facilitate fire protection.
(6) To ensure that the access into and out of subdivisions and land
developments is reasonably safe.
(b) Administration
(1) The full cost of the traffic study shall be borne by the applicant.
(2) The traffic study shall be reviewed by the City and/or City’s
consulting Traffic Engineer, the cost of which shall also be borne
by the applicant.
24
The applicant shall provide the appropriate escrow, as described
by resolution by the City of Bethlehem, to ensure the payment of
the costs of such traffic study review.
(3) The project manager for any traffic impact report shall be a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer with expertise in
the preparation of traffic impact studies.
(4) The City shall require such onsite traffic improvements to be
provided by the applicant, as the City deems appropriate, in light
of the traffic impact study as a specific condition of preliminary
plan approval for all land developments and/or subdivisions for
which a study has been required. The study shall identify
improvements/facilities to be installed or actions to be undertaken
by the applicant.
(5) Joint traffic studies between different applicants are acceptable
and are strongly encouraged.
(6) The City will ensure that the selected consulting Traffic Engineer
for any project does not have a prior professional relationship with
the applicant of the land development or subdivision plan or a
prior professional relationship with the Traffic Engineer that
prepared the traffic study for the applicant.
(c) Contents of the Study
(1) The following abbreviated traffic impact study shall be required as
part of the preliminary plan submission when the proposed project
will generate between 50 and 100 new vehicle trips in the peak
direction (inbound or outbound) during the site’s peak traffic hour.
a. A written, abbreviated traffic study, pedestrian safety
analysis and, where appropriate, a traffic calming analysis
shall be submitted at the time of preliminary plan
application and shall include:
i. projected peak AM, PM, and/or Saturday traffic
volumes of the development,
ii. projected ADT (average daily trips) of the
development,
iii. Current ADT and peak hour volumes of streets
adjacent to any access drives,
25
iv. LOS (level of service) of existing and proposed
access drives as defined by the Transportation
Research Board Highway Capacity manual (most
recent edition).
v. Modal split of services (categories of vehicles)
entering the site,
vi. Proposed sight distances at access drives, and
vii. Existing and proposed pedestrian paths from
streets and within the site to entrances of all
buildings.
b. The study shall identify improvements/facilities to be
installed or actions to be undertaken by the applicant to
ensure the following:
i. LOS C or higher overall for all new access drives,
ii. No reduction in the levels of service for existing
access drives, except that LOS D shall be
permitted during the AM and PM peak hour. If an
applicant cannot meet this requirement an analysis
shall be completed to show that all reasonable
options have been considered to create the most
efficient access possible.
iii. Sight distances for all access drives intersecting
with all streets shall meet City and/or PennDOT
requirements as applicable,
iv. If pedestrian paths cross vehicular drives and
parking areas within the site, adequate measures
to ensure pedestrian safety,
v. Safe pedestrian access and, if feasible, bicycle
access to the site, and
vi. Where appropriate, effective traffic calming
measures should be outlined.
(2) For residential or non residential developments generating 100 or
more new vehicle trips in the peak direction (inbound or outbound)
during the site’s peak traffic hour, or where current traffic problems
exist in the local area, such as high accident locations or
confusing or congested intersections which directly affect access
to and from the development, a written, full traffic study,
pedestrian safety analysis, and, where appropriate, traffic calming
measures shall be submitted at the time of preliminary plan
application.
26
The study area shall include all public streets and intersections
within a radius of 1,600 feet of an access drive to the site, unless
the City and/or the City’s consulting Traffic Engineer determine
that another study area shall be more appropriate.
a. The full traffic study and pedestrian safety analysis
shall include, at a minimum, the following:
i. Current ADT and peak hour volumes of all streets,
ii. Current LOS of all intersections,
iii. Projected ADT and peak hour volumes of all streets
without the development,
iv. Projected LOS of all intersections without the
development,
v. Site traffic generation, including projected ADT and
peak hour volumes of the development,
vi. Site traffic distribution,
vii. Site traffic assignment,
viii. Projected ADT and peak hour volumes of all streets
and intersections within the development,
ix. Projected LOS of all intersections within the
development, including all existing and proposed
access drives,
x. An assessment of the change in roadway operating
conditions resulting from the development traffic,
xi. Modal split of vehicles entering the site,
xii. Proposed sight distances at access drives,
xiii. Existing and proposed pedestrian paths from
streets and within the site to entrances of all
buildings, and
xiv. Proposed facilities to accommodate mass transit
and bicycle access to site.
b. The study shall identify improvements/facilities to be
installed or actions to be undertaken by the applicant to
ensure the following:
27
i. LOS C or higher overall for all new access
driveways,
ii. No reduction in the levels of service for existing
access driveways, except that LOS D shall be
permitted during the AM and PM peak hour. If an
applicant cannot meet this requirement an analysis
shall be completed to show that all reasonable
options have been considered to create the most
efficient access possible.
iii. No reduction in the levels of service of
intersections within the study area as a result of the
development; however, if the intersection already
has an LOS F, no reduction in the intersection
delay shall occur;
iv. Sight distances for all access drives intersecting
with all rights-of-way shall meet City and/or
PennDOT requirements as applicable;
v. Where high incidence of accidents for any adjacent
intersection exists, safe sight distances, adequate
traffic control restrictions, and safe pedestrian
crossings for each adjacent impacted intersection,
vi. If any access drive is within 1,600 feet of the
property line of any public or private elementary or
secondary school (1,600 feet is the maximum
length of a school zone in accordance with
PennDOT publications 201), safe pedestrian
crossings for all access drives,
vii. If pedestrian paths cross vehicular drives within the
development, adequate points of pedestrian rightof-
way and traffic flow restrictions as necessary to
ensure pedestrian safety,
viii. Provision of mass transit, safe pedestrian access,
and, if feasible, bicycle access to the site, and
ix. Where appropriate, effective traffic calming
measures shall be outlined.
[Section 1347.14 was added by Ordinance No. 4316 on March 15, 2005]
28
ARTICLE 1349
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
AT THE SOLE COST AND EXPENSE OF THE APPLICANT
1349.01 Monuments and Markers for Subdivisions:
(a) Permanent reference monuments of precast concrete, thirty (30) inches by
six (6) inches square, with forty-five (45) degree beveled shoulders, shall be
set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract of
ground to be subdivided. The top of all concrete monuments shall be set
six (6) inches above finished grade so as to be plainly visible.
(b) Iron pipe markers with a 3/4" minimum diameter x 24" minimum length shall
be placed at all radii of street line intersections, at point of curvature and
point of tangency on curves as shown on said applicant's plan, or as is
required by the Bureau of Engineering as the rough grading in said
development is completed. Applicant shall also furnish and set in place all
iron pipe markers specifically identifying each lot. Said markers and
monuments, other than lot markers, must be in place prior to any
verification done by the Bureau of Engineering.
(c) All iron pipe lot markers must be in place and set flush with the finished
grade in each block when all of the structures proposed to be erected
thereon shall have been completed and the lots completely graded.
1349.02 Street Grading: Applicant shall grade all streets to the grade shown on the street
profile and cross-section plan. Engineering control shall be by applicant, who shall
employ a Licensed Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor to perform this work,
which shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Streets shall be graded
to the full width of the right-of-way, and side bankments or fill shall be finished to a
maximum slope of one and one-half (1-1/2) horizontal, to one (1) vertical, i.e.,
beyond each street right-of-way where a cut or fill is necessary.
1349.03 Sanitary Sewers:
(a) Sanitary sewers and house lateral connections shall be constructed on all
streets not presently served, in accordance with the City's specifications
and to the lines and grades established by the developer's engineer and
subject to the City Engineer's approval and inspection.
(b) Capped Sanitary Sewers: Whenever trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are
available to a new subdivision and/or development, the applicant shall be
required to install sanitary sewers and connect same to such trunk line
facilities, regardless of the sizes of the lots on the approved subdivision plan. If
such facilities are not available, but are contemplated to become available
within five (5) years, such sanitary sewers, together with all necessary laterals
extending in each case from the main sewer to the street curb, shall be
installed and capped.
29
Where such capped sanitary sewer installations are made, the applicant shall
also install on-site disposal units, provided that they are so located as to permit
ready unimpeded access and inexpensive connection to the sewer facilities
when the same become available for use.
(c) Temporary Sewage Disposal Facilities: Whenever, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, sanitary sewer facilities are not presently available to a new
subdivision and/or development, the applicant shall construct and install a
complete temporary sanitary sewage disposal system consisting of a septic
tank and tile field or leaching bed. If public sewage disposal is not
available, and the sewage treatment is on a project or individual lot basis,
such private facilities must be installed under direct supervision of the State
or Local Health Department and must be designed to meet the standards of
the State Health Department. The officers of such departments shall
require percolation tests, soil samples, and other data to determine the size
and extent of facilities needed prior to the submission of subdivision and/or
development plans for final approval. Minimum lot sizes intended for
individual temporary sewage disposal facilities shall be dependent upon
recommendations of the State or Local Health Department. On-site waste
disposal systems located in flood plains shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(d) Sewer Facilities In Flood Areas: All sanitary sewer systems located in flood
plains, whether public or private, shall be flood-proofed up to a point one (1)
foot above the regulatory flood elevation.
1349.04 Storm Sewers And Surface Drainage:
Requirements under this section shall be as stipulated under Article 925.
1349.05 Water:
(a) Applicant shall install any and all water mains and fire hydrants required by
the City's Bureau of Water and Fire Department. All such installations shall
be performed and located in accordance with the Water Bureau's and Fire
Department's Rules and Regulations and subject to their inspection and
approval.
(b) Applicant shall reimburse the Bureau of Water for the cost of all inspection
and engineering required to be done by City forces.
(c) All water main installation shall be performed by a reputable contractor
experienced in this type of work. Further, all materials used shall be
subject to the approval of the Bureau of Water.
(c) After all water main installations have been inspected and approved by the
City, the applicant shall apply to the Bureau of Water for service lines and
meters. All service lines and meter charges are payable in advance. All
excavation and backfilling of service lines shall be done by the applicant.
30
(e) All water main installations, fire hydrant installations, and service line
trenches shall be subject to one (1) year's maintenance by the applicant.
(f) Applicant shall maintain all curb boxes and valve boxes in good condition
after the installation of each curb box and valve box, assuming full
responsibility for any damages occurring thereto prior to final acceptance of
abutting street section by the City.
(g) Wells will not be permitted in any subdivision or development in the City of
Bethlehem. All water supply connections shall be made only to the City's
water system.
(h) All water systems located in flood plains, whether public or private, shall be
flood-proofed to a point one (1) foot above the regulatory flood elevation.
1349.06 Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, Crosswalks, And Cross Drainage Gutters:
(a) Curbs And Gutters: Construct completely in concrete all curbs and gutters
in said subdivision and/or development, in accordance with the City's
Ordinances and Specifications. In the event that full-depth asphalt is used
for street construction, gutters may be eliminated except where the grade is
more than ten (10%) percent.
(b) Sidewalks And Crosswalks: Construct completely in concrete all sidewalks
and crosswalks in said sub-division and/or development in accordance with
the approved subdivision and/or development agreement, and in
accordance with the City's Ordinance and Specifications. Crosswalks shall
be constructed at all street intersections in the planting strip area between
the curb and the sidewalk.
(c) Cross Gutters: Where the grade of streets at any street intersection is less
than 1.25%, applicant shall construct an eight (8) inch reinforced concrete
drainage gutter, five (5) feet minimum width across the cartway of each
street intersection designated by the City Engineer for street drainage
purposes, pursuant to and in accordance with the City's Ordinances and
Specifications.
1349.07 Street Paving:
(a) Furnish all necessary materials and perform all work necessary to construct
and pave the traveled cartway in accordance with the City's Ordinances
and Specifications as set forth in Paragraph (f) of this Section, for the full
width between curb lines in each block, as indicated in applicant's plan.
(b) Minimum street paving construction in residential areas shall be an eight
and one-half (8-1/2) inch flexible type street paving or an equivalent full
depth asphalt pavement as required by the City's minimum specifications
for street paving.
31
Said paving shall consist of a minimum of six (6) inches compacted
thickness of graded crushed stone or slag base course and a two and onehalf
(2-1/2) inch compacted thickness, two course bituminous pre-mix
surface consisting of one and one-half (1-1/2) inch binder course and a one
(1) inch wearing course alternately, said paving shall consist of a six (6)
inch bituminous pre-mix surface course, for a total compacted seven and
one-half (7-1/2) inches of full-depth asphalt pavement.
(c) Whenever the cartway width in any street shall exceed thirty-four (34') feet,
applicant shall construct at his own expense, a ten and one-half (10-1/2)
inch flexible type street cartway paving, said paving consisting of a
minimum of eight (8) inches, compacted thickness of graded crushed stone
or slag base course and a two and one-half (2-1/2) inch compacted
thickness, two (2) course bituminous pre-mix surface consisting of one and
one-half (1-1/2) inch binder course and one (1) inch wearing course.
Alternately, said paving shall consist of seven (7) inches, compacted
thickness of bituminous pre-mix course installed in two (2) courses, four (4)
inches and three (3) inches respectively and one and one-half (1-1/2) inch
compacted thickness of bituminous pre-mix surface course, for a total
compacted eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches of full-depth asphalt pavement.
(d) All street paving work shall be performed by a reputable street paving
contractor. Any street paving contractor employed to perform street paving
work must, whenever requested by the City Engineer, furnish a work
qualification statement as to contractor experience, as well as his financial
ability to perform the street cartway paving required by these regulations.
(e) No street paving work shall be undertaken without the City Engineer's
written approval, and not until after the complete installation of all water
mains, including service lines for house connections, underground gas and
electric facilities, sanitary sewers and facilities, storm water sewers and
appurtenances, and any other sub-surface utilities.
(f) Street specifications are as follows:
32
FIFTY FOOT (50') STREET Paving shall consist of a
| | | | minimum of six (6) inches
| | 50' | | compacted thickness of graded
| | | | crushed stone or slag base
Sidewalk Area | 8'| |8' | course and a two and one-half
| | | | (2-1/2) inch compacted thickness
Cartway | | 34' | | two (2) course bituminous pre-
| | | | mix surface consisting of one
| | | | and one-half (1-1/2) inch binder
| | | | course and a one (1) inch
| | | | wearing course. Alternately,
| | | | said paving shall consist of a
| | | | Alternately, said paving shall
| | | | consist of a six (6) inch
| | | | bituminous pre-mix base course
| | | | installed in two (2) courses
| | | | of three (3) inches each and a
| | | | one and one-half (1-1/2) inch
| | | | bituminous pre-mix surface
| | | | course, for a total compacted
| | | | seven and one-half (7-1/2)
| | | | inches of full-depth asphalt
| | | | pavement.
SIXTY FOOT (60') STREET
| | 60' | | Whenever the cartway width in
| | | | any street shall exceed
Sidewalk Area | 8'| | 8'| thirty-four (34) feet,
| | | | applicant shall construct at his Cartway
| | 34' | | own expense, a twelve and one-
| | | | half (12-1/2) inch flexible
| | | | type street cartway paving,
| | | | said paving consisting of a
| | | | minimum of ten (10) inches,
| | | | compacted thickness of graded
| | | | crushed stone or slag base course and a
two and one-half (2-1/2) inch thickness.
33
SEVENTY FOOT (70') STREET
| | 70' | | two (2) course bituminous pre-
| | | | mix surface consisting of one Sidewalk
|13'| |13'| area and one and one-half (1-1/2) inch
| | | | binder course and one (1) inch Cartway
| | 44' | | wearing course. Alternately,
| | | | said paving shall consist of
| | | | seven (7) inches, compacted
| | | | thickness of bituminous pre-
| | | | mix base course installed in
| | | | two (2) courses, four (4)
| | | | inches and three (3) inches
| | | | respectively and one and
| | | | one-half (1-1/2) inch compacted
| | | | thickness of bituminous pre-
| | | | mix surface course, for a
| | | | total compacted eight and
| | | | one-half (8-1/2) inches of
| | | | full-depth asphalt pavement.
EIGHTY FOOT (80') STREET Whenever streets are an extension
| | | | of, or obviously in
| | 80' | | alignment with existing
| | | | streets, the City Engineer Sidewalk Area
|15'| |15‘| shall adjust cartway widths
| | | | to conform with existing Cartway
| | 50' | | conditions.
34
1349.08 Planting:
(a) To insure that principles of good landscaping and design are adhered to
and implemented, each site plan submitted for approval shall provide for:
(1) The preservation of desirable existing trees and shrubs;
(2) The preservation, insofar as possible, of natural rock outcropping
and natural topographic features;
(3) Adequate planting density;
(4) A variety of plant species to provide interest throughout the year
with color and texture of foliages, bark, flowers and fruit that are
displayed at various seasons;
(5) Proper selection and diversification of plant species to minimize the
possibility of damage due to insects and disease;
(6) Plant species which are suitable for use in Bethlehem soil
conditions; and
(7) Proper plant sizes at the time of installation to insure a successful
planting.
(b) The following minimum standards shall be met concerning required plant
materials used by the applicant:
(1) Shade trees - 2 to 2-1/2 inches (caliper).
(2) Ornamental trees - 6 to 8 feet (height).
(3) Pyramidal evergreen trees - 5 to 6 feet (height).
(4) Columnar evergreen trees - 4 to 5 feet (height).
(5) Evergreen and semi-evergreen shrubs - 2 to 2-1/2 feet (width).
(6) Broadleaf evergreen shrubs - 3 to 4 feet (height).
(7) Deciduous shrubs - 2 to 2-1/2 feet (height).
(8) Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground
cover, vines, or turf shall not be used in lieu of live material.
(9) The use of architectural planters is permitted in fulfillment of
landscaping requirements.
35
These planters shall be of material and design specifically intended for landscaping
use.
(c) Landscaped screens or buffer yards shall consist of evergreen trees and/or
evergreen shrubs. For example:
(1) Evergreen and semi-evergreen shrubs planted at a maximum of
four (4) foot center spacing, which shall be maintained at a
minimum height of four (4) feet at maturity. A few examples of
plants in this category are: Pfitzer juniper (Juniperus chinensis
pfitzeriana), dense yew (Taxus cuspidata densiformis), Japanese
andromeda (Pieris Japonica), and inkberry holly (Ilex glabra).
(2) Broadleaf evergreen shrubs planted a maximum three (3) foot
center spacing, which shall be maintained at a minimum height of
four (4) feet at maturity. A few examples of plants in this category
are: Franchet cotoneaster (Cotoneaster francheti), and leatherleaf
viburnum (Viburnum rhytidophyllum).
(3) Columnar evergreen trees planted at a maximum three (3) foot
center spacing. A few examples of plants in this category are:
Columnar Chinese Juniper (Juniperus chinensis columnaris), and
Keteleeri Juniper (Juniperus chinensis keteleeri).
(4) Pyramidal evergreen trees planted at a maximum ten (10) foot
center spacing. A few examples of plants in this category are:
Austrian pine (Pinus nigra), Canadian hemlock (Tsuga canadensis),
and Norway spruce (Picea excelsa).
In general, all screen plantings shall be planted and maintained at a
height greater than the materials - other than buildings - stored
inside.
(d) Street trees shall be planted along all street rights-or-way which abut the
applicant's property, unless this requirement is waived by the Planning
Commission. Tree species and spacing for planting shall follow the
guidelines in the current edition of the pamphlet entitled "Street Trees For
The City Of Bethlehem". All trees shall be balled and burlapped unless this
requirement is waived by the City Forester for any specified variety.
(e) All open space, parking, and loading areas shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, and/or flower beds which will receive the following credits towards
landscape area requirements:
Large trees, for example red oak (Quercus borealis), tulip poplar
(Liriodendron tulipifera), and green ash (Fraxinus lanceolate) - two hundred
(200) square feet credit.
36
Medium trees, for example red maple (Acer rubrum), European white birch
(Betula alba), and Bradford callery pear (Pyrus calleryana Bradford) - one
hundred fifty (150) square feet credit.
Small trees and evergreen trees, for example flowering dogwood (Cornus
florida), Kwanzan cherry (Prunus serrulata Kwanzan), and white pine
(Pinus strobus) - one hundred (100) square feet credit.
Shrubs and flower beds - only that area which is occupied by such
plantings shall be credited.
(f) The following uses shall be landscaped as follows:
(1) Landscaped off-street parking and loading areas shall have a
minimum of ten (10%) percent of the area represented by approved
plantings. These plantings shall be in addition to any buffer
plantings which may be necessary.
(2) Multi-Family, Townhouse, and PUD Developments shall have a
minimum of ten (10%) percent of the area represented by approved
plantings in addition to front and side foundation shrubs and any
buffer planting which may be necessary to screen garbage
collection or parking areas.
(3) In Institutional, Office-Research Center, and Planned Industrial
Zoning Districts, a minimum lot area equivalent to one-third (1/3) the
gross ground floor area of all buildings shall be reserved for
approved plantings. This requirement is in addition to buffer and
street tree requirements. Outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed
by a dense evergreen planting, wall, or fence which shall be in
harmony with the building and surroundings.
(4) In Shopping Center and Commercial Recreation Zoning Districts, a
minimum of ten (10%) percent of all areas not covered by buildings
shall be represented by approved plantings. This requirement is in
addition to buffer and street tree requirements. Outdoor storage
areas shall be enclosed by a dense evergreen planting, wall, or
fence which shall be in harmony with the building and surroundings.
(g) All plantings shown on submitted site plans shall be subject to approval or
disapproval by the appropriate authority after a review and recommendation
from the City Forester's office. All landscaping, as approved on final site
plans, shall be completed and, except on owner-occupied properties,
maintained, including the replacement of dead plantings by the applicant or
his successors. The City Forester's office shall be responsible for all
inspection work regarding approved planting plans and shall report all
violations to the Building Inspector for action.
37
1349.09 Fencing: The applicant may be required to construct a woven wire chain link fence
or equal at least four and one-half (4-1/2') feet in height above finished grade of the
abutting lots along either side of proposed pedestrian walkways. Such fences shall
be required along all railroad rights-of-way where the grade of the rails is below the
finished grade of the lot or less than five (5') feet above the finished grade of the lot.
1349.10 Street Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at every intersection by the
applicant. Their design and location must be approved by the City Engineer.
1349.11 Street Lights: For safety, convenience, and attractiveness of the subdivision or
development, onsite street lighting shall be installed either by the appropriate public
utility or the applicant. The Director of Parks and Public Property shall determine
whether the utility or the applicant shall have this responsibility. This determination
shall be made according to the ability of the subdivision or development area to
obtain the SE energy rate for lighting and be contiguous with other City owned
street lights. New street lighting eligible for this rate shall be applicant-installed. All
others shall be utility-installed.
(a) All applicant-installed lights must be installed by a contractor according to
City specifications. All such work shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City Electrician.
(b) If the public utility is to install the street lights, the applicant shall pay all
costs for equipment and installation as calculated by the public utility. This
money shall be paid to the City in advance as part of the security for the
Developer's Agreement.
(c) The applicant shall provide a sum of money to the City to pay all costs for
the energizing and maintenance of all street lights until such time as a final
review and approval is issued by the City Electrician.
1349.12 Utility Flood-Proofing: All utilities and facilities, whether public or private, located in
flood plains shall be flood-proofed to a point one (1') foot above the regulatory flood
elevation. Access points to such utilities and facilities shall be designed and
installed in such a manner to provide for self reflood-proofing upon such access.
1349.13 Final Acceptance Of Improvements: Prior to the final acceptance of all required
improvements by the City, applicant shall furnish, at his own expense, a
Maintenance Bond in a sum equal to ten (10%) percent of the full amount of the
cost of the improvements, guaranteeing the City against faulty workmanship and
materials, and for maintaining the required improvements in good condition,
including, but not limited to, settling, depressions, or sinkholes, for one (1) year
from the date of final acceptance.
38
ARTICLE 1351
VALIDITY, ENFORCEMENT, VARIANCES, LIABILITY AND FEES
1351.01 Validity: Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of
the Ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof.
1351.02 Enforcement: Any applicant who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty (60) days imprisonment, or
both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety (90) days
imprisonment, or both.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Such conviction and
fine shall not preclude other enforcement remedies otherwise authorized. The
Building Inspector shall be responsible for insuring compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
1351.03 Variances:
(a) General: Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with
these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served
to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to
these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further
provided the Planning Com-mission shall not approve variances unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
(1) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property.
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property.
39
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, dimensional, topographical, or geological
conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out.
(4) The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, Master Plan, or Official Map.
(b) Conditions: In approving variances, the Planning Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
(c) Procedures: A written request for any such variance shall accompany a
subdivider's or developer's application for review of a plat or site plan. The
request for a variance shall state fully the grounds for the application and all
the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(1) A copy of the application for a variance shall accompany the plat or
site plan when sent to all City Bureaus and Departments for
comments as part of the normal review process.
(2) All comments regarding the application shall be brought before the
Planning Commission for evaluation prior to final plat or plan
approval.
(3) Any variance thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the
Commission, setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the
Commission, justified the variance.
1351.04 Municipal Liability: The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or
land development plan in the identified flood plain shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the municipality or by any
official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and
shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or employees.
1351.05 Fees: Fees for subdivision and/or site plan review shall be set from time to time by
resolution of City Council and shall be payable at the time of the filing of the
application.
40
Appendix A
Property Boundary Layers
Parcels Boundaries (Polygon)
Layers: ASSR-PRCL (Current), BNDY-SUBD (Subdivision)
Property Setback (Poly Line)
Layer: PROP-SBCK
Building/Structure Footprint (Polygon)
Layer: BLDG-OTLN
Right of Way Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: ESMT-RWAY
Contours (Poly Line)
Layers: TOPO-MAJR, TOPO-MINR (Major/Minor), TOPO-SPOT (Spot
Elevations)
Control Points (Point)
Layer: CNTL-BMRK
Water Supply System Layers
Mains (Poly Line)
Layers: WATR-UNDR (Underground), WATR-PIPE (Above Grade Pipe)
Laterals/Private Pipe (Poly Line)
Layer: WATR-LATL
Manholes (Point)
Layer: WATR-MHOL
Valves (Point)
Layer: WATR-INST
Water Meter (Point)
Layer: WATR-EQPM
Hydrants (Point)
Layer: WATR-FHYD
Wells (Point)
Layer: WATR-STRC
Water Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: WATR-ESMT
Sanitary Sewer System Layers
Mains (Poly Line)
Layer: SSWR-PIPE
Laterals/Private Pipe (Poly Line)
Layer: SSWR-LATL
Manholes (Point)
Layer: SSWR-MHOL
Tanks (Point)
Layer: SSWR-TANK
Drainage Field (Polygon)
Layer: SSWR-DFLD
Sanitary Sewer Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: SSWR-ESMT
Storm Sewer System Layers
Mains (Poly Line)
Layers: STRM-UNDR (Underground), STRM-PIPE (Above Grade Pipe)
Laterals/Private Pipe (Poly Line)
Layer: STRM-LATL
Manholes (Point)
Layer: STRM-MHOL
Catch Basin (Point)
Layer: STRM-CBSN
Storm Ditches/Swales (Poly Line)
Layer: STRM-DTCH
Storm Retention Ponds (Polygon)
Layer: STRM-POND
Storm Sewer Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: STRM-ESMT
Natural Gas System and Storage Layers
Natural Gas Mains (Poly Line)
Layers: NGAS-UNDR (Underground), NGAS-PIPE (Above Grade Pipe)
Laterals/Private Pipe (Poly Line)
Layer: NGAS-LATL
Natural Gas Manholes (Point)
Layer: NGAS-MHOL
Natural Gas Valves (Point)
Layer: NGAS-INST
Natural Gas Meter (Point)
Layer: NGAS-EQPM
Natural Gas Storage Tank (Point)
Layer: NGAS-TANK
Natural Gas Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: NGAS-ESMT
Other Fuel Systems and Storage Layers
Fuel Gas Pipe
Layers: FUEL-UNDR (Underground), FUEL-PIPE (Above Grade Pipe)
Fuel Gas Manholes (Point)
Layer: FUEL-MHOL
Fuel Gas Valves (Point)
Layer: FUEL-INST
Fuel Gas Meter/Pumps/Motors (Point)
Layer: FUEL-EQPM
Fuel Gas Storage Tank (Point)
Layer: FUEL-TANK
Fuel Line Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: FUEL-ESMT
Fire Protection Layers
Fire Lanes/California Roads (Poly Line)
Layers: FIRE-FLNE (Visible) FIRE-FLCA (Hidden/California)
Fire Lane Markings
Layer: FIRE-MRKG
FDC Standpipe Connections (Point)
Layer: FIRE-STND
Knox Box (Point)
Layer: FIRE-KNOX
Hazardous Materials Storage (Point)
Layer: FIRE-HZMT
Electrical System Layers
Electric Lines (Poly Line)
Layers: POWR-OVHD (Overhead), POWR-UNDR (Underground)
Laterals/Private Lines (Poly Line)
Layer: POWR-LATL
Electric Manholes (Point)
Layer: POWR-MHOL
Electric Meter/Shutoffs (Point)
Layer: POWR-INST
Electric Poles (Point)
Layer: POWR-POLE
Lighting Poles (Point)
Layer: POWR-LTPL
Transformers (Point)
Layer: POWR-EQPM
Power Line Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: POWR-ESMT
Communications System Layers
Telecom Lines (Poly Line)
Layers: COMM-OVHD (Overhead), COMM-UNDR (Underground)
Laterals/Private Lines (Poly Line)
Layer: COMM-LATL
Telecom Manholes (Point)
Layer: COMM-MHOL
Telecom Poles (Point)
Layer: COMM-POLE
Telecom Towers (Point)
Layer: COMM-TOWR
Telecom Line Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: COMM-ESMT
Transportation Network Layers
Edge of Pavement (Poly Line)
Layers: ROAD-CURB (Curbed), ROAD-EDGE (No Curb)
Street Centerline (Poly Line)
Layer: ROAD-CNTR
Street/Roadway Markings (Poly Line)
Layer: ROAD-MRKG
Sidewalk Edge (Poly Line)
Layer: SWLK-EDGE
Sidewalk Centerlines (Poly Line)
Layer: SWLK-CNTR
Rail Lines (Poly Line)
Layer: RAIL-CNTR
Rail Line Right of Way/Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: RAIL-ESMT
Parking/Vehicle Storage Layers
Parking Areas Edge (Poly Line)
Layers: PRKG-CURB (Curbed), PRKG-EDGE (No Curb), PRKG-UPVD
(Unpaved)
Parking Entrances/Driveways Centerline (Poly Line)
Layer: DRIV-CNTR
Parking Entrances/Driveways Edge (Poly Line)
Layers: DRIV-EDGE (Paved), DRIV-UPVD (Unpaved)
Parking Lot/Driveway Markings (Poly Line)
Layer: PRKG-MRKG
Driveway Easements (Poly Line)
Layer: DRIV-ESMT
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP
I (we) the owner(s) of , being duly sworn according to law, depose and say
that I (we) am (are) the sole owner(s) of the above property in peaceful possession of the same
and that there are no suits or liens pending affecting the title thereof.
Signature of Owner
Sworn and subscribed to before me this day of , 19 .
SEAL
My Commission expires on .
*********************************************************************
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP (CORPORATION)
I, of
Name Corporation Name
being duly sworn according to law, and acting in my capa City as
Title
depose and say that the above named corporation is the true and lawful owner of property known
as ; that the above described
Describe property and address
property is in peaceful possession of said corporation and that there are no suits or liens pending
affecting the title thereof.
Corporation
By:
ATTEST: Corporation Official
*********************************************************************
ENGINEER'S OR SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify that this plan correctly and accurately represents the lands of the owner
and, where applicable, the lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, walkways, and other structures
and improvements shown thereon.
Registered Engineer or Surveyor
SEAL
Registration No.
B/36/74
ORDINANCE NO. 2458
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM, COUNTIES OF
LEHIGH AND NORTHAMPTON, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA,
SETTING FORTH RULES, PROCEDURES, AND REGULATIONS FOR
SUBDIVISIONS AND/OR DEVELOPMENTS; PROVIDING FOR
SUBMISSION OF PLANS, SETTING FORTH STANDARDS AND
CRITERIA FOR DEVELOPING AND/OR SUBDIVIDING LAND;
PROVIDING FOR INSPECTION; OUTLINING JURISDICTION OF
VARIOUS CITY DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, AND THE PLANNING
COMMISSION; SETTING FORTH RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
APPLICANT; PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES; AND REPEALING ALL
ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES INCONSISTENT
HEREWITH.
Sponsored by (s) Lawrence E. Kisslinger
(s) Dolores W. Caskey
ADOPTED by Council this 21st day of February, 1975.
(s) Paul M. Marcincin
ATTEST:
(s) Donald C. Cressman
City Clerk
This Ordinance approved this day of
Not signed by Mayor Mowrer
Mayor
AMENDMENTS
The following amendments have been made to the Subdivision and Development
Ordinance since January 21, 1975.
Date Ordinance No. Section Amended
1. Oct. 8, 1976 2531 1343.02(F)(2)G
1349.08
2. Oct. 19, 1977 2581 1351.03
3. May 24, 1978 2614 1341.02(a)(10)(11)
1343.02(d)
1343.02(f)(2)Q.
1343.02(f)(3)R.
1345.02
1347.02(a)
1347.05(d)
1347.12
1349.03(c)
1349.03(d)
1349.04(a)
1349.05(h)
1349.12
1349.13
1351.04
4. June 19, 1979 2661 1351.03
5. March 4, 1980 2696 1349.07
6. May 27, 1981 2777 1347.10(a)
1347.10(b)
7. May 26, 1982 2839 1343.02(f)(2)
1343.02(f)
1349.02
8. Oct. 20, 1982 2849 1347.13
9. Dec. 2, 1986 3090 1347.11(a)
1351.02
10. Apr. 7, 1987 3118 1349.11
Date Ordinance No. Section Amended
11. Sep. 20, 1988 3211 1349.08(e)(f)(g)
12. Feb. 7, 1989 3244 1351.02
13. May 23, 1989 3265 1351.05
14. May 6, 1992 3477 1349.04
SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
FORWARD
The decision to convert open land to a different use is a step that should receive
utmost consideration. Our land is limited, therefore, it is something which we must
preserve and use wisely.
When the decision is made to build a home, a street, a school, or a factory, it must
be realized that an indelible mark is placed on the land and a pattern of growth is started.
How well these patterns tie together determines whether the City will reap the problems
or advantages of such development. Although the actual transaction in the sale of land is
a private matter, the results are a vital concern to the whole community.
In adapting and administering these regulations, the primary purpose is to
encourage the best possible development.
Anyone who contemplates subdividing land in the City of Bethlehem should
become familiar with these regulations. They are designed to achieve equal treatment for
all and to provide clear-cut procedures for the preparation, submission, and approval of
subdivision and/or development plans.
It is the function of the Department of Community Development to confer, advise,
and cooperate with the applicant, but not to do the work of preparing the plans. Best
products will result when the applicant retains a qualified technician to prepare the
subdivision or development plan.
All subdivision plans, as well as all development plans for uses specified for site
plan review by the Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board or the City Planning Commission
in the City Zoning Ordinance, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer or the Planning
Director as appropriate for review and approval or disapproval. These regulations were
prepared and adopted to regulate the development of land in the City of Bethlehem,
Lehigh and Northampton Counties, Pennsylvania, requiring and regulating the
preparation and presentation of plans; establishing minimum design standards; providing
minimum improvements to be made; and setting forth the procedure to be allowed by the
City in applying these rules, regulations and standards.
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1341 TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION 1
AND ADOPTION
Section 1341.01 Title 1
Section 1341.02 Purpose 1
Section 1341.03 Authority 2
Section 1341.04 Jurisdiction 2
Section 1341.05 Adoption 2
ARTICLE 1343 DEFINITIONS 3
Section 1343.01 Inclusions 3
Section 1343.02 Additional Definitions 3
ARTICLE 1345 PROCEDURE 8
Section 1345.01 General 8
Section 1345.02 Submitting Plans For Approval 8
Section 1345.03 Development Sketch Plan Submission 8
Section 1345.04 Final Plan 9
Section 1345.05 Minor Subdivision 9
ARTICLE 1347 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 11
Section 1347.01 General 11
Section 1347.02 Suitability Of Land 11
Section 1347.03 Street Systems 11
Section 1347.04 Street Alignment 12
Section 1347.05 Street Grades 13
Section 1347.06 Street Intersections 14
Section 1347.07 Blocks 14
Section 1347.08 Lots And Building Restriction Lines- 15
Residential Districts
Section 1347.09 Utility Easements And Alleys 15
Section 1347.10 Dedication Of Parks And Playgrounds 16
Section 1347.11 Environmental Controls 16
Section 1347.12 Flood Plains 17
Section 1347.13 Noise Protection 17
ii
Page
ARTICLE 1349 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AT THE SOLE COST AND 19
EXPENSE OF THE APPLICANT
Section 1349.01 Monuments And Markers For Subdivisions 19
Section 1349.02 Street Grading 19
Section 1349.03 Sanitary Sewers 19
Section 1349.04 Storm Sewers And Surface Drainage 20
Section 1349.05 Water 21
Section 1349.06 Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, Crosswalks 22
And Cross Drainage Gutters
Section 1349.07 Street Paving 22
Section 1349.08 Planting 25
Section 1349.09 Fencing 28
Section 1349.10 Street Signs 28
Section 1349.11 Street Lights 28
Section 1349.12 Utility Flood-Proofing 28
Section 1349.13 Final Acceptance Of Improvements 28
ARTICLE 1351 VALIDITY, ENFORCEMENT, VARIANCES AND 29
LIABILITY
Section 1351.01 Validity 29
Section 1351.02 Enforcement 29
Section 1351.03 Variances 29
Section 1351.04 Municipal Liability 30
iii
ARTICLE 1341
TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION & ADOPTION
1341.01 Title
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as "The Bethlehem City
Subdivision and Development Ordinance."
1341.02 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to assure harmonious development of the City
by:
( 1) Ensuring suitable sites for building purposes and human habitation.
( 2) Assisting in orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions.
( 3) Coordinating existing and proposed public improvements.
( 4) Facilitating adequate space for efficient movement of traffic.
( 5) Securing sites for adequate open space for recreation, light and air.
( 6) Safeguarding water resources and drainage ways.
( 7) Encouraging the retention of whatever natural features the land to be
developed may possess which, in the view of the City Zoning Hearing
Board or City Planning Commission, are worth protection. These may
include, but need not be limited to: topography, water areas, plantings,
rock formations, historic landmarks, etc.
( 8) Providing for the proper distribution of population.
( 9) Promoting conditions favorable to the general health, safety, morals, and
welfare of the citizens of the City.
(10) Requiring that each subdivision lot in flood plains be provided with a safe
building site and that private and public facilities which serve such uses be
designed and installed to preclude flood damage to the subdivision or
adjacent property.
(11) Protecting individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for use
because of flood hazards.
1341.03 Authority
The City of Bethlehem is vested by law with the control of the subdivision and
development of land as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, 53 Purdons 10101 et seq.
1341.04 Jurisdiction
The City Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, and/or the City Planning
Commission shall have jurisdiction and control of all subdivision of land, as well as
any use of land requiring site plan review as specified in the City Zoning
Ordinance.
1341.05 Adoption
The following regulations have been proposed by the Bethlehem City Planning
Commission on February 28, 1974 and enacted by the Council of the City of
Bethlehem on January 21, 1975, signed by the Mayor on NOT SIGNED BY
MAYOR MOWRER, and shall remain in effect until amended, modified or
rescinded.
ARTICLE 1343
DEFINITIONS
1343.01 Inclusions:
All definitions stated in Article 1302 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Bethlehem shall represent the usage of those words when used in this Ordinance.
1343.02 Additional Definitions:
(a) Crosswalk: An extension of the sidewalk, usually ten (10) feet wide, which
is meant to provide a concrete walkway from the street curb to the sidewalk
on the planting strip between the curb and the sidewalk.
(b) Cul-de-sac: A City street with one end open for vehicular and pedestrian
access and the outer end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
(c) Developer: A person who is the registered owner, or authorized agent of
the registered owner, of land to be developed. In this Ordinance he may
also be referred to as the applicant.
(d) Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
(1) Total Development Acreage: The aggregate of lands to be
developed.
(2) Net Development Acreage: The total development acreage minus
all watercourses, floodways and street right-of-way lands.
(e) Easement: A right granted by a property owner to use certain land for a
special public or quasi-public purpose not inconsistent with the general
property rights of the owner.
(f) Plans:
(1) Development Sketch Plan: A plan showing the dimensions of the
property to be developed and the location of all existing and
proposed structures, roads, driveways, parking spaces, and
adjacent properties. Show existing topography if considered
necessary by the Planning Director or City Engineer.
(2) Development Final Plan: A plan by a Licensed Professional Land
Surveyor and, if required by Commonwealth Law, a Licensed
Professional Engineer, which shows the following information
concerning the property to be developed:
A. Identification title, including: Name of development; date of
preparation with revision; scale (40 or 50); City Ward and
Block; street address; county; zoning classification; total
acreage; and net development acreage.
B. Number of dwelling units with listing according to type.
Further subdivide apartments into: efficiency, one or two
bedrooms, and three or more bedrooms.
C. Certification of Ownership signed by the record owner of the
property.
D. Bearings and distances of all lot lines. Show abandoned lot
lines as dotted lines. Show lot numbers.
E. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, garbage receptacles, driveways, parking and
loading areas. Show number of parking spaces.
F. Building restriction lines with offset distances to street lines.
G. Show all walkways, landscaping and planting, including the
following:
1. Location, size and species of existing trees over
three (3) inches in caliper.
H. Designate those areas of the plan which are to be
commonly owned and/or maintained.
I. If there is to be any commercial use, show its location and
the floor area in square feet.
J. Show number of employees.
K. All signs shall be shown in detail including location, size,
illumination and materials.
L. Names, widths, and curve data for all City streets in and
adjacent to the development. If the existing property
extends into a proposed street, dedication of the land back
to the street line is required, including all bearings and
distances to be dedicated and labeled "Dedicated to the City
of Bethlehem for street purposes." All monuments at point
of curve and point of tangent of curves and angle points
shall be shown with a circle. Show centerline dimensions
between streets.
M. Names of owners of all adjacent properties.
N. North Arrow and location plan.
O. Stamp or certification of person who designed plan and
phone number of person submitting plan.
P. All existing and/or proposed easements, utilities, and
grading.
Q. Show the location of the proposed development with respect
to the municipality's flood plain, including information on, but
not limited to, the regulatory flood elevations, boundaries of
flood plains, fills, floor or erosion protective facilities, and
areas subject to special deed restrictions.
3. Subdivision Final Plan: A plan by a Licensed Professional Land
Surveyor and, if required by Commonwealth Law, a Licensed
Professional Engineer which shows the following information
concerning the property to be subdivided:
A. Identification title including: Name of subdivision, date of
preparation with revisions, scale (1" = 40' is preferred), City
Ward, zoning classification, county, and net development
acreage.
B. Certification of Ownership signed by the record owner of the
property.
C. Bearings and dimensions for all lot lines. Show old lot lines
(dotted) if different from future lot lines.
D. Lot numbers for all single family home subdivisions.
E. Location and dimensions of all existing structures,
driveways, parking and loading areas.
F. Building restriction lines with offset distances to street lines.
G. Names, widths, and curve data for all City streets in and
adjacent to the subdivision. If the existing property extends
into a proposed street, dedication of the land back to the
street line is required, including all bearings and distances to
be dedicated and labeled "Dedicated to the City of
Bethlehem for street purposes."
H. All monuments at point of curve and point of tangent of
curves and angle points shall be shown with a circle.
I. Centerline data between streets.
J. Names of owners of all adjacent properties.
K. North Arrow.
L. Stamp or certification of person who designed plan.
M. Phone number of person submitting plan.
N. All existing and/or proposed easements.
O. Proposed grading of the property.
P. Location of all utilities.
Q. Location plan.
R. Show the location of the proposed subdivision with respect
to the municipality's flood plain, including information on, but
not limited to, the regulatory flood elevations, boundaries of
flood plains, fills, flood or erosion protective facilities, and
areas subject to special deed restrictions.
(g) Street: See Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Street Specifications: Streets in Bethlehem are classified according
to their width as follows: Fifty (50) foot, sixty (60) foot, seventy (70)
foot, and eighty (80) foot streets.
(2) Streets are also classified according to their use as follows:
A. Local Street: A street whose main purpose is to provide
access to individual lots.
B. Arterial or Collector Street: A street which acts as a major
carrier of traffic between distant points in the City and which
may provide access to individual lots.
C. Limited Access Highway: A street whose main function is to
carry large volumes of traffic between distant points in the
City and beyond, and which provides no access to
individual lots.
(h) Subdivider: A person who is the registered owner, or authorized agent of
the registered owner, of land to be subdivided. In this Ordinance he may
also be referred to as the applicant.
(i) Subdivision: The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or
easement of access, shall be exempted.
(1) Minor Subdivision: A subdivision of one (1) acre or less which
creates no new streets, water mains, or sewer mains.
(j) "Subdivision and Development Ordinance" means Ordinance 2458 passed
January 21, 1975, as amended, which is codified as Articles 1341 to 1351
of this Part Thirteen.
ARTICLE 1345
PROCEDURE
1345.01 General: Land subdivision, residential development, institutional development,
industrial park, and/or shopping center development, as well as any other use of
land so specified in the City Zoning Ordinance, shall require the review and
approval of final plans as provided for in Sections 1345.04 and 1345.05 before the
applicant may apply for a building permit. The decision of the City Zoning Officer,
Zoning Hearing Board, or City Planning Commission to approve or disapprove
plans shall depend on three factors:
(1) Their adherence to this Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
(2) Their adherence to the pertinent regulations in the City Zoning Ordinance.
(3) The proper compliance of the applicant with whatever current soil and
sediment control regulations are prescribed and enforced by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, and/or the local
County Conservation District.
1345.02 Submitting Plans For Approval: All development and subdivision plans whether
sketch or final, shall be submitted to the City at least ten (10) working days prior to
the next scheduled meeting of the City Zoning Board or Planning Commission for
consideration at that meeting. Submission of development sketch plans as a
preliminary procedure for City Planning Commission review shall be at the
discretion of the applicant. Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested
that prospective developers consult with the Municipal Sewage Enforcement
Officer concerning soil suitability when on-site sewage disposal facilities are
proposed. When required by the City, prospective developers shall consult with
the County Conservation District Representative concerning erosion and sediment
control and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development. At the
same time, a determination should be made as to whether or not any flood hazard
either exists or will be created as a result of the subdivision or development.
1345.03 Development Sketch Plan Submission: If the applicant decides to apply for
development sketch plan approval, he shall submit to the City Planning Bureau
four (4) copies of the plan as defined under Section 1343.02(f)(1). Should the City
Planning Commission approve the sketch plan, such approval shall not compel the
Planning Commission to approve the project's final plan, but shall merely act as an
indication of the City Planning Commission's attitude toward the general purpose
of the project at the time of sketch plan approval.
1345.04 Final Plan: For final approval of a development or subdivision plan, the applicant
shall submit to the City eight (8) final plan prints as defined in Section
1343.02(f)(2) and (3). Upon receipt of final plans, the Zoning Officer or Planning
Director shall distribute copies to all other City Departments which would normally
be affected by such a project. Their comments on the plan shall then be conveyed
to the City Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission during the meeting at
which the project is to be discussed. For applications to the Planning Commission
which are subsequently approved by the Commission, the applicant shall submit
three (3) cloth, one (1) transparent mylar reproducible, and as many paper prints
as are deemed necessary by the Planning Bureau, for final stamping, signing, and
distribution of the plans. Approval of a final plan by the City Zoning Hearing Board
of Planning Commission shall be contingent upon the applicant signing a
Development or Subdivision Agreement, to be prepared by the Bureau of Law in
conjunction with the Bureau of Engineering and filing such security as shall be
required by the City to guarantee compliance by the applicant. The provisions of
the Development or Subdivision Agreement shall be based on, but not limited to,
the information included on the final plans as approved. The date of the signing of
a Subdivision Agreement shall be the date of final approval and the applicant shall
then have ninety (90) days within which to file the final plan with the County
Recorder of Deeds. Should the applicant fail to record a final subdivision plan
within the ninety (90) day period, the approval of the Commission shall be null and
void. A development applicant shall be required to commence and proceed with
construction on any development plan approved by the City Zoning Hearing Board
or Planning Commission within one (1) year of said approval, or one (1) year from
the effective date of this Ordinance, whichever comes later. An agreement
between the applicant and the City Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission
shall also specify date of completion. If construction has not been completed as
per date in agreement, approval by the City Zoning Hearing Board or Planning
Commission and this agreement shall lapse and become null and void. In such
case, the City Zoning Hearing Board or Planning Commission and applicant may
enter into a new agreement.
1345.05 Minor Subdivision: The applicant for approval of a minor subdivision plan shall
submit to the Director of the Planning Bureau eight (8) paper final plan prints and
(1) reproducible final plan print as defined under Section 1343.02(f)(3).
After distributing copies of the plan to all other City Departments normally
interested in subdivision review, the Planning Bureau Director or his designated
agent shall have the authority to approve or disapprove all minor subdivisions.
Approval of the final plan shall be contingent upon the applicant signing a
Subdivision Agreement to be prepared by the Bureau of Law in conjunction with
the Bureau of Engineering and filing such security as may be required by the City
to guarantee compliance by the applicant. The provisions of the Subdivision
Agreement shall be based on, but not limited to, the information included on the
final plans as approved. The date of the signing of the Subdivision Agreement
shall be the date of final approval and the applicant shall have ninety (90) days
within which to file the final plan with the County Recorder of Deeds. Should the
applicant fail to record the Minor Subdivision Plan within the ninety (90) day period,
the approval of the Director shall be null and void.
ARTICLE 1347
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
1347.01 General: The following principles of land subdivision and good design shall be
observed by the applicant in all instances.
1347.02 Suitability of Land:
(a) Land within the floodway shall not be plotted for structural development nor
for such other uses as may involve danger to health, life or property, or
aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plan shall be set aside
for such uses as shall not be adversely affected by flood waters. Refer to
Section 1347.12 for further detail.
(b) Land situated on slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent shall not be used
for development purposes unless a geologic survey of the area is
undertaken by the applicant. This study shall identify any erosion, storm
water drainage or similar problems which might be created by the proposed
development. The applicant shall then propose adequate safeguards to be
used or implemented during and after the construction process which
would alleviate any such problems.
1347.03 Street Systems:
(a) The development plan shall conform to such plan or plans for the City as
shall have been prepared and adopted by the City Planning Commission.
(b) Local streets in a new development should be so laid out as to discourage
through traffic, but provision for the extension and continuation of arterial
streets into and from adjoining areas should be required. If the subdivision
abuts a present or proposed arterial street, the Commission may require
access streets running parallel to the thoroughfare.
(c) At all times, the street layout should be logically related to the topography
of the land.
(d) Center lines of local streets opening into opposite sides of collector or
arterial streets which are within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of each
other, shall be made to coincide by curving the local streets.
(e) Proposed streets will be designed to connect with existing street stubs in
adjacent subdivisions and suitable street openings shall be provided to
adjacent undeveloped properties. Proposed streets which terminate at the
applicant's property lines shall terminate in a temporary cul-de-sac or
turnaround built and maintained at the applicant's expense until the
adjoining property is developed and the proposed street extended, or the
City accepts the cul-de-sac as permanent. The applicant shall deposit a
sum sufficient to connect all temporary cul-de-sacs to any future projection
of the street. Should any temporary cul-de-sac be accepted as permanent
by the City, said sum shall be returned without interest to the applicant.
(f) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited access highway right-of-way, the City Planning Commission may
require streets approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-ofway
at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land.
(g) Cul-de-sacs in the local street system shall not exceed five hundred (500)
feet in length from the centerline of the street to which the cul-de-sac
connects to the point of radius turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty
(50) feet on the street line.
(h) Half streets shall be prohibited.
(i) Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with existing
named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets.
(j) No new street names shall be used which may duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to
approval by the City Planning Commission.
1347.04 Street Alignment:
(a) The minimal radius at the centerline for curves on limited access highways
shall be five hundred (500) feet; for arterial streets, three hundred (300)
feet; and for local streets, it shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. Where
greater radii requirements have been established for streets planned prior
to subdivision, the established plans shall govern development. Super
elevation shall be provided for curves less than six hundred (600) feet
radius on all streets.
(b) Except for local residential streets there shall be a tangent of at least one
hundred (100) feet, measured at the centerline, between reverse curves.
(c) Between all horizontal curves on the street line and the radius at street
intersections, there shall be a tangent of at least ten (10) feet.
(d) Proper sight distance should be provided with respect to both horizontal
and vertical alignment. Measured along the centerline, said sight distance
should be four hundred (400) feet for limited access highways; two hundred
(200) feet for arterial streets; and one hundred (100) feet for local streets.
(e) Proper sight lines should be maintained at all intersections of streets. See
Section 1318.06 of the City Zoning Ordinance.
(f) Street lines at street intersections shall have a minimal radius of fifteen (15)
feet on local streets; on arterial streets, the minimum radius shall be
twenty-five (25) feet on the street line.
(g) In the Central Business (CB) District, where the street cartways are
composed of driving lanes eighteen (18) feet or wider, street intersection
radii may be reduced or eliminated at the discretion of the City Planning
Commission.
1347.05 Street Grades:
(a) There shall be a minimum grade of at least three quarters of one percent
(0.75%) on all streets. The maximum grade for arterial and limited access
streets shall be six (6%) percent, and there shall be a maximum grade of
ten (10%) percent for distances not to exceed fifteen hundred (1,500) feet
for local residential streets.
(b) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding one (1%)
percent, and should be designed for maximum visibility.
(c) Intersections shall be approached from all sides by leveling areas wherever
possible. Where the grade exceeds seven (7%) percent, such leveling
areas shall have a minimum length of fifty (50) feet from intersection, within
which no grade shall exceed a maximum of four (4%) percent.
(d) The finished elevation of proposed streets shall be no more than one (1)
foot below the regulatory flood elevation. The City Engineer may require,
where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine
compliance with this requirement. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
1347.06 Street Intersections:
(a) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) roadways
shall be avoided, but where such avoidance is impossible, such intersections
shall be designed with adequate consideration for both vehicular
and pedestrian safety.
(b) Right angle intersections are required, unless, due to exceptional
conditions, the Commission approves a variation, in which case no
intersection angle, measured at the centerline, shall be less than seventyfive
(75) degrees.
(c) Street curb line intersections shall be rounded by an arc, with a minimum
radius of twenty-three (23) feet for local streets and thirty-three (33) feet for
intersections including arterial streets. These radii shall be computed on
the basis of the radius on the street line, plus the width of the narrowest
sidewalk area.
(d) In the Central Business (CB) Zoning District, where the street cartways are
composed of driving lanes eighteen (18) feet or wider, street curb line
intersection radii may be reduced at the discretion of the City Planning
Commission to a minimum equal to the widest sidewalk adjacent to the
intersection.
1347.07 Blocks:
(a) In general, all blocks in a subdivision should have a minimum length of at
least five hundred (500) feet and a maximum length of sixteen hundred
(1,600) feet. Also, such blocks containing individual lots shall be two (2) lot
depths in width.
(b) In large blocks with interior parks, in exceptionally long blocks at bus stops,
or where access to a school or shopping center is necessary, a crosswalk
shall be provided.
1347.08 Lots and Building Restriction Lines - Residential Districts:
(a) Lots and building restriction lines shall conform to the provisions of the
Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance of 1970, being Ordinance No. 2210 as
adopted September 25, 1970, and including any amendments thereto.
(b) All side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, unless
otherwise approved by the Commission due to exceptional conditions.
1347.09 Utility Easements and Alleys:
(a) If easements are used at the rear or side of lots to provide sewer facilities,
a minimum easement of twenty (20) feet from the rear or side of each lot
must be provided. However, where easements are to be installed to the
rear or side of adjoining lots, the total easement required will be twenty (20)
feet. This width for a sewer easement shall be considered a part of the
overall lot depth as required in the City Zoning Ordinance; except where
necessary for safety and convenience, the City may exclude the easement
area in computing minimum lot size requirements.
(b) If easements are used at the front, side, or rear of lots to provide for electric
or telephone service facilities, a minimum easement width of five (5) feet
from the front, side or rear of each lot must be provided. For any
development of five (5) or more lots and/or dwelling units, underground
installation of electric or telephone service facilities may be required by the
City Planning Commission. Said five (5) foot easement for service facilities
or poles shall be considered a part of the overall lot depth or width as
required in the City Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Service streets or alleys may be required by the City Planning Commission
in commercial districts, shopping centers or industrial districts where
deemed necessary. Said service streets or alleys shall have a minimum
width of thirty-three (33) feet, with a twenty-four (24) foot cartway. Where
such alleys dead-end, they shall provide a turnaround having a street
radius of not less than thirty-seven (37) feet. The street line radius shall be
determined by the City Planning Commission at the time of site plan
review.
1347.10 Dedication of Parks and Playgrounds:
(a) Except as provided in Section 1347.10(b), any applicant shall dedicate,
grant, and convey to the City, by deed, a minimum area of suitable land
(the location thereof to be designated and approved by the City Planning
Commission) toward the development of community recreation facilities,
limited to park, playground, or neighborhood community facilities. The area
to be dedicated, conveyed and granted to the City for such purpose shall
be computed at the rate of not less than one-hundredths (0.01) acre for
each residential lot or, in the event such lot shall contain multiple family
dwellings, for each dwelling unit provided for in the entire subdivision and/or
housing development shown on the applicant's final plan. The area to be
dedicated shall be located in the area of the final plan or at such other
location designated on the City Planning Commission's Comprehensive
Plan. The applicant shall not remove or permit to be removed any top soil,
ground, or earth, or change the natural contour of the land proposed to be
dedicated to the City for community facilities, without the prior written
consent and approval of the City.
(b) The City Planning Commission shall determine whether the applicant's land
does or does not lend itself readily to the development of adequate
community recreation facilities, or whether it would be more advantageous
to the City to develop community recreation facilities in other areas. The
applicant, in lieu of dedicating a portion, or portions, or the applicant's tract
of land, shall make a cash donation to the City for such facilities, in the
amount of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each residential lot, or, in the
event such lot shall contain multiple family dwellings, for each dwelling unit,
in the proposed development. Any sum of money paid to the City by the
applicant shall be used only for the purpose of developing community
recreation facilities.
1347.11 Environmental Controls:
(a) No applicant shall strip (i.e., remove vegetation and top soil) at any one
time, an area of land greater than five (5) acres. Before additional stripping
may be accomplished, all previously stripped land must be stabilized (i.e.,
graded, reseeded, etc.) in such manner as to prevent any erosion over and
above that which normally took place prior to the stripping. Additional
stripping may be initiated only after the City Engineer has determined that
the previously stripped land has been stabilized.
(b) Provisions will be made by the applicant to insure that the development of
any land does not create health, safety, dust, drainage or attractive
nuisance problems which affect the quiet enjoyment of any adjoining tract
of land.
1347.12 Flood Plains:
(a) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or structure shall
not be permitted in any floodway area. Building sites may be permitted
outside the floodway area if the structures are constructed in conformance
with the requirements of the City Building Code. If fill is used to raise the
elevation of the site, the fill area shall extend out laterally for a distance of
at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the limits of the proposed structures.
(b) If the City Planning Commission determines that only a part of the
proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that
part and shall require that development proceed consistent with this
determination.
(c) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the City
Planning Commission determines that additional controls are required to
insure safe development, it may require the developer to impose
appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be
inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
1347.13 Noise Protection:
Any residential land development which abuts an urban principle arterial road as
designated on the current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Functional
Classification Map for the Allentown/Bethlehem Urban Area, as revised from time
to time (available from the City Planner), shall be protected from sound levels
which exceed the following maximum levels:
Zoning District Sound Level Limit
Residential 60 dBA
Institutional 60 dBA
Commercial 67 dBA
Industrial 75 dBA
If sound levels exceed these standards, a noise barrier of a type shown in the
current U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration
Implementation Package 76-8 and Publication FHWA-RD-76-58, as amended
from time to time, (available from the City Engineer) or other suitable barrier
acceptable to the City, shall be constructed in such a manner as to theoretically
reduce the sound levels on the lot(s) to be developed to or below the levels listed
above.
ARTICLE 1349
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
AT THE SOLE COST AND EXPENSE OF THE APPLICANT
1349.01 Monuments and Markers for Subdivisions:
(a) Permanent reference monuments of precast concrete, thirty (30) inches by
six (6) inches square, with forty-five (45) degree beveled shoulders, shall
be set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract
of ground to be subdivided. The top of all concrete monuments shall be set
six (6) inches above finished grade so as to be plainly visible.
(b) Iron pipe markers with a 3/4" minimum diameter x 24" minimum length
shall be placed at all radii of street line intersections, at point of curvature
and point of tangency on curves as shown on said applicant's plan, or as is
required by the Bureau of Engineering as the rough grading in said
development is completed. Applicant shall also furnish and set in place all
iron pipe markers specifically identifying each lot. Said markers and
monuments, other than lot markers, must be in place prior to any
verification done by the Bureau of Engineering.
(c) All iron pipe lot markers must be in place and set flush with the finished
grade in each block when all of the structures proposed to be erected
thereon shall have been completed and the lots completely graded.
1349.02 Street Grading: Applicant shall grade all streets to the grade shown on the street
profile and cross-section plan. Engineering control shall be by applicant, who shall
employ a Licensed Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor to perform this work,
which shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Streets shall be
graded to the full width of the right-of-way, and side bankments or fill shall be
finished to a maximum slope of one and one-half (1-1/2) horizontal, to one (1)
vertical, i.e., beyond each street right-of-way where a cut or fill is necessary.
1349.03 Sanitary Sewers:
(a) Sanitary sewers and house lateral connections shall be constructed on all
streets not presently served, in accordance with the City's specifications
and to the lines and grades established by the developer's engineer and
subject to the City Engineer's approval and inspection.
(b) Capped Sanitary Sewers: Whenever trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are
available to a new subdivision and/or development, the applicant shall be
required to install sanitary sewers and connect same to such trunk line
facilities, regardless of the sizes of the lots on the approved subdivision
plan. If such facilities are not available, but are contemplated to become
available within five (5) years, such sanitary sewers, together with all
necessary laterals extending in each case from the main sewer to the
street curb, shall be installed and capped. Where such capped sanitary
sewer installations are made, the applicant shall also install on-site disposal
units, provided that they are so located as to permit ready unimpeded
access and inexpensive connection to the sewer facilities when the same
become available for use.
(c) Temporary Sewage Disposal Facilities: Whenever, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, sanitary sewer facilities are not presently available to a new
subdivision and/or development, the applicant shall construct and install a
complete temporary sanitary sewage disposal system consisting of a septic
tank and tile field or leaching bed. If public sewage disposal is not
available, and the sewage treatment is on a project or individual lot basis,
such private facilities must be installed under direct supervision of the State
or Local Health Department and must be designed to meet the standards
of the State Health Department. The officers of such departments shall
require percolation tests, soil samples, and other data to determine the size
and extent of facilities needed prior to the submission of subdivision and/or
development plans for final approval. Minimum lot sizes intended for
individual temporary sewage disposal facilities shall be dependent upon
recommendations of the State or Local Health Department. On-site waste
disposal systems located in flood plains shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(d) Sewer Facilities In Flood Areas: All sanitary sewer systems located in flood
plains, whether public or private, shall be flood-proofed up to a point one
(1) foot above the regulatory flood elevation.
1349.04 Storm Sewers And Surface Drainage:
Requirements under this section shall be as stipulated under Article 925.
1349.05 Water:
(a) Applicant shall install any and all water mains and fire hydrants required by
the City's Bureau of Water and Fire Department. All such installations shall
be performed and located in accordance with the Water Bureau's and Fire
Department's Rules and Regulations and subject to their inspection and
approval.
(b) Applicant shall reimburse the Bureau of Water for the cost of all inspection
and engineering required to be done by City forces.
(c) All water main installation shall be performed by a reputable contractor
experienced in this type of work. Further, all materials used shall be
subject to the approval of the Bureau of Water.
(d) After all water main installations have been inspected and approved by the
City, the applicant shall apply to the Bureau of Water for service lines and
meters. All service lines and meter charges are payable in advance. All
excavation and backfilling of service lines shall be done by the applicant.
(e) All water main installations, fire hydrant installations, and service line
trenches shall be subject to one (1) year's maintenance by the applicant.
(f) Applicant shall maintain all curb boxes and valve boxes in good condition
after the installation of each curb box and valve box, assuming full
responsibility for any damages occurring thereto prior to final acceptance of
abutting street section by the City.
(g) Wells will not be permitted in any subdivision or development in the City of
Bethlehem. All water supply connections shall be made only to the City's
water system.
(h) All water systems located in flood plains, whether public or private, shall be
flood-proofed to a point one (1) foot above the regulatory flood elevation.
1349.06 Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, Crosswalks, And Cross Drainage Gutters:
(a) Curbs And Gutters: Construct completely in concrete all curbs and gutters
in said subdivision and/or development, in accordance with the City's
Ordinances and Specifications. In the event that full-depth asphalt is used
for street construction, gutters may be eliminated except where the grade is
more than ten (10%) percent.
(b) Sidewalks And Crosswalks: Construct completely in concrete all sidewalks
and crosswalks in said sub-division and/or development in accordance with
the approved subdivision and/or development agreement, and in
accordance with the City's Ordinance and Specifications. Crosswalks shall
be constructed at all street intersections in the planting strip area between
the curb and the sidewalk.
(c) Cross Gutters: Where the grade of streets at any street intersection is less
than 1.25%, applicant shall construct an eight (8) inch reinforced concrete
drainage gutter, five (5) feet minimum width across the cartway of each
street intersection designated by the City Engineer for street drainage
purposes, pursuant to and in accordance with the City's Ordinances and
Specifications.
1349.07 Street Paving:
(a) Furnish all necessary materials and perform all work necessary to construct
and pave the traveled cartway in accordance with the City's Ordinances
and Specifications as set forth in Paragraph (f) of this Section, for the full
width between curb lines in each block, as indicated in applicant's plan.
(b) Minimum street paving construction in residential areas shall be an eight
and one-half (8-1/2) inch flexible type street paving or an equivalent full
depth asphalt pavement as required by the City's minimum specifications
for street paving. Said paving shall consist of a minimum of six (6) inches
compacted thickness of graded crushed stone or slag base course and a
two and one-half (2-1/2) inch compacted thickness, two course bituminous
pre-mix surface consisting of one and one-half (1-1/2) inch binder course
and a one (1) inch wearing course alternately, said paving shall consist of a
six (6) inch bituminous pre-mix surface course, for a total compacted seven
and one-half (7-1/2) inches of full-depth asphalt pavement.
(c) Whenever the cartway width in any street shall exceed thirty-four (34') feet,
applicant shall construct at his own expense, a ten and one-half (10-1/2)
inch flexible type street cartway paving, said paving consisting of a
minimum of eight (8) inches, compacted thickness of graded crushed stone
or slag base course and a two and one-half (2-1/2) inch compacted
thickness, two (2) course bituminous pre-mix surface consisting of one and
one-half (1-1/2) inch binder course and one (1) inch wearing course.
Alternately, said paving shall consist of seven (7) inches, compacted
thickness of bituminous pre-mix course installed in two (2) courses, four (4)
inches and three (3) inches respectively and one and one-half (1-1/2) inch
compacted thickness of bituminous pre-mix surface course, for a total
compacted eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches of full-depth asphalt
pavement.
(d) All street paving work shall be performed by a reputable street paving
contractor. Any street paving contractor employed to perform street paving
work must, whenever requested by the City Engineer, furnish a work
qualification statement as to contractor experience, as well as his financial
ability to perform the street cartway paving required by these regulations.
(e) No street paving work shall be undertaken without the City Engineer's
written approval, and not until after the complete installation of all water
mains, including service lines for house connections, underground gas and
electric facilities, sanitary sewers and facilities, storm water sewers and
appurtenances, and any other sub-surface utilities.
(f) Street specifications are as follows:
FIFTY FOOT (50') STREET Paving shall consist of a
| | | | minimum of six (6) inches
| | 50' | | compacted thickness of graded
| | | | crushed stone or slag base
Sidewalk Area | 8'| |8' | course and a two and one-half
| | | | (2-1/2) inch compacted thickness
Cartway | | 34' | | two (2) course bituminous pre-
| | | | mix surface consisting of one
| | | | and one-half (1-1/2) inch binder
| | | | course and a one (1) inch
| | | | wearing course. Alternately,
| | | | said paving shall consist of a
| | | | Alternately, said paving shall
| | | | consist of a six (6) inch
| | | | bituminous pre-mix base course
| | | | installed in two (2) courses
| | | | of three (3) inches each and a
| | | | one and one-half (1-1/2) inch
| | | | bituminous pre-mix surface
| | | | course, for a total compacted
| | | | seven and one-half (7-1/2)
| | | | inches of full-depth asphalt
| | | | pavement.
SIXTY FOOT (60') STREET
| | 60' | | Whenever the cartway width in
| | | | any street shall exceed
Sidewalk Area | 8'| | 8'| thirty-four (34) feet,
| | | | applicant shall construct at his Cartway
| | 34' | | own expense, a twelve and one-
| | | | half (12-1/2) inch flexible
| | | | type street cartway paving,
| | | | said paving consisting of a
| | | | minimum of ten (10) inches,
| | | | compacted thickness of graded
| | | | crushed stone or slag base
course and a two and one-half
SEVENTY FOOT (70') STREET (2-1/2) inch compacted thickness
| | 70' | | two (2) course bituminous pre-
| | | | mix surface consisting of one Sidewalk Area
|13'| |13'| and one-half (1-1/2) inch
| | | | binder course and one (1) inch Cartway
| | 44' | | wearing course. Alternately,
| | | | said paving shall consist of
| | | | seven (7) inches, compacted
| | | | thickness of bituminous pre-
| | | | mix base course installed in
| | | | two (2) courses, four (4)
| | | | inches and three (3) inches
| | | | respectively and one and
| | | | one-half (1-1/2) inch compacted
| | | | thickness of bituminous pre-
| | | | mix surface course, for a
| | | | total compacted eight and
| | | | one-half (8-1/2) inches of
| | | | full-depth asphalt pavement.
EIGHTY FOOT (80') STREET Whenever streets are an extention
| | | | of, or obviously in
| | 80' | | alignment with existing
| | | | streets, the City Engineer Sidewalk Area
|15'| |15‘| shall adjust cartway widths
| | | | to conform with existing Cartway
| | 50' | | conditions.
1349.08 Planting:
(a) To insure that principles of good landscaping and design are adhered to
and implemented, each site plan submitted for approval shall provide for:
(1) The preservation of desirable existing trees and shrubs;
(2) The preservation, insofar as possible, of natural rock outcropping
and natural topographic features;
(3) Adequate planting density;
(4) A variety of plant species to provide interest throughout the year
with color and texture of foliages, bark, flowers and fruit that are
displayed at various seasons;
(5) Proper selection and diversification of plant species to minimize the
possibility of damage due to insects and disease;
(6) Plant species which are suitable for use in Bethlehem soil
conditions; and
(7) Proper plant sizes at the time of installation to insure a successful
planting.
(b) The following minimum standards shall be met concerning required plant
materials used by the applicant:
(1) Shade trees - 2 to 2-1/2 inches (caliper).
(2) Ornamental trees - 6 to 8 feet (height).
(3) Pyramidal evergreen trees - 5 to 6 feet (height).
(4) Columnar evergreen trees - 4 to 5 feet (height).
(5) Evergreen and semi-evergreen shrubs - 2 to 2-1/2 feet (width).
(6) Broadleaf evergreen shrubs - 3 to 4 feet (height).
(7) Deciduous shrubs - 2 to 2-1/2 feet (height).
(8) Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground
cover, vines, or turf shall not be used in lieu of live material.
(9) The use of architectural planters is permitted in fulfillment of
landscaping requirements. These planters shall be of material and
design specifically intended for landscaping use.
(c) Landscaped screens or buffer yards shall consist of evergreen trees and/or
evergreen shrubs. For example:
(1) Evergreen and semi-evergreen shrubs planted at a maximum of
four (4) foot center spacing, which shall be maintained at a
minimum height of four (4) feet at maturity. A few examples of
plants in this category are: Pfitzer juniper (Juniperus chinensis
pfitzeriana), dense yew (Taxus cuspidata densiformis), Japanese
andromeda (Pieris Japonica), and inkberry holly (Ilex glabra).
(2) Broadleaf evergreen shrubs planted a maximum three (3) foot
center spacing, which shall be maintained at a minimum height of
four (4) feet at maturity. A few examples of plants in this category
are: Franchet cotoneaster (Cotoneaster francheti), and leatherleaf
viburnum (Viburnum rhytidophyllum).
(3) Columnar evergreen trees planted at a maximum three (3) foot
center spacing. A few examples of plants in this category are:
Columnar Chinese Juniper (Juniperus chinensis columnaris), and
Keteleeri Juniper (Juniperus chinensis keteleeri).
(4) Pyramidal evergreen trees planted at a maximum ten (10) foot
center spacing. A few examples of plants in this category are:
Austrian pine (Pinus nigra), Canadian hemlock (Tsuga canadensis),
and Norway spruce (Picea excelsa).
In general, all screen plantings shall be planted and maintained at a
height greater than the materials - other than buildings - stored
inside.
(d) Street trees shall be planted along all street rights-or-way which abut the
applicant's property, unless this requirement is waived by the Planning
Commission. Tree species and spacing for planting shall follow the
guidelines in the current edition of the pamphlet entitled "Street Trees For
The City Of Bethlehem". All trees shall be balled and burlapped unless this
requirement is waived by the City Forester for any specified variety.
(e) All open space, parking, and loading areas shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, and/or flower beds which will receive the following credits towards
landscape area requirements:
Large trees, for example red oak (Quercus borealis), tulip poplar
(Liriodendron tulipifera), and green ash (Fraxinus lanceolate) - two hundred
(200) square feet credit.
Medium trees, for example red maple (Acer rubrum), European white birch
(Betula alba), and Bradford callery pear (Pyrus calleryana Bradford) - one
hundred fifty (150) square feet credit.
Small trees and evergreen trees, for example flowering dogwood (Cornus
florida), Kwanzan cherry (Prunus serrulata Kwanzan), and white pine
(Pinus strobus) - one hundred (100) square feet credit.
Shrubs and flower beds - only that area which is occupied by such
plantings shall be credited.
(f) The following uses shall be landscaped as follows:
(1) Landscaped off-street parking and loading areas shall have a
minimum of ten (10%) percent of the area represented by approved
plantings. These plantings shall be in addition to any buffer
plantings which may be necessary.
(2) Multi-Family, Townhouse, and PUD Developments shall have a
minimum of ten (10%) percent of the area represented by approved
plantings in addition to front and side foundation shrubs and any
buffer planting which may be necessary to screen garbage
collection or parking areas.
(3) In Institutional, Office-Research Center, and Planned Industrial
Zoning Districts, a minimum lot area equivalent to one-third (1/3)
the gross ground floor area of all buildings shall be reserved for
approved plantings. This requirement is in addition to buffer and
street tree requirements. Outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed
by a dense evergreen planting, wall, or fence which shall be in
harmony with the building and surroundings.
(4) In Shopping Center and Commercial Recreation Zoning Districts, a
minimum of ten (10%) percent of all areas not covered by buildings
shall be represented by approved plantings. This requirement is in
addition to buffer and street tree requirements. Outdoor storage
areas shall be enclosed by a dense evergreen planting, wall, or
fence which shall be in harmony with the building and surroundings.
(g) All plantings shown on submitted site plans shall be subject to approval or
disapproval by the appropriate authority after a review and
recommendation from the City Forester's office. All landscaping, as
approved on final site plans, shall be completed and, except on owneroccupied
properties, maintained, including the replacement of dead
plantings by the applicant or his successors. The City Forester's office
shall be responsible for all inspection work regarding approved planting
plans and shall report all violations to the Building Inspector for action.
1349.09 Fencing: The applicant may be required to construct a woven wire chain link fence
or equal at least four and one-half (4-1/2') feet in height above finished grade of
the abutting lots along either side of proposed pedestrian walkways. Such fences
shall be required along all railroad rights-of-way where the grade of the rails is
below the finished grade of the lot or less than five (5') feet above the finished
grade of the lot.
1349.10 Street Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at every intersection by the
applicant. Their design and location must be approved by the City Engineer.
1349.11 Street Lights: For safety, convenience, and attractiveness of the subdivision or
development, onsite street lighting shall be installed either by the appropriate
public utility or the applicant. The Director of Parks and Public Property shall
determine whether the utility or the applicant shall have this responsibility. This
determination shall be made according to the ability of the subdivision or
development area to obtain the SE energy rate for lighting and be contiguous with
other City owned street lights. New street lighting eligible for this rate shall be
applicant-installed. All others shall be utility-installed.
(a) All applicant-installed lights must be installed by a contractor according to
City specifications. All such work shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City Electrician.
(b) If the public utility is to install the street lights, the applicant shall pay all
costs for equipment and installation as calculated by the public utility. This
money shall be paid to the City in advance as part of the security for the
Developer's Agreement.
(c) The applicant shall provide a sum of money to the City to pay all costs for
the energizing and maintenance of all street lights until such time as a final
review and approval is issued by the City Electrician.
1349.12 Utility Flood-Proofing: All utilities and facilities, whether public or private, located in
flood plains shall be flood-proofed to a point one (1') foot above the regulatory
flood elevation. Access points to such utilities and facilities shall be designed and
installed in such a manner to provide for self reflood-proofing upon such access.
1349.13 Final Acceptance Of Improvements: Prior to the final acceptance of all required
improvements by the City, applicant shall furnish, at his own expense, a
Maintenance Bond in a sum equal to ten (10%) percent of the full amount of the
cost of the improvements, guaranteeing the City against faulty workmanship and
materials, and for maintaining the required improvements in good condition,
including, but not limited to, settling, depressions, or sinkholes, for one (1) year
from the date of final acceptance.
ARTICLE 1351
VALIDITY, ENFORCEMENT, VARIANCES, LIABILITY AND FEES
1351.01 Validity: Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of
the Ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof.
1351.02 Enforcement: Any applicant who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(a) First violation - A fine of $200.00, or thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both;
(b) Second violation - A fine of $500.00, or sixty (60) days imprisonment, or
both;
(c) Third and each subsequent violation - A fine of $1,000.00, or ninety (90) days
imprisonment, or both.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Such conviction and
fine shall not preclude other enforcement remedies otherwise authorized. The
Building Inspector shall be responsible for insuring compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
1351.03 Variances:
(a) General: Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with
these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served
to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to
these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further
provided the Planning Com-mission shall not approve variances unless it
shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
(1) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property.
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property.
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, dimensional,
topographical, or geological conditions of the specific property
involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these
regulations are carried out.
(4) The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, Master Plan, or Official Map.
(b) Conditions: In approving variances, the Planning Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
(c) Procedures: A written request for any such variance shall accompany a
subdivider's or developer's application for review of a plat or site plan. The
request for a variance shall state fully the grounds for the application and
all the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(1) A copy of the application for a variance shall accompany the plat or
site plan when sent to all City Bureaus and Departments for
comments as part of the normal review process.
(2) All comments regarding the application shall be brought before the
Planning Commission for evaluation prior to final plat or plan
approval.
(3) Any variance thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the
Commission, setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the
Commission, justified the variance.
1351.04 Municipal Liability: The granting of a permit or approval of a subdivision and/or
land development plan in the identified flood plain shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the municipality or by any
official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use, and
shall create no liability upon the municipality, its officials or employees.
1351.05 Fees: Fees for subdivision and/or site plan review shall be set from time to time by
resolution of City Council and shall be payable at the time of the filing of the
application.
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP
I (we) the owner(s) of , being duly sworn according to law, depose and
say that I (we) am (are) the sole owner(s) of the above property in peaceful possession of the
same and that there are no suits or liens pending affecting the title thereof.
Signature of Owner
Sworn and subscribed to before me this day of , 19 .
SEAL
My Commission expires on .
*********************************************************************
CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP (CORPORATION)
I, of
Name Corporation Name
being duly sworn according to law, and acting in my capaCity as
Title
depose and say that the above named corporation is the true and lawful owner of property known
as ; that the above described
Describe property and address
property is in peaceful possession of said corporation and that there are no suits or liens pending
affecting the title thereof.
Corporation
By:
ATTEST: Corporation Official
*********************************************************************
ENGINEER'S OR SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify that this plan correctly and accurately represents the lands of the owner
and, where applicable, the lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, walkways, and other structures
and improvements shown thereon.
Registered Engineer or Surveyor
SEAL
Registration No.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE A
ANNEXATIONS
1
TABLE A - Annexations.docx
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
22 2/04/1918 Part of Bethlehem Township in Northampton County
59 8/26/1918 Part of Bethlehem Township in Northampton County
70 10/21/1918 Borough of Northampton Heights
71 10/21/1918 Part of Hanover Township in Lehigh County
105 5/26/1919 Part of Lower Saucon Township in Northampton County
895 2/24/1942 Part of Lower Saucon Township in Northampton County
1531 4/01/1953 Four tracts in Hanover Township
1620 10/27/1959 Three tracts in Hanover Township
1679 12/30/1960 Tract in Hanover Township
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
1
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- A -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
50 6/05/1893 Alaska Street from Broadway southward to a point opposite 631 Alaska St.
381 9/24/1923 Allamanda Street from W. Market St. southwestward
35 4/6/1909 Anthracite Street from Third St. to Fourth St.
4402 11/21/2006 Apple Street from Fire Lane to Apple Street, 16th Ward,
near Lehigh University (Note: Apple Street was also realigned)
2437 10/15/1974 Apollo Drive from Johnston Dr. north to property line
2437 10/15/1974 Apollo Drive from Johnston Dr. south to property line
2847 9/07/1982 Apollo Drive from Macada Acres West property line to Macada Acres
East property line
2673 10/16/1979 Apollo Drive from Macada Estates property line to Artemis Circle
2673 10/16/1979 Artemis Circle from Apollo Dr. to cul-de-sac
2673 10/16/1979 Artemis Drive from Apollo Dr. to Macada Rd.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
2
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- B -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2439 10/15/1974 Avenue B from Industrial Dr. to Avenue A
2847 9/07/1982 Barclay Drive from Barnsdale Rd. westwardly
2043 9/05/1967 Barnsdale Road from Johnston Dr. north
2847 9/07/1982 Barnsdale Road from Macada Rd. to east property line
2439 10/15/1974 Barrett Drive from Markham Dr. to South 566 ft.
137 6/19/1911 Bastian Street from Bishopthorpe St. to Alaska St.
2439 10/15/1974 Bathgate Drive from Westgate Dr. to West 455 ft.
340 11/16/1922 Beverly Avenue from Richmond Ave. to W. North St.
2673 10/16/1979 Blake Street from Henderson St. to Norman St.
98 2/1/1904 Boyce Street from Cress St. to Summit St.
2439 10/15/1974 Brandon Road from Ivanhoe Rd. to Greenleaf St.
2439 10/15/1974 Briarwood Place from Bridle Path Rd. to South 325 ft.
97 2/01/1904 Brighton Street from Cherokee St. to western boundary
80 8/24/1914 Broad Street from Maple St. eastwardly 1,271 ft.
40 6/27/1910 Broad Street from Main St. to Broad St. bridge
142 1/01/1912 Brodhead Avenue from Fourth St. to Packer Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
3
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
34 7/15/1901 Brodhead Avenue from Packer Ave. to Eighth St.
1720 10/17/1960 Brown Street from North Blvd. to Pyatt St
1723 10/21/1960 Brown Street from North Blvd. to Pyatt St.
1780 12/18/62 Bryan Street (portion) from Walnut to Broad St.
1805 3/05/1963 Buchanan Street from E. Third St. to Evans St.
175 9/13/1915 Buchanan Street from Third St. to Columbia St.
842 10/15/1940 Burnside Street from Atwood St. to Memorial Ave.
2439 10/15/1974 Burtis Road from Pine Top Trail to South 380 ft.
1583 12/23/1958 Butztown Road from Linden St. to Easton Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
4
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- C -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2439 10/15/1974 Avenue C from City Line Rd. to North 943 ft.
2673 10/16/1979 Avenue C from Schoenersville Rd. westwardly 1,205 ft.
2439 10/15/1974 Calypso Avenue from Mt. Airy to Craig
2673 10/16/1979 Camelot Drive from Pine Top Trail to Johnston Dr.
446 10/14/1924 Carter Street from Spring St. to Filbert St.
1344 4/12/1955 Catasauqua Rd. from Schoenersville Rd. to Pennsylvania Ave.
421 5/05/1924 Center Street from Washington Ave. northward to City line
485 8/10/1925 Central Boulevard from Market St. southwestward to City line
2043 9/05/1967 Chester Road from City line to East 2,008.95 ft.
2439 10/15/1974 Chester Road from City line to East 1,393 ft.
2847 9/07/1982 Chester Road from East Blvd. to Freedom Estates east property line
790 10/25/1938 Chiles Street from Raspberry St. to Hausman St.
183 5/01/1916 Christian Street from Itaska St. to Sioux St.
2439 10/15/1974 City Line Place from City Line Rd. to West 545 ft.
1232 3/17/1953 Columbia Street in 3rd Ward
2673 10/16/1979 Country Lane from Country Lane dead end to cul-de-sac
2043 9/05/1967 Country Lane from Thompson Ave. to North 425.15 ft.
99 2/15/1904 Cress Street from Montclair Ave. to Carlton Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
5
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1942 11/16/1965 City Line Road from Airport Rd. (Allentown - Schoenersville) to
Bethlehem – Schoenersville Rd.
1972 3/15/1966 Clifton Avenue from Kelchner Rd.
2439 10/15/1974 Clifton Avenue from Kelchner Rd. to Kelchner Rd.
1350 5/10/1955 Club Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Pennsylvania Ave.
4402 11/21/2006 College Drive, from a point eighty-five (85') east of the
west boundary line of the City eastwardly to west side of
William Street, in the 16th Ward (near Lehigh University)
2016-27 9/20/206 Commerce Center Boulevard: Hellertown Road/SR 412 eastwardly to a
point of lands owned by Majestic Bethlehem Commerce Center
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
6
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- D -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2043 9/05/1967 Dalehurst Road from Stanford Rd. to Ralston Rd.
109 7/24/1905 Daly Avenue from Third and Harrison Sts. eastwardly 1,224 ft.
179 1/03/1920 Dellwood Street from Elm St. and Broad St. northeastwardly to Goepp St.
2673 10/16/1979 Devonshire Drive from Glendon Rd. to Camelot Dr.
987 9/09/1947 Dover Lane from Fritz Dr. to Flower Dr.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
7
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- E -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2516 4/20/1976 East Boulevard from Butztown Rd. northwardl .31 mile to Johnston Dr.
2439 10/15/1974 East Boulevard from Johnston Dr. to North and South 836 ft.
1443 10/30/1956 East Boulevard from Lansdale Ave. to Butztown Rd.
2847 9/07/1982 East Boulevard from Linden St. to Freedom Estates south property line
2673 10/16/1979 East Boulevard from Sherwood East property line to Johnston Dr.
2439 10/15/1974 Easthill Drive from East Hills Section No. 7 toWest 1,412 ft.
1496 9/17/1957 Easton Avenue from Cleveland St. to Butztown Rd.
850 11/19/1940 Edge Street from Union Blvd. to Spruce St.
428 6/16/1924 Eighth Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Lyons St.
479 6/15/1925 Eighth Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Schoenersville Rd.
736 5/11/1936 Eleventh Avenue from Spring St. to W. Lehigh St.
428 6/16/1924 Eleventh Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Genoa St.
1756 9/21/1962 Elizabeth Avenue from Main St. to Mauch Chunk Rd.
92 6/14/1915 Elm Street from Laurel St. to Turner St.
60 5/21/1900 Elm Street from Goepp St. to Fairview St.
2439 10/15/1974 Elmhurst Avenue from Madison Ave. to Concord Ave.
2016-27 9/20/2016 Emery Street: E. Fourth Street northwardly to a cul-de-sac adjacent to the
Norfolk Southern rail lines
60 5/21/1900 Ettwein Street from Elm St. to Wood St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
8
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
60 5/21/1900 Ettwein Street from Linden St. to Pulaski St.
30 12/20/1886 Ettwein Street from New St. eastward to Elm St.
- 7/16/1894 Evans Street from Harrison St. to Third St.
100 6/06/1904 Evans Street from Fillmore St. eastward to Pierce St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
9
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- F -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
60 5/21/1900 Fairview Street from Elm St. to Stirling St.
70 4/27/1914 Fairview Street from New St. to Wood St.
107 8/14/1916 Fairview Street from Wood St. to Stirling St.
2016-27 9/20/2016 Feather Way: Gilchrist Drive southwardly to a temporary cul-de-sac
475 6/08/1925 Fifteenth Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Gary St.
50 8/28/1911 Fifth Avenue from W. Broad St. to W. Union Blvd.
2439 10/15/1974 Fifth Street, East from Duncan St. to West 156 ft.
- 2/05/1894 Fiot Avenue from Broadway to Wyandotte St.
4020 7/18/2000 First Street, East from Webster Street eastwardly to temporary
cul-de sac in the vicinity of Hayes Street
987 9/09/1947 Flower Drive from Marvine St. to Dover La.
2439 10/15/1974 Forrest Avenue from Madison Ave. to Concord Ave.
4020 7/18/2000 Founders Way from East First Street southwardly to East Third Street
379 9/24/1923 Fourteenth Avenue from W. Union Blvd. 633 ft.
northward to Superior Metal Co.
- 11/19/1894 Fourth Street from Hill St. east to borough line
26 9/17/1907 Fourth Street from Anthracite St. westward to William St.
73 8/04/1915 Fourth Street from Hill St. to borough line
2439 10/15/1974 Fox Drive from Biery's Bridge Rd. to South 440 ft.
1742 6/05/1962 Fox Drive from Pine Top Trail to Biery's Bridge Rd.
987 9/09/1947 Fritz Drive from Pembroke Rd. to Marvine St.
- 7/05/1894 Front Street from Brodhead Ave. eastward 1,209 ft.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
10
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- G -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2439 10/15/1974 Gail Lane from Pine Top Trail to North 445 ft.
179 1/03/1920 Garrison Street from Elm St. to Dellwood St.
179 1/03/1920 Garrison Street from Hawthorne Rd. eastward to Woodruff St.
2847 9/07/1982 Garrett Circle from Garrett Rd. to cul-de-sac
2847 9/07/1982 Garrett Road from East Blvd. to Thompson Ave.
428 6/16/1924 Gary Street from Twelfth Ave. to Sixteenth Ave.
1461 4/23/1957 George Ave. extension
2439 10/15/1974 Geraldine Avenue from Jill St. to East 784 ft.
1058 10/11/1949 Gernet Street (portion) from western terminus to Stehr St.
2016-27 9/20/2016 Gilchrist Drive: Commerce Center Boulevard southwardly and
eastwardly to a cul-de-sac
2847 9/07/1982 Glendon Road from Johnston Dr. to Apollo Dr.
2673 10/16/1979 Glendon Road from Pine Top Trail to Johnston Dr.
179 1/03/1920 Goepp Circle from Goepp St. at Dellwood St.
eastward to Goepp St. at Hawthorne Rd.
179 1/03/1920 Goepp Street from Elm St. eastward to Dellwood St.
179 1/03/1920 Goepp Street from Hawthorne Rd. eastward to Woodruff St.
60 5/21/1900 Goepp Street from Linden St. to Wood St.
2043 9/05/1967 Green Meadow Circle from north of Green Meadow Dr. North 213.72 ft.
2439 10/15/1974 Greenleaf Street from Ivanhoe Rd. to 335 ft.
2439 10/15/1974 Greenwood Avenue from Madison Ave. to Concord Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
11
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- H -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
14 1/21/1915 Hall Street from Mechanic St. to Evans St.
1726 12/12/1961 Hansam Court from Langhorne Ave. to Woodstock Dr.
2016-27 9/20/2016 Harvard Avenue: Cortez Street to Gilchrist Drive
2516 4/20/1976 Hastings Road from East Blvd. eastwardly .04 mile to common property
line between the City and O. Y. Zawarski
2673 10/16/1979 Hastings Road from Johnston Dr. to East Blvd.
790 10/25/1938 Hausman Street from Stratford St. to Gates St.
179 1/03/1920 Hawthorne Road from Wood St. and Broad St. to Goepp St.
140 9/5/1911 Hayes Street from Center St. to Ridge St.
1950 12/21/65 Hayes Street from E. Third St. to E. Fourth St.
2043 9/05/1967 Hayes Street from Third St. to Fourth St.
2439 10/15/1974 Hazelwood Lane from Kingsley Dr. to North 606 ft.
1566 8/12/1956 Heckewelder Place from Market St. to Church St.
2673 10/16/1979 Helms Place from Glendon Rd. westwardly to property line 160 ft.
42 9/12/1910 Henry Street from Leibert St. to Saint Claire St.
736 5/11/1936 Herman Street from Martin's Lane to Lehigh Ave.
- 2/05/1894 Hess Street from Sheets St. to Summit St.
136 12/06/1909 Hill ST from Fourth St. to Philadelphia & Reading Co.'s right-of-way
1058 10/11/1949 Hillmond Street (portion) from Madison Ave. and Stehr St.
2043 9/05/1967 Holland Avenue from County La. to East 312.30 ft.
2847 9/07/1982 Holland Avenue from Garrett Rd. to Town and Country property line
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
12
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- I -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1546 5/19/1958 Illick's Mill RD from Schrader & Segfried, Inc. land to Monocacy Creek
1419 7/10/1956 Industrial Drive from Allentown-Schoenersville Rd. to Bethlehem-
Schoenersville Rd.
2043 9/05/1967 Irene Street from Livingston St. to West 130.15 ft.
52 9/05/1893 Itaska Street from Wyandotte St. to 130 ft. west of Fiot Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
13
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- J -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1461 4/23/1957 Jefferson St. extension
1126 6/12/1951 Jennings Street from Easton Ave. to Nazareth Pike
2439 10/15/1974 Johnston Drive from Barrymore La. to Camelot Dr.
2673 10/16/1979 Johnston Drive from Camelot Dr. to North Center Farms property line
2043 9/05/1967 Johnston Drive from Center St. to East of Mercury St.
1934 9/21/1965 Johnston Drive from Linden St. to East Hills Section 7
2439 10/15/1974 Johnston Drive from Linden St. to John Glenn property
2847 9/07/1982 Johnston Drive from Powder Mill Estates west property line to Powder
Mill Estates east property line
2043 9/05/1967 Johnston Drive from west of Shakespeare Rd. to West 725.48 ft.
175 9/13/1915 Julian Street from Third to Columbia St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
14
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- K -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1345 4/12/1955 Kelchner Road from Eaton Ave. and Clifton Ave.
2439 10/15/1974 Kensington Road from Hazelwood La. to West 704 ft.
2043 9/5/1967 Kimberly Road from Dalehurst Rd. to North 100 ft.
2439 10/15/1974 Kingsley Drive from east property line to West 916 ft.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
15
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- L -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
494 11/02/1925 Langhorne Avenue from Monocacy Creek to William Penn Highway
2439 10/15/1974 Lansdale Avenue from Lynnhurst Dr. to East 135 ft.
- 2/05/1894 Laufer Street from Hayes St. to Buchanan St.
31 7/11/1887 Laurel Street from New St. to Mauch Chunk Rd.
42 9/12/1910 Leibert Street from Sixth Ave. to Seventh Ave.
71 4/27/1914 Locust Street from Linden St. to Maple St.
92 6/14/1915 Locust Street from Maple St. to Wood St.
1780 12/18/1962 Logan Street (portion) from Walnut St. to Broad St.
356 4/02/1923 Long Street from Elizabeth Ave. to Laurel St.
428 6/16/1924 Lyons Street from Eighth Ave. to Tenth Ave.
535 6/08/1926 Lynn Avenue from Fourth St. to Sixth St.
2016-27 9/20/2016 Lynn Avenue from E. Fourth Street to Spillman Drive
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
16
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- M -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
836 9/10/1940 Madison Avenue from Atwood Ave. to Macada Rd.
936 6/05/1945 Madison Avenue from Atwood Ave. to Macada Rd.
71 4/27/1914 Maple Street from Laurel St. to Turner St.
2847 9/07/1982 Markham Drive from East Blvd. to east property line
2439 10/15/1974 Markham Drive from Easthill Dr. to West 900 ft.
2439 10/15/1974 Mars Court from Apollo Dr. to East 676 ft.
42 9/12/1910 Martin's Lane from Sixth Ave. to Seventh Ave.
736 5/11/1936 Martin's Lane from Tenth Ave. to Eleventh Ave.
1873 8/18/1964 Mauch Chunk Road from W. Goepp St. to Schoenersville Rd.
2043 9/05/1967 Meadow Circle from Green Meadow Dr. to West 233.97 ft.
51 7/03/1893 Mechanic Street from Hill St. to borough line
477 6/08/1925 Mercer Street from North to Garrison St.
2439 10/15/1974 Mercury Drive from Apollo Dr. to Johnston Dr.
42 9/12/1910 Miller Avenue from Leibert St. to Saint Claire St.
2043 9/05/1967 Missouri Avenue from Tremont St. to South 405.23 ft.
79 9/02/1901 Montclair Avenue from Broadway to Summit St.
1453 12/28/1956 Morgan Street from Babcock St. to Flora St.
54 2/05/1894 Morton Street from a point about 170 ft. east of Buchanan St. to State St.
1547 5/19/1958 Mountain Drive in 5th Ward
1941 11/16/1965 Mountain Drive and portions of unnamed streets intersecting same
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
17
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- N -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
978 4/29/1947 New Street from Hillmond St. and Washington Ave.
50 8/28/1911 Ninth Avenue from Broad St. to Union Blvd.
50 8/28/1911 Ninth Avenue from Prospect Ave. to Lehigh St.
428 6/16/1924 Ninth Avenue from Union Blvd. to Lyons St.
1508 11/29/1957 North Boulevard to Edge St.
2673 10/16/1979 North Boulevard to Edgewood Ave. to east property line of Lincoln Park
2032 5/23/1967 North Boulevard from West Blvd. to Edgewood Ave.
2043 9/05/1967 North Boulevard from West Blvd. to Edgewood Ave.
179 1/03/1945 North Circle from Dellwood St. to Hawthorne Rd.
2439 10/15/1974 North Pine Top Circle from dead end to East 329 ft.
179 1/03/1926 North Street from Elm St. to Dellwood St.
50 8/28/1911 North Street from Fifth Ave. to Eighth Ave.
49 8/28/1911 North Street from Fourth Ave. to Seventh Ave.
179 1/03/1920 North Street from Hawthorne Rd. to Woodruff St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
18
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- O -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
63 2/05/1900 Old York Road (portion) in vicinity of Widman's Brewery
325 8/21/1922 Old York Road from Main St. to Rubel St.
2673 10/16/1979 Oxford Drive from Glendon Rd. to Camelot Dr.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
19
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- P -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
393 12/03/1923 Packer Avenue from Carlton Ave. to Wyandotte St.
179 1/03/1920 Park Place from Dellwood St. to Hawthorne Rd.
153 5/05/1913 Parkhill Street from Packer Ave. to Thomas St.
1568 8/26/1958 Parkhill Street from Seventh St. to Sampson St.
428 6/16/1924 Parkway Avenue from Sixteenth Ave. to Eaton Ave.
2043 9/05/1967 Patterson Drive from Chester Rd. to South 258.64 ft.
1351 5/10/1955 Pennsylvania Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Club Ave.
101 6/27/1904 Pennsylvania Railroad Company
1453 12/28/1956 Peters Street from Bayard St. to Jill St.
1609 7/14/1959 Pine Top Drive extending eastward 1.342 ft. from Pine Top Trail
2464 4/01/1975 Pine Top Trail from Pine Top Dr. westwardly .37 mile
to Woodbridge Circle
4020 7/18/2000 Polk Street from East First Street southwardly to East Third Street
2847 9/07/1982 Powder Mill Circle from Johnston Dr. to cul-de-sac
2847 9/07/1982 Powder Mill Road from Johnston Dr. to east property line
1318 9/28/1954 Primrose St. from Eaton Ave. to Richard Ave.
61 12/03/1900 Pulaski Street from North St. to Ettwein St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
20
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- R -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2043 9/05/1967 Ralston Road from Stanford Rd. to North 325.03 ft.
2673 10/16/1979 Redfern Lane from Camelot property line to Brentwood subdivision
2439 10/15/1974 Redfern Lane from Johnston Dr. to East 1,037 ft.
2517 4/20/1976 Redfern Lane from Johnston Dr. to East .43 mile to Pine Top Dr.
182 4/17/1916 Ridge Street from Sixth St. to Eighth St.
420 4/14/1924 Ritter Street from Keystone Ave. to Grandview Blvd.
2439 10/15/1974 Rockhill Circle from Biery's Bridge Rd. to North 380 ft.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
21
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- S -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
42 9/12/1910 Saint Claire Street from Sixth Ave. to Seventh Ave.
1056 10/07/1949 Sanders Street extending 68 ft. east from Stehr St.
2847 9/07/1982 Santee Drive from Santee Rd. to cul-de-sac
1563 7/29/1958 Schoenersville Rd. from Eighth Ave. to Lehigh Valley Thruway
284 10/17/1921 Second Avenue from Prospect Ave. to Spring St.
365 5/28/1923 Second Avenue from Prospect Ave. to Spring St.
1233 3/17/1953 Second Street from New St. to Adams St.
4020 7/18/2000 Second Street, East from Polk Street eastwardly to a cul-de-sac in
the vicinity of State Street
4402 11/21/2006 Seidersville Road, Drive A, from College Drive to existing Seidersville
Road, in the 16th Ward (near Lehigh University)
4402 11/21/2006 Seidersville Road, Drive B, from College Drive to existing Seidersville
Road, in the 16th Ward (near Lehigh University)
4402 11/21/2006 Seidersville Road, Drive C, from College Drive to existing
Seidersville Road, in the 16th Ward (near Lehigh University)
42 9/12/1910 Seventh Avenue from Spring St. to Lehigh St.
50 8/28/1911 Seventh Avenue from Spring St. to Prospect Ave.
2043 9/05/1967 Shakespeare Road from Chester Rd. to South 190.04 ft.
56 2/05/1894 Sheets Street from Wyandotte St. to Carlton Ave.
2673 10/16/1979 Sheridan Circle from Glendon Rd. to cul-de-sac
849 11/05/1940 Shimersville Road from Iron Hill to bridge across Saucon Creek
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
22
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2439 10/15/74 Siegfried Street from Stanhope St. to South 154 ft.
428 6/16/1924 Sixteenth Avenue from W. Union Blvd. to Gary St.
43 9/12/1910 Sixth Avenue from Broad St. to Prospect Ave.
42 9/10/1910 Sixth Avenue from Spring St. to Lehigh St.
25 1894 Sixth Street from Hayes St. to Buchanan St.
2016-27 9/20/2016 Spillman Drive: Emery Street westwardly to a cul-de-sac and Emery
Street eastwardly to a cul-de-sac
103 3/27/1916 Spruce Street from Monocacy St. to right-of-way of Lehigh and New
England Railroad Co.
2043 9/05/1967 Stanford Road from Dalehurst Rd. to Ralston Rd.
879 10/28/1941 Stehr Street from Greenwich St. to Hillmond St.
1058 10/11/1949 Stehr Street (portion) from Hillmond St. to Gernet St.
1461 4/23/1957 Stehr Street extension
1879 11/10/1964 Sterling Street from Turner St. to Hickory St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
23
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- T -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
50 8/28/1911 Tenth Avenue from Broad St. to Prospect Ave.
50 8/28/1911 Tenth Avenue from Broad St. to Union Blvd.
428 6/16/24 Tenth Avenue from Union Blvd. to Lyons St.
428 6/16/1924 Thirteenth Avenue from Union Blvd. to Gary St.
2847 9/07/1982 Thompson Avenue from East Blvd. to Town and Country property line
2043 9/05/1967 Thompson Avenue from Linden St. to East 656.01 ft.
384 10/01/1923 Thorpe Street from Bishopthorpe St. and Christian St., from
Sioux St. to Itaska St.
2043 9/05/1967 Town Lane from Thompson Ave. to South 135.0 ft.
53 10/02/1893 Trone St. from Third St. to right-of-way line of Pennsylvania Railroad Co.
428 6/16/1924 Twelfth Avenue from Union Blvd. to Gary St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
24
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- U -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
179 1/03/1920 Union Boulevard from Dellwood St. to Hawthorne Rd.
179 1/03/1920 Union Boulevard from Elm St. to Dellwood St.
61 12/03/1900 Union Boulevard from Linden St. to Pulaski St.
828 7/16/1940 Union Station Plaza from Second St. to Brodhead Ave.
485 8/10/1925 Unnamed alley along eastern property line of C.R.R. of N.J. round house
34 1/04/1892 Unnamed street (portion) through Moravian Seminary
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
25
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- W -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2847 9/07/1982 Wafford Lane from Barnsdale Rd. to east property line
2439 10/15/1974 Walker Place from Bridle Path Rd. to South 256 ft.
29 6/07/1886 Wall Street to eastern limits of Borough
1947 11/23/1965 Waiters Street from Jennings St. to Carlisle St.
1420 7/10/1956 Walton Street from Eighth Ave. to Eleventh Ave.
789 10/25/1938 Walton Street from Ninth Ave. to Tenth Ave.
736 5/11/1936 Walton Street from Tenth Ave. to Eleventh Ave.
1567 8/26/1958 Washington Avenue from Eighth Ave. to Center St.
979 4/29/1947 Washington Avenue from New St. to Main St.
95 9/13/1915 Wesley Street from Pine St. to High St.
2043 9/05/1967 West Boulevard from Johnston Dr. to South 789.44 ft.
1465 4/30/1957 West Boulevard from Lansdale Ave. to Butztown Rd.
2439 10/15/1974 West Boulevard from North Blvd. to Line St.
1752 9/04/1962 West Boulevard from South Blvd. to Liberty Park
2439 10/15/1974 Westbury Drive from Lynnhurst Dr. to West 430 ft.
179 1/03/1920 Weston Place from Goepp's Circle to Pembroke Rd.
139 10/07/1919 Wood Street from Broad St. to Market St.
332 9/19/1922 Wood Street from Broad St. to North St.
107 8/14/1916 Wood Street from Fairview St. to Turner St.
60 5/21/1900 Wood Street from Goepp St. to Fairview St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
26
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2439 10/15/1974 Woodbridge Circle from Pine Top Trail to North 270 ft.
- 5/16/1898 Wyandotte Street from Eighth St. to Borough line
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE B
DEDICATION OF STREETS
27
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets.docx
Updated 9.20.2016
- Y -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2673 10/16/1979 Yorkshire Drive from Glendon Rd. to Camelot Dr.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
1
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- A -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1980 5/24/1966 A Avenue (portion) in 13th Ward
1230 3/03/1953 Adams Street (portion) from Columbia St. to Second St.
2052 11/27/1967 Adams Street (portion) from E. Packer Ave. to Morton St. in 3rd Ward
1763 10/30/1962 Allen Street from West Blvd. to Lafayette
1365 6/28/1955 Alley between N. Main St. and Old York Rd.
1413 6/12/1956 Alley between Pembroke Rd. to Woodruff St.
1127 6/26/1951 Anderson Street (portion) from Eaton Ave. to
Homestead Ave.
827 7/16/1940 Anderson Street from Georgia Ave. to Gernet St.
1057 10/11/1949 Anderson Street from Hillmond St. to Gernet St.
1371 8/30/1955 Ann Street from Covington Ave. to East Blvd.
1991 8/16/1966 Ann Street (portion) from Lafayette Ave. to Covington Ave.
2003 10/17/1966 Ann Street (portion) from West Blvd. to Stuber St.
2043 9/05/1967 Anthracite Street from Fourth St. to Kenton St.
2034 6/06/1967 Anthracite Street (portion) from E. Fourth St. to E. Third St.
2023 3/07/1967 Anthracite Street (portion) from Kenton St. to Third St.
1936 9/21/1965 Atlantic Street (portion)
1611 9/01/1959 Atlantic Street at Ninth St.
108 7/24/2005 Atlantic Street from Second St. to Columbia St.
150 9/16/2012 Augusta Street from Second St. northward 372 ft.
2086 3/20/1968 Avalon Street (portion) in 13th Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
2
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- B -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1980 5/24/1966 B Avenue (portion) in 13th Ward
1981 5/24/1966 Babcock Street (portion) from Davis St. to Mary St.
2254 7/20/1971 Babcock Street (portion) from Fleming St. to
Bayard St. in 15th Ward
2487 10/28/1975 Babcock Street (portion) in 15th Ward
831 8/13/1940 Baldwin Street from Beverly St. to Genoa St.
1869 8/04/1964 Bartow Street (City Center area)
1189 7/15/1952 Bayard Street from Lebanon St. to Clermont St.
1599 4/21/1959 Benton Street from Garrison St. to Burton St.
868 7/15/1941 Benton Street from Genoa St. to Gary St.
2043 9/05/1967 Bessemer Street from Fourth St. to Kenton St.
2034 6/06/1967 Bessemer Street (portion) from E. Fourth St. to E. Third St.
2023 3/07/1967 Bessemer Street (portion) from Kenton St. to E. Third St.
623 7/07/1930 Biery's Bridge Road from Center St. to
southeast right-of-way line of Lehigh Railroad Co.
775 5/03/1988 Billiardsville Road from University Avenue
southward to city line
1832 10/29/1963 Birkel Avenue (Lehigh University Campus)
1744 7/24/1962 Birkel Avenue from Ninth St.
3459 1/21/1992 Birkel Avenue to West Eighth St.
1555 7/08/1958 Boyd Street from Easton Ave. to Lewis St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
3
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3820 5/27/1997 Boyd Street (unopened portion) at the southwest corner of
intersection of Stanhope Street with Stefko Boulevard
1966 3/01/1966 Brewery Street (portion) in 3rd Ward
301 12/29/1931 Brighton Street from point 12 ft. west of Anthracite Building to
Wyandotte St.
1674 12/20/1960 Broad Street (portion) from Stefko Blvd. to Marshall St.
2382 8/21/1973 Broad Street, West (portion) in 7th Ward
2005 11/01/1966 Brodhead Avenue (portion) in 2nd Ward
312 4/24/1922 Brodhead Avenue from north right-of-way line of Lehigh Valley
Railroad to Front St.
1868 8/04/1964 Brodhead Avenue from 160 ft. north of north line of W. Ninth
St. south 950 ft. to south end of Brodhead
312 4/24/1922 Brodhead Avenue from Repsher property north of Third St.
northward 318 ft.
823 5/14/1940 Brodhead Avenue from Second St. to Union Station Plaza
4326 6/07/2005 Brodhead Avenue from Summit Street south approx. 275 feet
1878 10/27/1964 Brooks Street from Hanover Place to Junction Place
2386 9/18/1973 Bryan Street (portion) in 15th Ward
2520 7/06/1976 Bryan Street (portion) in 15th Ward
1780 12/18/1962 Bryan Street (portion) from Walnut St. to Broad St.
174 9/13/1915 Buchanan Street from Third St. to Columbia St.
1997 9/20/1966 Burk Street
898 4/14/1942 Burkhardt Street from Silver Rd. to Cherry Lane
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
4
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
841 10/15/1940 Burnside Street from Center St. to High St.
2056 12/12/1967 Buss Alley (portion) in 2nd Ward
1866 6/16/1964 Butler St. from E. Morton St. to E. Packer Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
5
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- C -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1980 5/24/1966 C Avenue (all) in 13th Ward
120 8/11/1919 Calypso Avenue from Thirteenth Ave. to Eleventh Ave.
2043 9/05/1967 Carbon Street from Fourth St. to Kenton
2034 6/06/1967 Carbon Street (portion) from E. Fourth St. to E. Third St.
2023 3/07/1967 Carbon Street (portion) from Kenton St. to E. Third St.
1832 10/29/1963 Carlton Avenue (Lehigh University Campus)
1744 7/24/1962 Carlton Avenue from Tenth St.
938 9/18/1945 Carson Street (portion) from Elm St. to Raspberry St.
1418 7/03/1956 Carter Street (portion) from Lehigh Ave. to Walton St.
1007 5/04/1948 Carter Street (portion) from Lyons St. to Randall St.
3794 12/17/1996 Catasauqua Road (portion) 5,200 sq. ft. area formerly part of the
right-of-way of Catasauqua Road in the vicinity of Motel Drive
1189 7/15/1952 Catherine Street from Gresham St. to Marvine Village
424 5/26/1924 Cayuga Street from Newton Ave. to Pembroke Rd.
1683 1/1719/61 Cedar Street (portion) from Monocacy St. to Mercury St.
1865 6/02/1964 Cedar Street from Main St. to Mercury St.
3145 10/20/1987 Center Street (portion) Northeast Corner of Center Street and Memorial Ave.
714 5/13/1935 Chapel Place from Main St. to line 23 ft. west of Heckewelder St.
1189 7/15/1952 Charles Street from Bayard St. to Davis St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
6
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
862 3/04/1941 Chester Street from Barbara St. to Watkins St.
862 3/04/1941 Chester Street from line of Zinzendorf Realty Corp. subdivision to Barbara St.
862 3/04/1941 Chester Street from Watkins St. to Carlisle St.
881 11/05/1941 City Line Road
1980 5/24/1966 City Line Road (portion) in 13th Ward
881 11/05/1941 City Line Road from Applebutter Rd. to Coke Works Rd.
2986 3/19/1985 Clermont Street (portion)
1858 4/07/1964 Clermont Street from Glenwood St. to Stefko Blvd.
2138 3/18/1969 Clifford Street
2439 10/15/1974 Clifford Street from E. Fairview St. to Laurel St.
1400 3/06/1956 Clifton Ave. (portion) extending 1,856 ft. northward from Delmar Ave.
2383 9/04/1973 Clinton Street (portion)
2383 9/04/1973 Clinton Street (portion) in 15th Ward
2009-15 5/20/2009 Clinton Street (portion) from North Street southwardly to
the rear of 610 Stefko Boulevard
1674 12/20/1960 Clinton Street from Market St. to Broad St.
881 11/05/1941 Coke Works Road from Harvard Ave. to Lower Saucon Church Rd.
905 10/20/1942 Columbia Street (portion) 120.1 ft. eastward from Polk St.
882 11/18/1941 Columbia Street (portion) 232 ft. west from Fillmore St.
2023 3/07/1967 Columbia Street (portion) from Emery St. to Anthracite St.
2056 12/12/1967 Columbia Street (portion) in 2nd Ward
765 7/27/1937 Columbia Street from 344 ft. east of Grace Ave. to Daly Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
7
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
174 9/13/1915 Columbia Street from a point 190 ft. east of
Pierce St. to a point 174 ft. east of Buchanan St.
2043 9/05/1967 Columbia Street from Anthracite St. to Emery St.
858 1/28/1941 Columbia Street from Fillmore St. to Grace Ave.
301 12/29/1921 Conestoga Street from Lehigh St. to Vineyard St.
2212 11/10/1970 Cooper Street (portion) from Genoa St. to Spur Route in 13th Ward
1242 5/19/1953 Cooper Street (portion) from Market St. to Prospect Ave.
2521 7/06/1976 Cooper Street between Gary St. and Rte. 378 in 13th Ward
1130 6/26/1951 Crawford Street (portion) extending 110 ft. eastward from Marvine St.
424 5/26/1924 Crawford Street from Newton Ave. to Marvine St.
812 12/05/1939 Curtis Street from Burton St. to Garrison St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
8
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- D -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1189 7/15/1952 Davis Street from Newton Ave. to Clermont St.
1166 3/25/1952 Delmar Avenue (portion) extending 526 ft. eastward from Kelchner Rd.
1400 3/06/1956 Delmar Avenue (portion) from Kelchner Rd. to Clifton Ave.
2244 4/20/1971 Deschler Street (portion) between Lynn Ave. and
Bethlehem Steel Corporation in 17th Ward
4434 7/03/1907 Deschler Street (portion) from Lynn Avenue westward to dead end.
1049 8/16/1949 Dewberry Avenue (portion) from Madison Ave. to Concord Ave.
2392 12/04/1973 Dewberry Avenue between Main and Center Sts. in 14th Ward
2034 6/06/1967 Diamond Street (portion) from E. Fourth St. to E. Third St.
2043 9/05/1967 Diamond Street from Fourth St. to Kenton St.
2023 3/07/1967 Diamond Street (portion) from Kenton St. to E.Third St.
424 5/26/1924 Douglas Street - alley in Pembroke Village
880 11/05/1941 Douglas Street from Marvine St. to Waiters St.
1129 6/26/1951 Douglas Street (portion) extending 112 ft. eastward from Marvine St.
424 5/26/1924 Douglas Street from Walters St. to Pembroke Rd.
87 3/08/1915 Durham Street from alley east of New St, to alley west of Center St.
2407 12/27/1973 Durham Street between Arcadia and Bryan Sts. in 15th Ward
206 7/19/1920 Durham Street from Center St. to New St.
1669 10/11/1960 Durham Street from Monocacy St. to Geissinger
4084 8/21/2001 Durham Street from Orchard to Monocacy Streets
2015-36 10/20/2015 Durham Street (portion) from Orchard Street to Main Street
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
9
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- E -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1613 9/08/1959 East Street from North Blvd. to Callone Ave.
1979 5/24/1966 Eastburn Street (portion) in 15th Ward
2104 11/06/1968 Eastman Ave. to Kelchner Rd., public pedestrian walkway in 13th Ward
39 12/06/1895 Edge Street from Church St. to Nisky St.
1006 5/04/1948 Edge Street from East Blvd. to E. Market St.
1826 9/17/1963 Edge Street from Lewis St. to Spring Garden St.
659 7/06/1932 Edge Street from North St. to Raspberry St.
821 4/09/1940 Edge Street from Pembroke Rd. to Frankford St.
1924 7/06/1965 Edgewood Avenue (portion) from North Blvd. to Line St.
3459 1/21/1992 Eighth Street, West (portion) to Birkel Ave. to Montclair Avenue
1936 9/21/1965 Eleventh Street, East (portion)
537 7/26/1926 Elizabeth Ave. from Maple St. to Parker St.
39 12/06/1895 Elm Street from Church St. to Nisky St.
2023 3/07/1967 Emery Street from E. Fourth St. to Kenton St.
2043 9/05/1967 Emery Street from Fourth St. to Kenton St.
189 7/15/1952 Erie Street from Morris St. to Clermont St.
1552 6/16/1958 Erwin Street from Gramley St. to Locust St.
3261 4/18/1989 Erwin St., between Otis Place and Sterner St.
1996 9/20/1966 Ettwein Street (portion) from Fernwood St. to Bridge St
2156 8/05/1969 Exeter St. (portion) bounded by 1344, 1348 and 1350 North
Blvd., East Blvd. and Covington Ave. in 14th Ward
2465 4/01/1975 Exeter Street between Edgewood Ave. and an unnamed street or alley
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
10
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- F -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2164 10/22/1969 Felton St (portion) from Spring Garden St. to North Blvd. in 14th Ward
1875 9/15/1964 Fernwood Street to Sterling Street – Unnamed Alley
2164 10/22/1969 Felton St (portion) from Spring Garden St. to North Blvd. in 14th Ward
1875 9/15/1964 Fernwood Street to Sterling Street – Unnamed Alley
105 7/10/1916 Filbert Street from Ninth Ave. to Tenth Ave.
159 7/07/1913 Fillmore Street from Second St. to Columbia St.
882 11/18/1941 Fillmore Street from Third St. to Columbia St.
1505 11/12/1957 Finady Avenue (portion) from Moravian St. and Wyandotte St.
1153 11/20/1951 Fire Lane (portion) in 16th Ward
1189 7/15/1952 Fleming Street from Peters St. to Woodbine St.
1007 5/04/1948 Flora Street (portion) from Luzerne St. to Fleming St. and from Luzerne St. to
Gresham St.
2437 9/17/1974 Flora Street between Rockland St. and Lloyd St. in 15th Ward
1883 12/01/1964 Fourteenth Avenue north of Gary St.
2995 5/28/1985 Fourteenth Avenue (portion)
1007 5/04/1948 Frankford Street (portion) from High St. to Pine St. and from High St. to
Linden St.
2137 3/18/1969 Frankford Street between Linden St. and Clifford St. in 9th Ward
823 5/14/1940 Front Street from Northampton Ave. to Union Station Plaza
868 7/15/1941 Fulmer Street from Genoa St. to Gary St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
11
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- G -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1869 8/04/1964 Gambold Street (City Center area)
1593 3/10/1959 Garrison Street (portion) from Fifteenth Ave. to Sixteenth Ave.
2612 4/18/1978 Garrison Street from Liberty St. to Sixth Ave. in 12th Ward
812 12/05/1939 Garrison Street from Twelfth Ave. to Thirteenth Ave.
2157 8/05/1969 Garrison Street, West (portion) in llth Ward
2321 10/03/1972 Gary Street (portion) between Twelfth and Thirteenth Ayes.
884 12/02/1941 Gates Street from Burton St. to Garrison St.
1669 10/11/1960 Geissinger Street (portion) from Durham St. to Locust St.
3903 9/15/1998 Geissinger Street (portion) from W. Elizabeth Ave. to W. Greenwich St.
1973 3/29/1966 Geissinger Street (portion) in 8th Ward
831 8/13/1940 Genoa Street from Beverly St. to Raymond St.
1189 7/15/1952 George Street from Bayard St. to Davis St.
1057 10/11/1949 Gernet Street (portion) extending 68 ft. east from Stehr St.
1806 3/19/1963 Getz Street (Lehigh University Campus)
775 5/03/1938 Getz Street from Sherman St. to Billiardsville Rd.
1978 5/03/1966 Girard Street (portion) in 15th Ward
2528 9/21/1976 Glenmere Street between Livingston St. and Clermont St. in 15th Ward
2062 12/26/1967 Glenn Street (portion) between Ritter St. and Brookside Dr. in 13th Ward
2076 2/07/1968 Goepp Street from Stefko Blvd. to Marshall St.
1882 11/17/1964 Goundie Street in 6th and 7th Wards
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
12
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1903 2/16/1965 Goundie Street (portion) in 6th and 7th Wards
858 1/28/1941 Grace Avenue from Third St. to Columbia St.
2016-13 5/17/2016 Graham Place (partial) from Vine St. to New St.
1552 6/16/1958 Gramley Boulevard from Laurel St. to Elizabeth Ave.
875 9/16/1941 Grant Street eastward 40 ft. to property line of 402 Grant St.
1806 3/19/1963 Grant Street (Lehigh University Campus)
775 5/03/1938 Grant Street from Sherman St. to Porter St.
4398 10/03/2006 Greenleaf Street from Best Place westward to dead end
862 3/04/1941 Gresham Street from Carlisle St. and Snyder St.
1189 7/15/1952 Gresham Street from Newton Ave. to Clermont St.
1997 9/20/1966 Grube Court
1848 12/28/1963 Guetter Street from W. Laurel to Durham St. and from Durham St. to
W. Locust St.
4040 11/21/2000 Guetter Street and W. North Street intersection
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
13
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- H -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3459 1/21/1992 Halsey Street from Taylor Street to Grant St.
1878 10/27/1964 Hanover Place from W. Lehigh St. to Vineyard St.
2076 2/07/1968 Hargrave St. from Stefko Blvd. to Bryan St.
1936 9/21/1965 Hayes Street (portion)
1189 7/15/1952 Hazel Street from Newton Ave. to Morris St.
312 4/24/1922 Hellertown Road from Wyandotte St. to New St. Bridge
1878 10/27/1964 Henry Street (portion) from W. Lehigh St. to Walton St.
1418 7/03/1956 Herman Street (portion) from Lehigh Ave. to Walton St.
3128 7/21/1987 Herman Street (portion)
1832 10/29/1963 Hess Street (Lehigh University campus)
1269 12/08/1953 Hickory Street (portion) from Nazareth Pike to Cloverleaf St.
841 10/15/1940 High Street from Atwood Ave. to Memorial Ave.
1007 5/04/1948 High St. from E. Fairview St. to E. Laurel St.
218 8/23/1920 High Street from Laurel St. to Elizabeth Ave.
1878 10/27/1964 Hill's Row from Water St. to Lehigh Railroad
1611 9/01/1959 Hillsdale Avenue at Ninth St.
1936 9/21/1965 Hillside Avenue (portion)
1308 7/27/1959 Homer Street (portion) from Larchmont St. to Mercer St.
1643 4/12/1960 Hunter Street (portion) from Easton Ave. to Arlington St.
862 3/04/1941 Hunter Street from first street south of Gresham
St. to Chester St.; and from Nicholas St. to Gresham St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
14
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- I -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2161 8/19/1969 Industrial Drive (portion) from Bethlehem-
Schoenersville Rd. to row of Ramp F. of
Legislative Rt. 1007 in 13th Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
15
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- J -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1806 3/19/1963 Jackson Street (Lehigh University campus)
1556 7/08/1958 Jenkins Street from Crawford St. to Hilton St.
1007 5/04/1948 Jones Street (portion) from Lyons St. to Genoa St.
765 7/27/1937 Julian Street from Columbia St. to Third St.
1878 10/27/1964 Junction Place from W. Lehigh St. to Vineyard St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
16
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- K -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1361 6/14/1955 Keim Street (portion) from Crawford St. to Hilton St.
862 3/04/1941 Keim Street from Nicholas St. to Chester St.
1346 4/12/1955 Kelchner Road (portion) extending 310 ft. northward from Eaton Ave.
1189 7/15/1952 Kelvin Street from Morris St. to Catherine St.
2043 9/05/1967 Kenton Street from Anthracite St. to Emery St.
2023 3/07/1967 Kenton Street from Emery St. to Anthracite St.
898 4/14/1942 Kichline Avenue from Hellertown Rd. to first street east of Burkhardt St.
330 9/19/1922 Kirkland Street from Pennsylvania Ave. to Cambridge Ave.
659 7/06/1932 Kirkland Street from Pennsylvania Ave. to Cambridge Ave.
1878 10/27/1964 Krause Street (portion) from Martin's Lane to Spring St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
17
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- L -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1611 9/01/1959 Lamb Street at Ninth St.
1936 9/21/1965 Lamb Street (portion)
1923 7/06/1965 Langhorne Avenue (portion) from Main St. to Center St.
2308 6/20/1972 Langhorne Avenue between Nazareth Pike and North Blvd.
1007 5/04/1948 Laurel Street (portion) from Linden St. to Pine St.
2209 9/08/1970 Laurel Street (portion) from Linden St. to
lands of Bethlehem School District in 9th Ward
2439 10/15/1974 Laurel Street from Linden St. to Clifford St.
2059 12/19/1967 Laurel Street, East (portion) from Center St. to Long St. in 9th Ward
2138 3/18/1969 Laurel Street, East (portion) east from Clifford St. in 9th Ward
3306 12/05/1989 Laurel Street, West (portion) from Mauch Chunk Road east to Geissinger St. in
8th Ward
3626 7/19/1994 Laurel Street, West (portion) from Geissinger St. to Monocacy St.
1189 7/15/1952 Lebanon Street from Bayard St. to Bethlehem View
2002 10/17/1966 Lehigh Street (portion) in 10th Ward
2467 4/15/1975 Lenox Avenue between W. Locust St. and W. Elizabeth Ave. in 8th Ward
1417 7/03/1956 Leonard Street (portion) from Gresham St. to Fisher St.
1189 7/15/1952 Leonard Street from Lebanon St. to Clermont St.
4440 7/31/1907 Leonard Street from Lebanon St. to Woodbine St.
39 12/06/1895 Linden Street from Church St. to Nisky St.
1189 7/15/1952 Livingston Street from Bethlehem View to Fairview St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
18
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2578 10/18/1977 Lloyd Street (portion) in 15th Ward
87 2/08/1915 Locust Street from alley east of New St. to alley west of Center St.
206 7/19/1920 Locust Street from Center St. to New St.
1552 6/16/1958 Locust Street from Mauch Chunk Rd. to Otis Place
218 8/23/1920 Locust Street from Pine St. to Linden St.
3261 4/18/1989 Locust Street, West, from Monocacy St. westwardly to a dead end
3626 7/19/1994 Locust Street, West, from Monocacy St. to Main St.
1780 12/18/1962 Logan Street (portion) from Walnut St. to Broad St.
2076 2/07/1968 Logan Street from E. Goepp St. to Bryan St.
356 4/02/1973 Long Street from Laurel St. to Elizabeth Ave.
1869 8/04/1964 Long Street, portions of (City Center area)
1007 5/04/1948 Luzerne Street (portion) from Renwick St. to Richard St.
1189 7/15/1952 Luzerne Street from Peters St. to Woodbine St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
19
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- M -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1685 1/31/1961 Mack Street from Lewis St. to Spring Garden St.
2007 12/20/1966 Mack Street (portion) from Lewis St. to Allen St.
2057 12/19/1967 Mack Street (portion) from Spring Garden St. to Exeter St. in 14th Ward
1722 11/14/1961 Madison Avenue from Atwood Ave. to Macada Rd.
2975 3/19/1985 Madison Avenue (portion)
301 12/29/1921 Main Street from Old Bridge eastward to temporary bridge
312 4/24/1922 Main Street south from point 118 ft. south of Lehigh St. to line of
Lehigh Coal and Navigation Co.
532 5/24/1926 Main Street from line of Lehigh Coal and Navigation Co. and line
285.85 ft. south of Lehigh St.
1998 9/20/1966 Main Street (portion) in 6th and 10th Wards
4040 11/21/2000 Main Street and W. North St. intersection
1189 7/15/1952 Malcolm Street from Bayard St. to George St.
39 12/06/1895 Maple Street from Church St. to Nisky St.
1131 6/26/1951 Maple Street (portion) from Locust St. to Beech St.
1780 12/18/1962 Marshall Street (portion) from Market St. to Broad St.
2009-15 5/20/2009 Marshall Street (portion) from North St. to Broad St.
2488 11/25/1975 Marshall Street from E. Union St. to E. Goepp St.
2076 2/07/1968 Marshall Street from Eastburn St. to E. Goepp St.
876 9/30/1941 Marshall Street from Milton St. to Wesley St.
2053 12/05/1967 Martel Street (portion) from W. Packer Ave. to 40 ft. south of Morton
St. in 2nd Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
20
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2193 5/05/1970 Martel Street (portion) from W. Packer Ave. to portion of Martel
Ave. vacated by Ord. 2053 in 2nd Ward
2439 10/15/1974 Martel Street from W. Packer Ave. to north 198 ft.
1878 10/27/1964 Martin's Lane (portion) from Franklin St. to Conestoga St.
424 5/26/1924 Marvine Street - alley in Pembroke Village
1848 12/281963 Masslich Street from W. Locust St. north 150 ft. to dead end
2841 7/20/1982 Masslich Street (portion)
1595 3/31/1959 Meade Street from Stoneman St. to Norfolk St.
2034 6/06/1967 Mechanic Street (portion) from Anthracite St. to Emery St.
2043 9/05/1967 Mechanic Street from Anthracite St. to Emery St.
859 1/28/1941 Mechanic Street from Fillmore St. and West St.
424 5/26/1924 Media Street from Newton Ave. to Pembroke Rd
880 11/05/1941 Media Street from Pembroke Rd. 120 ft. north -.unnamed street
3145 10/20/1987 Memorial Avenue - Northeast area of Memorial Ave. and Center St.
1308 7/27/1954 Mercer Street (portion) extending 286 ft. northward from Hamilton Ave.
3416 4/02/1991 Mercury Street (portion) from Elizabeth Ave. to W. Greenwich St.
823 5/14/1940 Mill Street from Northampton Ave. to Brodhead Ave.
1074 2/28/1950 Millard Street (portion) from Washington Ave. to Hickory St.
1780 12/18/1962 Milton Street (portion) from Clinton St. to point 42 ft. east of Marshall St.
1951 12/21/1965 Monocacy Street (portion) from Elizabeth Ave. to W. Locust St.
2043 9/05/1967 Monocacy Street from Elizabeth Ave. to Locust St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
21
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3626 7/19/1994 Monocacy Street (portion) from West Laurel St.to West Locust St.
765 7/27/1937 Monroe Street from Columbia St. to Third St.
1562 7/22/1958 Monroe Street (portion) from Third St. to Pennsylvania Railroad
1910 5/04/1965 Monroe Street, portion of, from Evans St. to right-of-way of
Reading Company
2043 9/05/1967 Monroe Street from Evans St. to Railroad
1744 7/24/1962 Montclair Avenue from Ninth St.
1832 10/29/1963 Montclair Avenue (Lehigh University campus)
862 3/04/1941 Monterey Street from Chester St. to Marion St. and from
Nicholas St. to Chester St.
862 3/04/1941 Morgan Street from Gresham St. to Fisher St.
1814 6/04/1963 Morgan Street from Gresham St. to Nicholas St.
1189 7/15/1952 Morris Street from Fairmount St. to Gresham St.
1400 3/06/1956 Mt. Airy Avenue (portion) extending 243 ft. northward from W. Market St.
3306 12/05/1989 Mulberry Street from West Laurel to West Frankford St. in 8th Ward
3953 5/19/1999 Mulberry Street from West Fairview St. to West Frankford St.
1744 7/24/1962 Muschlitz Street from Ninth St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
22
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- N -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1128 6/26/1951 New Street (portion) extending 117 ft. eastward from Marvine St.
1917 5/25/1965 New Street, North (portion) in City Center area of 6th Ward
2060 12/26/1967 New Street, South (portion) from E. Packer Ave.
to a point south of Morton St. in 2nd and 3rd Wards
2382 8/21/1973 New Street, North (portion) in 7th Ward
424 5/26/1924 Newton Avenue - alley in Pembroke Village
1057 10/11/1949 Nicholas Street from Barbara St.
1007 5/04/1948 Ninth Avenue (portion) from Lyons St. to W. Union Blvd.
112 3/26/1917 Ninth Avenue from North St. to W. Union Blvd.
2014-32 11/18/1914 Ninth Avenue from Union Blvd. to Genoa Street
1744 7/24/1962 Ninth Street from Brodhead Ave. to Birkel Ave.
1832 10/29/1963 Ninth Street, West (Lehigh University campus)
1917 5/25/1965 Nisky Street (portion) in City Center area of 6th Ward
39 12/06/1895 Nisky Street from Union Cemetery Assn.'s land to Wood St.
1917 5/25/1965 Nitschman Street (portion) in City Center area of 6th Ward
301 12/29/1921 No Man's Road being the extension of Second St.
westward from Brodhead Ave. for Bridge ramp
312 4/24/1922 No Man's Road from Second St. ramp northward
to old Hellertown Rd.
1569 3/31/1959 Norfolk St. from Hillside Ave. to Meade St.
112 3/26/1917 North Street from Eighth Ave. to Ninth Ave.
2009-15 5/20/2009 North Street, East (portion) from Stefko Blvd. to Marshall St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
23
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2365 3/22/1973 North Street, West (portion)
4040 11/21/2000 North Street, West and Main St. and Guetter St. intersections
820 2/13/1940 Northampton Avenue from Second St. northward
417 ft. to Lehigh Valley Railroad Co. tracks
4120 3/05/2002 Northampton Street, portion from West Third Street to
Fahy Bridge Ramp; repealed by Ordinance 4144
4144 9/17/2002 Northampton Street, portion from West Third Street to Fahy Bridge
Ramp (new Ordinance required due to error in property description under
Ordinance 4120)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
24
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- O -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1997 9/20/1966 Ohio Road
2504 1/05/1976 Old Public Road (portion) in 13th Ward (by petition)
2505 1/20/1976 Old Public Road (portion) in 13th Ward (without petition)
3713 12/05/1995 Old River Street (portion) in 10th Ward in vicinity of Fritch
Fuel (Lehigh County)
1935 9/21/1965 Old York Road (portion) from Broad St. Bridge south 139.16 ft.
2270 11/16/1971 Old York Road (portion) from 721 and 723 Main St. to 641
Main St. in 7th and 8th Wards
53 2/05/1900 Old York Road (portion) in vicinity of Widman's Brewery
1882 11/17/1964 Old York Road in 6th and 7th Wards
3832 8/19/1997 Old York Road in 8th Ward south of W. Union Blvd.
2550 1/18/1977 Orchard Street between Edgewood Ave. and lands of
Townhouse Associates in 14th Ward
2098 8/09/1968 Orchard Street (portion) from south side of Locust St. to
north side of Durham St. in 8th Ward
2015-36 10/20/2015 Orchard Street (portion) from Durham Street to West Laurel Street.
840 10/01/1940 Orlando Avenue from Florence Ave. to Glendale Ave.
1992 8/16/1966 Orlando Street (portion) from Florence Ave.
3261 4/18/1989 Otis Place, between W. Locust St. and. W. Elizabeth Ave.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
25
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- P -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1425 8/07/1956 Parker Street (portion) extending 109 ft. westward from Barbara St.
862 3/04/1941 Parker Street from Carlisle St. to Snyder St.
1436 9/25/1956 Paul Avenue (portion) from Cambridge Ave. to Putnam St.
424 5/26/1924 Pembroke Road - alley in Pembroke Village
50 11/21/1898 Pembroke Road from Linden St. northwestward to eastern Borough limits
1007 5/05/1948 Penn Street (portion) from E. Fairview St. to E. Laurel St.
1189 7/15/1952 Peters Street from Luzerne St. to Bethlehem View
1979 5/24/1966 Peters Street (portion) in 15th Ward
2089 5/07/1968 Peters Street (portion) from Major St. to Fairmount St. in 15th Ward
155 5/15/1913 Pierce Street from Second St. to Columbia St.
858 1/28/1941 Pierce Street from Third St. to Columbia St.
831 8/13/1940 Pierpont Street from Genoa to Wilson Ave.
4081 8/14/1901 Plymouth Street from West Second Street to West Third Street
823 5/14/1940 Plymouth Street from Second St. to right-of- way line of Lehigh
Valley Railroad
845 10/22/1940 Polk Street from Columbia St. to Second St.
858 1/28/1941 Polk Street from 18 ft. north of Columbia St. to Second St.
4016 7/05/2000 Polk Street between Columbia St. and East Third St.
128 1/18/1909 Poplar Street from Second St. to Columbia St.
775 5/03/1938 Porter Street from Thomas St. to Taylor St.
39 12/06/1895 Pulaski Street from Church St. to Nisky St.
447 10/14/1924 Pulaski Street from Elizabeth Ave. northward 95 ft.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
26
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
659 7/06/1932 Putnam Street from Paul Ave. south 240 ft.
1435 9/25/1956 Putnam Street (portion) from Baldwin Rd. to Park Ave.
330 9/19/1922 Putnam Street from Paul St. to Kirkland St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
27
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- R -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
424 5/26/1924 Radclyffe Street from Newton Ave. to Pembroke Rd.
880 11/05/1941 Radclyffe Street from Pembroke Rd. northward 120 ft. to unnamed street
1994 9/06/1966 Ralston Road (portion) from Winters Ave. to Schoenersville Rd.
1007 5/04/1948 Randall Street (portion) from Eighth Ave. to Ninth Ave.
1119 5/01/1951 Raspberry Street (portion) from Dellwood St. to Hawthorn Rd.
4366 2/21/2006 Raspberry Street between Dellwood St. to Park Place
4367 2/21/2006 Raspberry Street between Hawthorne Rd. and East Broad St.
331 9/19/1922 Raspberry Street from Sixth Ave. to Way St.
2255 7/20/1971 Raspberry Street, East (portion) in 7th Ward
1922 7/06/1965 Raspberry Street, West (portion) from Terrace Ave. to Conestoga St.
2856 11/16/1982 Raspberry Street, West (portion)
1878 10/27/1964 Rauch Street (portion) from Vineyard St. to Spring St.
2050 11/27/1967 Reed Street between Morton St. and Martel St. in 2nd Ward
1763 10/30/1962 Regina Street from Exeter St. to Allen St.
1552 6/16/1958 Remus Street from Laurel St. to Locust St.
2008 12/20/1966 Rennig Street from E. Packer Ave. to Morton St.
]573 10/21/1958 Rexford Street (portion) from Pyatt St. to Ann St.
1782 12/27/1962 Rexford Street from Lewis St. to Spring Garden St.
1824 9/03/1963 Rexford Street from Spring Garden St. to Exeter St.
2200 8/04/1970 Ripley Street (portion) from E. Fifth St. to Deschler St. in 17th Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
28
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
424 5/26/1924 Rockland Street from Newton Ave. to Douglas St.
1552 6/16/1958 Romulus Street from Laurel St. to Locust St.
369 6/11/1923 Roswell Street from Pierpont St. and Tioga Ave.
1882 11/17/1964 Rubel Street in 6th and 7th Wards
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
29
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- S -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1611 9/01/1959 Sampson Street at Ninth St.
2379 6/05/1973 Santee Road (portion) in 14th Ward
1928 7/20/1965 Santee Road (portion) in school district in 14th Ward
2043 9/05/1967 Santee Road at high school property to 1,217.14 ft.
1751 9/04/1962 Saucon Street from New St. to Chelsea Ave.
2037 7/25/1967 Saucon Street (portion) from Seifert St. to Van Bueren property
2009 12/20/1966 School Street (portion) from Frankford St. to Laurel St.
87 3/08/1915 School Street from Laurel St. to Elizabeth Ave.
1517 12/31/1951 School Street (portion) from Lehigh St. to Steinman St.
1806 3/19/1963 Scott Street (Lehigh University campus)
858 1/28/1941 Second Street from Adams St. to Polk St.
2043 9/05/1967 Second Street from Anthracite St. to Emery St.
1231 3/03/1953 Second Street (portion) from Bethlehem St. to New St.
108 7/24/1905 Second Street from Buchanan St. extended, a distance of 2,215 ft. to
Doster tract
159 7/07/1913 Second Street from a point 40 ft. east of Fillmore St. to the projected
east line of Polk St.
155 5/05/1913 Second Street from projected east line of Pierce St. to a point 40 ft.
east of Fillmore St.
128 1/18/1909 Second Street from Poplar St. to Pierce St.
154 5/15/1913 Second Street, 10 ft. strip between building line and curb line on
north side of Second St. between projected east line of Polk St.
845 10/22/1940 Second Street from Taylor St. to Polk St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
30
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2023 3/07/1967 Second Street, East (portion) from Emery St. to Anthracite St.
1995 9/06/1966 Seidersville Road (portion) in 16th Ward
4401 11/21/2006 Seidersville Road (portion) extending east from College Drive a
distance of approx. 2,047.96 ft.
2608 3/21/1978 Seifert Street (portion) in 14th Ward
4371 2/21/2006 Service Road #2 (easterly side of Rt 378, south of Rt 22, north of
Catasauqua Rd)
875 9/16/1941 Sherman Street from Getz St. to Grant St.
775 5/03/1938 Sherman Street from Grant St. to Taylor St.
1806 3/19/1963 Sherman Street (Lehigh University campus)
1936 9/21/1965 Shields Street (portion)
878 10/21/1941 Shimersville Road between Fourth St. and bridge over Saucon Creek
1812 6/04/1963 Siegfried Street from Geraldine St. to Irene St.
2108 12/03/1968 Siegfried Street (portion) extending northwardly from Stefko Blvd. to
Easton Ave. in 15th Ward
4339 9/20/2005 Silk Mill Street north of West Goepp St. from Geissinger St.
898 4/14/1942 Silvex Road from Hellertown Rd. to first street east of Burkhardt St.
1997 9/20/1966 Sixth Avenue (portion)
2565 5/24/1977 Spring Street between Craig Ave. and property line of Central
Railroad of New Jersey in 13th Ward
2036 7/25/1967 Spruce Street (portion) from Caron St. to Elm St. in 9th Ward
1189 7/15/1952 Stanley Street from Bayard St. to Davis St.
831 8/13/1940 Stanton Street from Euclid Ave. to Wilson Ave. and from Wilson
Ave. to Eaton Ave.
1936 9/21/1965 State Street (portion)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
31
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3781 12/03/1996 Steckel Street (portion) off Wallace St. between High St. and
Jefferson Ave.
1869 8/04/1964 Steinman Street (portion) in City Center area
1876 10/27/1964 Sterling Street between Turner St. and Hickory St.
3261 4/18/1989 Sterner Street, between Erwin St. and W. Elizabeth Ave.
1763 10/30/1962 Stuber Street from Exeter St. to Allen St.
1347 4/12/1955 Sudan Street (portion) extending 280 ft. southward from South St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
32
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- T -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1291 4/13/1954 Taurus Street (portion) extending 120 ft. eastward of Chelsea Ave.
858 1/28/1941 Taylor Street from 18 ft. north of Columbia St.to Second St.
3459 1/21/1992 Taylor Street from Packer Ave. to University Ave.
2014-32 11/18/2014 Tenth Avenue (unopened) from Genoa St. to S.R. 378
1744 7/24/1962 Tenth Street from Broadhead Ave. to Carlton Ave.
1936 9/21/1965 Tenth Street, East (portion)
2043 9/05/1967 Third Street from Anthracite St. to Emery St.
33 7/07/1908 Third Street from Anthracite St. to Hellertown Rd.
108 7/24/2005 Third Street from Columbia St. to Second St.
926 4/18/1944 Third Street from Emery St. to land conveyed by
I.O. Person to Bethlehem Steel Corp.
2023 3/07/1967 Third Street, East (portion) from Emery St. to Diamond St.
2034 6/06/1967 Third Street, East (portion) from Anthracite St. to Diamond St.
1806 3/19/1963 Thomas Street (Lehigh University campus)
775 5/03/1938 Thomas Street from 122.26 ft. west of Sherman St. southwestward to
Billardsville Rd.
2231 12/28/1970 Township Road 623, formerly, (portion) in 13th Ward
903 10/06/1942 Township Road No. 397 - 600 ft. north of Coke Works Rd. eastwardly 1,600 ft.
1251 9/01/1953 Tremont Street (portion) from Woodale Ave. to Jennings St.
1813 6/04/1963 Tremont Street from Woodale Ave. to Missouri Ave.
1979 5/24/1966 Tremont Street (portion) in 15th Ward
2321 10/03/1972 Twelfth Avenue (portion) north of Spur Route in 13th Ward
3641 10/18/1994 Twelfth Avenue from Genoa Street northwardly to Spur Route in the 13th Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
33
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- U -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
927 5/23/1944 Union Boulevard from Dellwood St. to Hawthorne Rd.
2076 2/07/1968 Union Boulevard, East from Stefko Blvd. to Marshall St.
3459 1/21/1992 University Avenue from Taylor Street to Birkel Avenue and West
Eighth Street
25 7/18/1881 Unnamed Alley from Church St. to Lehigh St.
39 12/06/1895 Unnamed Alley from Church St. to Nisky St.
602 4/22/1929 Unnamed Alley from Garrison St. to North St.
160 7/07/1913 Unnamed Alley from Ryan St. to Thomas St.
160 7/07/1913 Unnamed Alley from Taylor St. to projected line of Fillmore St.
977 4/09/1947 Unnamed Alley south of W. Market St. extending
145 ft. west form Allamanda St.
2439 10/15/1974 Unnamed farm land from Huntington St. to Spring Garden St.
2308 6/20/1972 Unnamed farm land extending across lands of C.M.W. Co.
1069 12/30/1949 Unnamed Road and street in Mt. Airy Park
441 9/15/1924 Unnamed Roads - as laid out in 1801 and 1854 through roundhouse
property of Central Railroad Co. of New Jersey
862 3/04/1941 Unnamed Street from Carlisle St. to Snyder St.
862 3/04/41 Unnamed Street from first street south of
Gresham St. to Chester St.
880 11/05/1941 Unnamed Street from Marvine St. to Walters St.
1070 1/31/1950 Unnamed Street from Montrose Ave. to Stehr St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
34
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
880 11/05/1941 Unnamed Street from Pembroke Rd. 150 ft. to unnamed street east of
Washington Ave.
898 4/14/1942 Unnamed Street from Silvex Rd. to Cherry Lane
880 11/05/1941 Unnamed Street from Walters St. 1,010 ft. west-wardly to unnamed
street north of Pembroke Rd.
2466 4/1/1975 Unnamed Street or alley between Spring Garden
St. and Orchard St. in 14th Ward
2579 10/18/1977 Unnamed Street or alley from Spring Garden St. to lands of
Townhouse Associates in 14th Ward
2268 10/26/1971 Unnamed Street, bounded by Bethlehem Suburban Motor Sales, Inc.,
Marcon Enterprises, Inc. and Ford Leasing Development Co. in
13th Ward
1007 5/04/1948 Unnamed Streets adjacent to Broughal Junior High School
1007 5/04/1948 Unnamed Streets adjacent to Lincoln School
1040 5/31/1949 Unnamed Streets bounded by Nazareth Pike Hickory and Willard
Streets and Woodlawn Ave.
2328 11/28/1972 Upton Street (portion) from Hillside Ave. to land of Bethlehem Steel
Corp. and part of Hillside Ave. from E. 9th St. to land of
Bethlehem Steel Corp. in 4th Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
35
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- V -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2051 11/27/1967 Verona Street in 2nd Ward
1878 10/27/1964 Vineyard Street (portion) from W. Lehigh St. to Conestoga St.
2002 10/17/1966 Vineyard Street (portion) in 10th Ward
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
36
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- W -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
876 9/30/1941 Wall Street from Clinton St. to Yeates St.
1209 11/12/1952 Wallace Street (portion) from Linwood St. to Minsi Trail St.
1006 5/04/1948 Walnut Street (portion) from Maple St. to Elm St.
1780 12/18/1962 Walnut Street (portion) from Marshall St. to Jennings St.
2522 7/06/1976 Walnut Street, East between Maple St. and YMCA in 7th Ward
2382 8/21/1973 Walnut Street, West (portion) in 7th Ward
2419 3/19/1974 Walnut Street, West (portion) in 7th Ward
2445 11/18/1974 Walnut Street, West (portion) in 7th Ward
424 5/26/1924 Walters Street - alley in Pembroke Village
880 11/05/1941 Walters Street from Douglas St. to Pembroke St.
424 5/26/1924 Walters Street from Newton Ave. to Douglas St.
2444 11/12/1974 Walton Street between Eighth and Ninth Ayes. In 10th Ward
1438 10/02/1956 Warwick Street (portion) from New St. to Merino St.
2037 7/25/1967 Warwick Street (portion) from Seifert St. to
Dancho property in 14th Ward
424 5/26/1924 Washington Avenue - alley in Pembroke Village
1997 9/20/1966 Water Works Road
1384 10/25/1955 Watson Street from E. Union Blvd. to E. Spruce St.
598 3/05/1929 Watson Street from Goepp St. to Spruce St.
844 10/22/1940 Way Street, a 5 ft. strip on east side of Way St. in rear of 915 Sixth Ave.
858 1/28/1941 Webster Street from 18 ft. north of Columbia St. to Second St.
4037 11/08/2000 Weisenberger Street (portion) from Evans to Third St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
37
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1615 9/15/1959 Wesley Street (portion) east of Maple St.
1878 10/27/1964 West Place from W. Lehigh St. to Vineyard St.
1878 10/27/1964 West Street (portion) from Martin's Lane to Spring St.
33 7/07/1908 William Street from Hellertown Rd. to Third St. and from
Hellertown Rd. to Steel Ave.
1745 7/24/1962 Woodbine Street between Stanhope St. and Irene St.
1189 7/15/1952 Woodbine Street from Luzerne St. to Bethlehem View
301 12/29/1921 Wyandotte Street from right-of-way line of Lehigh Valley Railroad
to south bank of Lehigh River
312 4/24/1922 Wyandotte Street from right-of-way of Philadelphia and Reading
Railway to right-of-way of Lehigh Valley Railroad
462 2/09/1925 Wyandotte Street from right-of-way of Lehigh Valley Railroad
northward about 75 ft.
301 12/29/1921 Wyandotte Street from south line of right-of-way of Philadelphia and
Reading Railway Co. southward 450 ft.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE C
VACATING OF STREETS
38
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets.docx
Updated 7.25.2016
- Y -
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
1780 12/18/1962 Yeates Street (portion) from Market St. to Broad St.
1
TABLE D - Vacating Streets by NonAcceptance.DOC
Updated 1.13.2016
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE D
VACATING OF STREETS BY NON-ACCEPTANCE
Ordinance Date Passed
Number in Council Description
2703 6/17/1980 Non-acceptance of portions of Sullivan Street
from State St. to Joseph St. and Joseph Street
from Sullivan St. to Seventh St.
2825 2/16/1982 Non-acceptance of portions of Florence Avenue
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE E
STREETS - MISCELLANEOUS ACTION
1
TABLE E - Streets Miscellaneous Action.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2377 6/06/1973 Major Street and Stefko Boulevard - appropriating tract for widening
(Erie Rental)
2378 6/06/1973 Major Street and Stefko Boulevard - appropriating tract for widening
(Stephen Gaidish)
2439 10/16/1975 Establishing and opening for public use and travel, portions of various
streets throughout the City which were paved during the years 1968-1974
2464 4/01/1975 Ordaining and establishing the grades, width and alignment of fifty
(50') foot wide Public Street to be known as Pine Top Trail
2516 4/21/1976 Ordaining and establishing the grades of East Boulevard and Hastings Rd
2517 4/21/1976 Ordaining and establishing the grades and alignment of Redfern Lane
2673 10/16/1979 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portions of various
streets throughout the City which were paved during the years 1978-1979
2847 9/07/1982 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portions of various
streets throughout the City which were paved during the years 1979-1982
3007 9/03/1985 Condemnation of portion of Altonah Road and adding the portion to the
City Streets Plan
3144 10/06/1987 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portion of various
streets throughout the City which were paved during the years 1983-1987
3264 5/02/1989 Hill-to-Hill Bridge – Approving Right-of-Ways and adopting Official
City Plan for Bridge
3834 9/02/1997 Dedication and realignment of Old York Road
3836 9/16/1997 Widening of Plymouth Street
3845 11/11/1997 Amend. Ord. 3836 - Plymouth Street Widening - Legal Description
3886 6/02/1998 Eminent Domain Proceedings – Schoenersville Road - Everson
Electric Company
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE E
STREETS - MISCELLANEOUS ACTION
2
TABLE E - Streets Miscellaneous Action.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3887 6/02/1998 Eminent Domain Proceedings – Schoenersville Road - Fuller Company
3964 9/21/1999 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portion of various
streets throughout the City which were paved during the years 1988-1999
4035 10/03/2000 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portion of various
streets throughout the City which were paved
4202 7/15/2003 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portion of various streets
throughout the City which were paved
4402 11/21/2006 Apple Street – Realigning and Renaming Apple Street between William
Street and Fire Lane to College Drive
2008-23 9/02/2008 Establishing on General Plan of Streets and Map portion of various
streets throughout the City which were paved
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE F
SANITARY SEWER EXTENSIONS AND INSTALLATION
1
TABLE F - Sanitary Sewer Extensions.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed
Number in Council Description
2435 8/20/1974 West side of Schoenersville Road
2461 3/04/1975 Jennings St. from Union Blvd. northwardly to E. Goepp St. and
Main St. from Illick's Mill Rd. and northwardly to Macada Rd.
2509 2/17/1976 Construction and installation of sanitary sewer at Thompson Ave.,
Country Land and Holland Ave.
2519 5/19/1976 Amending Ordinance No. 2509 - increasing line on Holland Ave.
2795 11/10/1981 Auburn St. from Dearborn to Traveler Aves.;
Norwood St. from Dearborn to Traveler Aves.
2878 3/01/1983 Belmont St. from Linford St. to Edgewood Ave.
- sanitary sewer extension
3067 5/06/1986 Santee Drive from Santee Road to cul-de-sac (approximately 460')
3548 4/20/1993 Linden St. from existing manhole in front of
2730 Linden St. southwardly to 2612 Linden St.
3612 4/05/1994 Linden St. from Johnston Drive northwardly, 50 ft. north of the
south property line of 3235 Linden St.
3620 6/21/1994 Linden St. from Johnston Drive southwardly 145 feet south from
the center line of Johnston Drive.
4390 8/15/2006 Acquiring Easements – Sanitary Sewer Replacements –
Homestead Avenue, Highland Avenue, Eaton Avenue
TABLE G - Water Main Extensions.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE G
WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2469 5/27/1975 Seidersville Road from existing terminus westwardly 80 lineal feet
2548 1/03/1977 Creek Road - Water main
2796 11/10/1981 Norwood St. from Millside Dr. to Traveler Ave.;
Traveler Ave. from Norwood St. to Auburn St.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE H
BOND ISSUES
1
TABLE H - Bond Issues.docx
Updated 5.06.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2438 10/01/1974 Increasing debt of City by $2,000,000
2443 11/04/1974 $4,380,000 Bond Issue
2480 8/05/1975 $4,950,000 Bond Issue for Wastewater Treatment Plant expansion
2503 12/22/1975 $4.3 Million issue for construction and financing of Walnut Street Garage
2514 4/13/1976 $2,050,000 Bond Issue
2515 4/13/1976 $5,065,000 Bond Issue
2530 9/22/1976 Refinancing Parking Authority bond issue ($4,345,000 and $2,835,000)
2562 5/04/1977 $286,000 Bond Issue
2563 5/04/1977 $735,000 Bond Issue
2577 10/11/1977 $4,385,000 Bond Issue
2618 5/30/1978 $900,000 Bond Issue
2709 7/01/1980 $600,000 Urban Rehabilitation Revenue Notes with limited guaranty
2780 7/07/1981 $2,130,000 General Obligation Bond Issue for Non-Utility projects
2887 5/03/1983 $2,000,000 General Obligation Bond Issue
2907 11/15/1983 $400,000 - Reestablishing Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program
2983 3/19/1985 1985 General Obligation Bond Issue - $4,230,000
3074 6/17/1986 1986 General Obligation Bond Issue - $12,225,000
3124 6/16/1987 1987 General Obligation Bond Issue - $3,870,000
3223 12/06/1988 1988 General Obligation Bond Issue - $4,615,000
3417 5/07/1991 1991 General Obligation Bond Issue - $4,895,000
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE H
BOND ISSUES
2
TABLE H - Bond Issues.docx
Updated 5.06.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3446 12/12/1991 Bond Issue (Bethlehem Authority) – Water Filtration Plant –
$41,905,000 – Bond Anticipation Notes - $19,000,000
3460 2/04/1992 1992 Bond Issue - Refinancing 1986, 1987 and 1988 Bond Issues –
$14,731,104.90
3505 12/01/1992 Bond Issue (Bethlehem Authority) Phase II Water Projects –
$32,650,000
3538 4/06/1993 Bond Issue (Bethlehem Parking Authority) $4,555,000
3563 8/17/1993 Bond Issue (Non-Utility Capital Budget) ($2,230,000)
3581 11/18/1993 Bond Issue - Landfill ($36,507,542.80)
3597 2/01/1994 Refinancing 1992 Bond Issues – Bethlehem Authority ($82,870,000) –
Water Filtration Plant
3703 8/01/1995 Bond Issue - 1995 Capital Projects; Refinancing 1977 and 1991
Issues; and Line of Credit - Landfill ($17,936,305.63)
3708 10/03/1995 Bond Issue - Letter of Credit - Landfill ($4,900,068.46)
3770 10/01/1996 Bond Issue - Letter of Credit – Landfill Closure Fund ($5,818,831.29)
3827 6/17/1997 Guaranteed Water Revenue Note - $40,000,000 – Penn Forest Dam Repair
3831 8/05/1997 Bond Issue - Non-Utility Capital Projects ($3,605,000)
3862 1/06/1998 Bethlehem Authority PennVest Loan – Penn Forest Dam - $20,000,000
3875 3/03/1998 General Obligation Bond - Letter of Credit Landfill Closure –
$6,210,532.74
3900 7/21/1998 Bethlehem Authority - Guaranteed Water Revenue Bond –
Series of 1998 - $25,142,165.35
3973 11/16/1999 Refinancing 1993 Parking Authority Bond Issue ($2,410,000) and 1999
Bond Issue Non-Utility Capital ($3,000,000) – $5,410,000
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE H
BOND ISSUES
3
TABLE H - Bond Issues.docx
Updated 5.06.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in in Council
4019 7/18/2000 General Obligation Bond Issue – Parking Garage – Main and West
North Streets - $8,550,000 (Funds Advanced to Parking Authority)
4072 4/17/2001 Bond Issue – 2001-2002 Non-Utility Capital Projects; General Fund
Equipment; Refunding 1995 Bond Issue -$6,775,000
4103 12/04/2001 Landfill Stranded Debt Refinancing – $10,900,000; Agreement for
Transfer of Wastewater Treatment Plant from City to Bethlehem
Authority ending December 31, 2026
4125 3/05/2002 Refunding 1992, 1993, 1995 and 1997 Bond Issues - $7,670,000
4158 11/19/2002 Bethlehem Authority – Interest Rate Swap – Emmaus General Authority
Note of 1997 (Penn Forest Dam) - $3,056,096
4182 4/01/2003 2003 Bond Issue – $8,085,000 - 2003-2004 Non- Utility Capital Projects
($4,580,000) and 1999 Bond Issue Refunding ($3,505,000)
4184 4/01/2003 General Obligation Note – Municipal Street Lighting System Acquisition
– 1,900,000
4207 8/19/2003 Parking Authority – Advanced Refunding – 2000 Bond Issue –
$9,285,000
4240 4/06/2004 2004 Bond Issue – Non-Utility Capital Projects ($385,000) and
Sewer Capital Projects ($2,115,000) - $2,500,000
4248 4/20/2004 Bond Issue - Hirko Settlement - $7.39 Million – Bethlehem Authority
4263 7/20/2004 Bond Issue – Purchase of Street Lights – $5,115,000
4264 7/20/2004 1994 Bond Issue – Bethlehem Authority – Forward Financing –
$66,090,000
4287 11/16/2004 Pension Bond Issue – Unfunded Pension Liability - $35,290,000
4321 4/19/2005 2005 Bond Issue – $9,705,000 - Non-Utility and Sewer Capital
Projects ($5,415,000); Refinancing 2001 Bond Issue ($4,290,000)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE H
BOND ISSUES
4
TABLE H - Bond Issues.docx
Updated 5.06.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4370 2/21/2006 General Obligation Note – LED Traffic Signal Project, and Sanitary
Sewer Project – Rosemont/Homestead Avenues - $1,739,000
4422 4/10/2007 General Obligation Note – $9,395,000 - Non-Utility Capital Projects
($3,971,000), Equipment ($438,507), 911 Trunking Radio System
($4,220,000) and Water System Improvements ($819,700)
2008-30 12/02/2008 General Obligation Note – $7,463,000 Non-Utility Capital Projects
2009-38 12/22/2009 General Obligation Note – Water and Sewer Capital Projects – Series
A (Water - $8,100,000)- Series B (Sewer - $2,600,000)
2010-2 2/02/2010 Guaranty of Bethlehem Authority Bonds to Refinance the 1998 Guaranteed
Water Revenue Bonds - $11,600,000
2010-9 4/06/2010 Refinancing Bond Issues – Refunding 2002 Bonds, 2003A Bonds, 2004 Bonds,
2004A Bonds and 2006 Note - $11,875,000
2010-23 9/07/2010 2010 General Obligation Note – Non-Utility
Capital Borrowing – 2011-2012 - $6,040,000
2011-2 3/01/2011 Refunding General Obligation Bonds and Notes - $14,665,000
2011-3 3/01/2011 Guaranteed Lease Revenue Bonds – $17,805,000 (Sales Leaseback)
2012-5 2/21/2012 PennVest – Guaranteed Revenue Note $9,429,730 – Design &
Construction Project – Digester System and Waste Activated Sludge
Thickening Improvements Project
2012-29 11/07/2012 General Obligation Note - $6,810,000 – Sewer Capital Projects
2013-5 03/05/2013 General Obligation Bond – Non-Utility Projects - $5,425,000; 2001 – Landfill
Bond Refinancing (Series of 2001) - $8,265,000
2013-25 09/17/2013 General Obligation Note - $1,765,000 – Bethlehem Authority (Refund portion of
2013 maturity of 2004 Bonds)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE H
BOND ISSUES
5
TABLE H - Bond Issues.docx
Updated 5.06.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2014-19 07/15/2014 PennVest – Guaranteed Revenue Note $10,737,000 – Capital Improvements –
Bio Solid Dewatering Facility Effluent Pump Station
2014-26 08/19/2014 Guaranteed Water Revenue Bonds – $67,785,000 – Bethlehem Authority
2014-31 10/21/2014 General Obligation Note – Series A – $1,850,000 – Series B $24,100,000 –
Series C - $27,785,000
2015-15 03/17/2015 General Obligation Bonds - Series A: $6,000,000 to refund portion of 2010 GO
Bond; and Series B: $7,000,000 to Fund Capital Improvement Projects
2015-34 10/20/2015 Bethlehem Parking Authority’s refunding of City’s General Obligation Bonds,
Series C of 2003, and the Parking Authority’s Series 2004 and 2009 Parking
Revenue Notes: $9,580,000
2016-12 05/03/2016 Bethlehem Parking Authority’s issue of Guaranteed Parking System Revenue
Bonds, Series 2016 ($17,500,000 maximum principal amount), to fund capital
project (construction of parking garage at South New and Rink Streets); and
refunding Grant Anticipation Note, Series 2013
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
1
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2468 5/27/1975 Agreement between Lower Saucon Township, Bethlehem Authority, and City
of Bethlehem re the disposal of sewage
2477 8/05/1975 Agreement by and between Freemansburg Municipal Authority, Bethlehem
Authority, and the City of Bethlehem re disposal of sewage
2478 8/05/1975 Agreement by and between Bethlehem Township Municipal Authority,
Township of Bethlehem, Bethlehem Authority and the City of Bethlehem re
disposal of sewage
2481 9/2/1975 Real estate registry
2483 9/23/1975 Sprinkler systems in high-rise buildings
2484 9/23/1975 Housing Rehabilitation Program
2486 10/13/1975 Adopting the 1975 Plumbing Code
2508 2/17/1976 Adopting the 1975 Third Edition BOCA Basic Plumbing Code
2573 9/06/1977 Amending Article 941 - Alcoholic beverages in parks
2574 9/20/1977 Amending Zoning Code - Storage area shopping centers
2580 10/19/1977 Penalties for late payment of Real Estate Tax
2609 4/10/1978 Amending Article 1325.02 - Increasing membership on Zoning Hearing Board
2610 4/10/1978 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Procedures Public Hearings
2611 4/10/1978 Amending Article 533 - Parking meters
2615 5/24/1978 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Proposed development within flood areas in City
2616 5/24/1978 Amending Building Code - Proposed development within flood areas in City
2619 6/21/1978 Amending Library Board Ordinance
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
2
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2659 3/22/1979 Approving editing and inclusion of Codified Ordinances
2693 12/18/1979 Creating a Board of Health
2726 12/02/1980 Amending the Zoning Ordinance for rowhouse development by setting
Minimum lot requirement
2768 2/17/1981 Salary of Mayor
2769 2/17/1981 Salary of Controller
2770 2/17/1981 Salary of President and Members of Council
2773 4/17/1981 Amending rules and regulations for home professional offices
2797 11/17/1981 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Definition of a Lot
2826 3/02/1982 Adopting the Airport Zoning Ordinance
2879 3/01/1983 Establishing salary of Treasurer
2885 4/19/1983 Approving designation of a limited access highway - Interstate-78
2886 5/03/1983 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Floodplain management
2891 6/07/1983 Amending Zoning Ordinance – Delete Medical Office Building as use in R-M
District
2893 6/07/1983 Amending Zoning Ordinance – Increasing compensation of Zoning Hearing
Board members
2906 10/18/1983 Increasing Salaries of Solicitor and City Clerk
2911 11/15/1983 Establishing Buy American Policy
2936 3/20/1984 Adopting 1982 Retail Food Store Sanitation Code
2940 4/17/1984 Establishing general regulations for the disposal and discharge of industrial waste
(Pretreatment Ordinance)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
3
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2959 11/13/1984 Establishing Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Program (LERTA)
2982 3/19/1985 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Regulation of satellite earth stations
2984 3/19/1985 Setting salary for Controller
2985 3/19/1985 Setting salary for Mayor
2992 5/07/1985 Establishing Salary of Solicitor
2998 5/28/1985 Adopting 1984 BOCA Basic National Existing Structures Code
2999 5/28/1985 Adopting 1984 BOCA Basic National Building Code
3000 5/28/1985 Adopting 1984 BOCA Basic National Plumbing Code
3001 5/28/1985 Adopting 1984 National Electrical Code
3004 7/02/1985 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Portable sidewalk sign
3017 9/17/1985 Adopting new Article 1165 - Day Care Center regulations
3021 10/01/1985 Amending Buy American Ordinance
3023 10/01/1985 Establishing process for leasing Pedestrian Malls
3031 10/22/1985 Amending Urban Rehabilitation Revenue Notes Program
3032 10/22/1985 Increasing membership in Sister City Commission.
3137 8/18/1987 Emergency Alarm System
3138 9/15/1987 City of Bethlehem Pension Fund
3148 11/17/1987 Reimbursement for Extraordinary Expenses
3163 3/01/1988 Providing for Municipal Solid Waste Disposal (Municipal Contract with
LVSWA)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
4
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3345 6/19/1990 Incurring of City Debt - $1,150,000 PennVest Loan - Construction of 5 MG
Water Storage Tank
3373 12/04/1990 Mutual Aid Agreement for Intermunicipal Police Cooperation – Northampton
County (Drug Task Force)
3387 12/18/1990 Improving Benefits - Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (PMRS)
Pension Plan
3412 4/02/1991 Adopting 1990 BOCA Basic Building Code
3413 4/02/1991 Adopting 1990 National Electrical Code
3414 4/02/1991 Adopting 1990 BOCA Basic National 3436 10/01/1991 Declaration of Taking - Property for Landfill
3438 11/12/1991 Increasing Retiree Benefits - Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
(PMRS) Pension Plan
3501 11/17/1992 Fire Insurance Proceeds - Act 98 of 1992
3522 12/15/1992 Line of Credit - City of Bethlehem -$1,500,000
3542 4/06/1993 Line of Credit - City of Bethlehem -Landfill - $6,000,000
3580 11/18/1993 Line of Credit - City of Bethlehem - Landfill - $3,000,000
3697 7/11/1995 Amending PMRS Ordinance and Agreement
3779 11/19/1996 Construction Notes - $10,000,000 – Penn Forest Dam Repair - Interim Financing
3849 12/16/1997 Extending Franchise - Service Electric Cable T.V.
3926 12/15/1998 Granting Cable Television Franchise System - RCN
3941 3/02/1999 Amending PMRS Ordinance and Agreement
4189 5/06/2003 Amending PMRS Ordinance and Agreement – Retirement Age and Percentage
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
5
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4239 3/23/2004 Acquiring Right of Way – Paint Mill Bridge Replacement
4275 9/21/2004 Establishing Article 128 -Maintaining Liability Insurance - $10 Million
Minimum
4329 6/21/2005 Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System – Changing Member Benefits
4336 8/16/2005 Reimbursing Sewer Assessment Fund
4338 9/06/2005 Amending PMRS Agreement – Part-Time Employees
4431 5/01/2007 Establishing Environmental Advisory Committee
2010-24 9/21/2010 Authorizing Cooperative Memorandum of Agreement – Borough of Hellertown
– SR 0412 Multi-Jurisdictional Signal
2011-1 2/15/2011 PMRS Ordinance – Early Retirement
2011-22 9/20/2011 Intergovernmental Cooperation and Purchase and Sale Agreement - Bethlehem
Authority, East Allen Township and East Allen Township Municipal Authority
2011-37 12/21/2011 Amending Article 151 – Firemen’s Pension Fund – Compliance with Pension
Acts and IRS Regulations
2011-38 12/21/2011 Amending Article 153 – Police Pension Fund – Compliance with Pension Acts
And IRS Regulations
2011-39 12/21/2011 Amending Article 155 – Officers’ and Employees’ Retirement and Pension
System – Compliance with Pension Acts and IRS
Regulations
2012-13 4/03/2012 Cooperative Purchasing Agreement – 911 Goods and Services
2013-14 5/07/2013 Granting Cable Franchise – Service Electric Cable TV
2013-15 5/07/2013 Granting Cable Franchise – RCN Telecom Services (Lehigh) LLC
2014-4 2/18/2014 Amending Municipal Pension Plan (PMRS Ord.)
2014-16 6/03/2014 Extending Bethlehem Parking Authority Term
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
6
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2014-30 10/21/2014 Amending Article 157-Civil Service Board
2015-5 3/03/2015 Relating to the main street streetscape improvements phase II project in the Seventh
Ward on Main Street between West Church Street and West Broad Street and
providing for the assessment of part of the costs of the project by the City of
Bethlehem on the abutting property owners
2015-13 3/17/2015 Authorizing execution of Lower Nazareth Sewer Service Agreement, an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement between the City of Bethlehem and
Lower Nazareth Township
2015-24 5/05/2015 Authorizing execution of Intergovernmental Service Territory Agreement
between the City of Bethlehem and the Northampton Borough Municipal
Authority.
2015-37 12/01/2015 Intermunicipal Agreement – Allentown – Shared Lane Markings Network
2015-38 12/01/2015 Intermunicipal Agreement – Easton – Shared Lane Markings Network
2016-14 6/07/2016 Established Article 1162, Solid Waste Collection and Enforcement; Repealed
Articles 931 and 935.
2016-15 6/07/2016 Deleted Section 1161.08 (Accumulation of Rubbish and Garbage) of Article
1161 (Health Nuisances)
2016-21 07/19/2016 Amended Art. 146 (Environmental Advisory Council), Sections 146.02, 146.06
2016-22 08/02/2016 Established Art. 742, Anti-Graffiti
2016-23 09/06/2016 Amended Art. 342, Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance (LERTA)
2016-24 09/06/2016 Deleted/Re-enacted Art. 149, Blighted Property Review Committee
2016-28 10/18/2016 Amended Art. 153, Police Pension Fund
2016-29 10/18/2016 Amended Art. 531, Parking Generally. Added front lawn parking rules
2016-32 11/15/2016 Amended Art. 107, deletion of Department of Parks and Public Property
2016-33 11/15/2016 Amended Art. 927, Sewer Rental
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I
MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES
7
TABLE I - Miscellaneous Ordinances.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
2016-34 12/06/2016 Intermunicipal Agreement with Hellertown Borough - Traffic Signal
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE J
SALARIES
1
TABLE J - Salaries.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2984 3/19/1985 Establishing Salary of Controller
3247 2/21/1989
3531 2/16/1993
3808 3/04/1997
4063 2/06/2001
4308 2/15/2005
2009-8 3/03/2009
2013-3 3/05/2013
2985 3/19/1985 Establishing Salary of Mayor
3248 2/21/1989
3530 2/16/1993
3807 3/04/1997
4062 2/06/2001
4307 2/15/2005
2009-7 3/03/2009
2013-2 3/05/2013
3065 4/15/1986 Establishing Salaries of Solicitor and Assistant Solicitor
3087 11/11/1986 Establishing Salary of City Clerk
3114 3/03/1987 Establishing Salary of Treasurer
3405 3/19/1991 (Treasurer Changed from Full Time to Part Time Beginning 1992)
2009-9 3/03/2009 Increasing Salary of Treasurer
2013-4 3/05/2013
2015-4 3/03/2015
3115 3/03/1987 Establishing Salary of President and Members of City Council
3249 2/21/1989
3532 2/16/1993
3809 3/04/1997
4064 2/06/2001
4309 2/15/2005
2009-10 3/03/2009
2013-11 3/19/2013
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE K
TAXES
1
TABLE K - Taxes.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3101 12/16/1987 1987 Real Estate Tax
3159 12/15/1987 1988 Real Estate Tax Rate
3238 12/20/1988 1989 Real Estate Tax Rate
3160 12/15/1987 Act 511 - Flat Rate Occupation Tax
3317 12/19/1989 1990 Real Estate Tax Rate
3383 12/18/1990 1991 Real Estate Tax Rate
3458 12/17/1991 1992 Real Estate Tax Rate
3517 12/15/1992 1993 Real Estate Tax Rate
3595 12/21/1993 1994 Real Estate Tax Rate
3658 12/20/1994 1995 Real Estate Tax Rate
3730 12/21/1995 1996 Real Estate Tax Rate
3793 12/17/1996 1997 Real Estate Tax Rate
3861 12/30/1997 1998 Real Estate Tax Rate
3921 12/15/1998 1999 Real Estate Tax Rate
3985 12/21/1999 2000 Real Estate Tax Rate
4058 12/19/2000 2001 Real Estate Tax Rate
4115 12/18/2001 2002 Real Estate Tax Rate
4171 12/23/2002 2003 Real Estate Tax Rate
4233 12/16/2003 2004 Real Estate Tax Rate
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE K
TAXES
2
TABLE K - Taxes.docx
Updated 1.06.2017
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4249 4/20/2004 Amending 2004 Real Estate Tax Rate Landfill Debt
4299 12/21/2004 2005 Real Estate Tax Rate
4361 12/20/2005 2006 Real Estate Tax Rate
4417 12/19/2006 2007 Real Estate Tax Rate
4465 12/18/2007 2008 Real Estate Tax Rate
2008-41 12/16/2008 2009 Real Estate Tax Rate
2009-37 12/22/2009 2010 Real Estate Tax Rate
2010-49 12/21/2010 2011 Real Estate Tax Rate
2011-18 7/19/2011 Amending Ord. 2010-49 – EMS Facility & Fire Pumper
2011-36 12/21/2011 2012 Real Estate Tax Rate
2012-1 1/17/2012 Amending Ord. 2010-49 Tax Millage – Purpose
2012-2 1/17/2012 Amending Ord. 2011-18 – Tax For Public Safety Projects
2012-41 12/20/2012 2013 Real Estate Tax Rate
2013-39 12/17/2013 2014 Real Estate Tax Rate
2014-45 12/16/2014 2015 Real Estate Tax Rate
2015-50 12/15/2015 2016 Real Estate Tax Rate
2016-45 12/21/2016 2017 Real Estate Tax Rate
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
1
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2574 9/20/1977 Amending Zoning Code - Storage area shopping centers
2609 4/10/1978 Amending Article 1325.02 - Increasing membership on Zoning
Hearing Board
2610 4/10/1978 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Procedures Public Hearings
2615 5/24/1978 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Proposed development within flood areas
2726 12/02/1980 Amending the Zoning Ordinance for row house development by setting
minimum lot requirement
2797 11/17/1981 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Definition of Lot
2826 3/02/1982 Adopting the Airport Zoning Ordinance
2886 5/03/1983 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Floodplain management
2891 6/07/1983 Amending Zoning Ordinance – Delete Medical Office Building as use in
R-M District
2893 6/07/1983 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Increasing compensation of Zoning
Hearing Board members
2982 3/19/1985 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Regulation of satellite earth stations
3004 7/02/1985 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Portable sidewalk sign
3066 5/06/1986 Types of Dwellings
3104 1/20/1987 Rezoning Portion of W. Lehigh Street from R-M to P-I
3105 2/03/1987 Rezoning Tract at Eaton Avenue and Ralston Road from C-M to R-G
3106 2/17/1987 Rezoning of Union Station Property and Surrounding Area
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
2
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3126 6/16/1987 Bed and Breakfast Homes - Regulations
3229 12/20/1988 Deleting Section 1304.02(b)(2) - Hospital, Nursing and Convalescent
Homes, Religious and Philanthropic Institutions
3173 3/15/1988 Group Homes and Shelters
3243 2/07/1989 Increasing Fees for All Other Appeals; Increasing Penalty Provision
3273 7/11/1989 Rezoning Mechanic Street and East Fourth Street from R-M to C-L
3284 8/15/1989 Amending Section 1318.27 - Notice to Adjoining Municipalities
3285 9/19/1989 Amending Airport Zoning Ordinance - Airport Elevation
3286 9/19/1989 Rezoning Burnside Plantation from L-I to I
3289 10/17/1989 Rezoning Portion of W. Laurel Street from R-M to I
3303 12/05/1989 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Sections 1325 and 1326
3342 6/05/1990 Rezoning Portion of South Mountain from R-M to R-S
3351 9/18/1990 Rezoning Portion of Friedensville Road from I to RG
3389 1/08/1991 Amending Zoning Ordinance - Setting Standards for Development on
Steep Slopes - Section 1302
3471 4/07/1992 Rezoning Portion of Wyandotte and Dakotah Streets from RM to CG
3478 5/05/1992 Amending Section 1321.03 - Site Plan Review Criteria - Storm Water
Drainage
3482 6/02/1992 Amending Zoning Ordinance -Page A-5 of the Table of Area, Yard
and Building Regulations Site Plan Review Required for Districts C-G,
C-L, L-I and H-I; Footnote 16 Added
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
3
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3492 10/06/1992 Amending Section 1320.08(a)(4) -Off-Premise Real Estate Signs;
Adding Section 1320.08(b)(3) - Off-Premise Real Estate Signs
3494 10/20/1992 Rezoning Northwest Corner of Schoenersville Road and Industrial
Drive from PI to CS
3498 11/17/1992 Amending Art. 1302, Definitions - Adding Section 1302.66 - Private
Power Generation Facility (Tenaska Penn)
3499 11/17/1992 Amending Article 1317, H-I Heavy Industrial District - Adding
Section 1317.02(a)(5) Private power generation facilities (Tenaska Penn)
3537 4/06/1993 Rezoning 2980 Linden Street – Rear from RS to CS
3560 7/20/1993 Amending Section 1326.02 - Zoning Fees
3578 11/09/1993 Amending Section 1324.03 - Fees for Appeals to the Zoning Hearing
Board
3596 12/21/1993 Amending Articles 1302, 1304, 1305, 1306, 1307, 1308, 1308 A and
1325 -Small and Large Group Care Facilities
3674 3/21/1995 Amending Section 1319.03 - Off-Street Parking and Loading, Design
Standards
3696 7/11/1995 Rezoning Vicinity of Hellertown Road & Silvex Road - LI to CG
3712 12/05/1995 Rezoning East Side of Hellertown Road - RM to CG
3739 2/20/1996 Amending Section 1302.63 - Definition of a Parking Space
3743 4/02/1996 Establishing Article 1317A - IR - Industrial Redevelopment District
3744 4/02/1996 Rezoning Certain HI - Heavy Indus- trial Property to IR - Industrial
Redevelopment District (former Bethlehem Steel Corporation
property - South Side)
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
4
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
3748 5/07/1996 Rezoning I to R-RC - Presbyterian Housing and Services Corporation -
Langhorne Avenue vicinity
3763 9/17/1996 Rezoning Portion of West Third Street - LI to CB
3773 10/15/1996 Rezoning East Broad Street and Stefko Boulevard - RM to CR
3774 10/15/1996 Amending Section 1322 - Add New Section 1322.04(j)(7) - Special
Conditions for Conditional Uses - Parking
3835 9/02/1997 Rezoning Old York Road - I to CB
3867 2/17/1998 Amending Section 1309 – Add New Section 1309.02(b)(6)
3884 5/26/1998 Adding Zoning Ordinance Section 1318.28A Regulations for
Commercial Communications Towers and Antennas
3935 2/16/1999 Rezoning Various Parcels – Moravian College – RM to I
3958 7/06/1999 Adding Zoning Ordinance Sections 1302.17A and 1313.02(a)(15) –
B.Y.O.B. Club
3959 7/20/1999 Rezoning East Market Street at Wood Street – I and CR to R-RC
3963 9/07/1999 Amending Section 1322.04(f) – Multiple Family Dwellings – Deleting
PUD Requirements
3965 9/21/1999 Rezoning of 17 Acres at Creek Road and Friedensville Road – I’ –
Institutional (Private – Lehigh University) to RG – Residential
4006 5/02/2000 Rezoning Northwest Corner of Dakotah and Wyandotte Streets – RM to CG
4030 9/05/2000 Rezoning Cortland Street – Request of Moravian College – RS to I
4039 11/08/2000 Rezoning Property between Pennsylvania Avenue and Club Avenue
North of Lehigh Shopping Center – CS to R-RC
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
5
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4068 2/20/2001 Amending Section 1304.02 – Use Regulations
4069 2/20/2001 Adding Section 1318.30 – Regulations Applying to Office or Business
Related Activities Conducted Wholly within a Residential Structure in a
Residential Zoned District
4077 6/05/2001 Adding Definitions of Recreational Vehicles and Substantial Damage to
Article 1302
4078 6/05/2001 Amending Sections 1327.03; 1327.04; 1327.05; 1327.09(a);
1327.09(b)(4)(VI), (VII) and (VIII); 1327.09(c)(4)(5)(6) and (7); and
1327.09(d)(2) - Floodway and Flood-Fringe Districts
4083 8/21/2001 Rezoning area bounded by Durham Street, Monocacy Street, W. Laurel
Street and Orchard Street – Request of Moravian College – RM to I
4087 9/04/2001 Amending Section 1318.31 – Pool Regulations
4099 11/20/2001 Rezoning area bounded by Morton Street, Vine Street, Packer Avenue
and Webster Street - Institutional Overlay District
4100 11/20/2001 Amending Article 1309 – Establishing Institutional Overlay District
4135 9/03/2002 Amending Article 1302.76 – Definitions – Restaurant
4136 9/03/2002 Amending Article 1310.02(a)(8) – Outdoor Dining – CB District
4137 9/03/2002 Amending Article 1311.02(a)(4) – Outdoor Dining – CG District
4138 9/03/2002 Amending Article 1318.30(a)(1) – Home Office in Rental Dwelling Unit
4139 9/03/2002 Amending Article 1320 – Signs
4145 9/17/2002 Rezoning Eastern End of East Broad Street – LI to RT, RT to CG, LI to
CG, RM to RT
4174 2/18/2003 Rezoning Lehigh Valley Hospital Center – Muhlenberg Campus – CM to I
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
6
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4183 4/01/2003 Rezoning West Second Street and Union Station Plaza – HI to CB
4187 5/06/2003 Adding Article 1317B - Establishing Industrial Redevelopment-Flexible
(IR-F) Zoning District
4188 5/06/2003 Rezoning Former Durkee Property – Eighth Avenue - LI to IR and RT
4190 5/21/2003 Amending Article 1316.02(a)(19) – Light Industrial District – Private
Utilities
4191 5/21/2003 Amending Article 1317 A(a)(47) – IR Industrial Redevelopment District
– Residences in Office Buildings
4192 5/21/2003 Amending Article 1320.04(i) – Signs – Deleting Site Plan Approval
4193 5/21/2003 Amending Article 1326 – Amendments – Fees for Citizen Petitions and
Notification Requirements
4194 6/03/2003 Amending Article 1301.07 – Titles, Purpose, and Interpretation – Nonapplicability
of Zoning Ordinance to City and Authorities
4195 6/03/2003 Adding Section 1308.07 – Establishing RM Residential District Overlay
Zone
4199 6/17/2003 Rezoning Portion of Bethlehem Commerce Center – HI to IR-F
4201 7/15/2003 Rezoning Cherry Lane and Easton Road – HI to RM Overlay and CG
4205 8/19/2003 Adding Section 1304.07 – R-R Residential District Overlay Zone
4215 10/21/2003 Amending Art. 1302.38 – Height of Structure
4216 10/21/2003 Adding Section 1309.02(b)(7) – Institutional District – Arena
4217 10/21/2003 Amending Article 1318.11 and 1318.17 – Front and Rear Yards –
Porches and Decks
4218 10/21/2003 Amending Article 1320.09(a)(2)(II) – Signs
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
7
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4219 10/21/2003 Amending Article 1322.04(f)(1) and 1322.04(m) – Location of
Buildings and Arenas
4260 7/20/2004 Rezoning Arden and Ravena Streets – I to RG
4265 8/03/2004 Rezoning Schoenersville Road – PI to CS
4266 8/03/2004 Zoning Text Amendment – CS Regulations – Revisions
4269 8/17/2004 Zoning Text Amendment – Appendix A-2 Side Yard Setbacks
4276 10/05/2004 Rezoning South Mountain – CS, RM and RG to RR
4302 1/04/2005 Zoning Text Amendment – Establishing Article 1304.08 – RR Overlay –
Township Line Road
4310 3/01/2005 Amending Article 1302 – Definitions
4311 3/01/2005 Amending Article 1312 – CL District – Use Regulations
4312 3/01/2005 Amending Article 1316 – LI District – Use Regulations
4313 3/01/2005 Amending Article 1319 – Off Street Parking and Loading
4314 3/01/2005 Amending Article 1322 – Uses Granted Under Special Conditions
4315 3/01/2005 Amending Zoning Ordinance – Appendix A-2, A-3, A-4 - Table of
Area, Yard, and Building Regulations
4320 4/19/2005 Rezoning Union Boulevard/Center Street Vicinity – CB to RM and RT
4343 10/18/2005 Rezoning East 4th Street/Route 412 Vicinity – HI to IR (LVIP)
4344 10/18/2005 Amending Article 1317 – HI District – Adding Permitted Uses
4345 10/18/2005 Amending Article 1317 A – IR District – Adding Permitted Uses
4373 3/07/2006 Amending Article 1323 – Nonconforming Uses
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
8
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
4374 3/07/2006 Amending Article 1314 – Establishing New Section 1314 A - CM-LTN
Overlay District (Martin Tower)
4380 4/18/2006 Zoning Text Amendment – Assisted Living Facilities and Personal Care
Centers
4391 9/19/2006 Estab. Article 1314.B – CMU Commercial Mixed Use Zoning District
and Rezoning Parcels Along 8th Avenue, Eaton Avenue and
Schoenersville Road to CMU District
4392 10/03/2006 Zoning Text Amendments – Articles 1302, 1313, 1317 A and 1319 –
Licensed Gaming Facilities and Retail
4393 10/03/2006 Zoning Text Amendments – Articles 1302, 1311, 1313, 1317, 1317 A,
1318 and 1319 – Regulating Licensed Gaming Facilities, Providing
Additional Regulations in the IR Zoning District, Regulating Adult
Oriented Establishments, Pawn Shops, BYOB Clubs, Check Cashing
Operations
4418 1/02/2007 Rezoning 625-633 Montclair Avenue – I to RM
4472 2/19/2008 Zoning Map Amendment – LVIP VII Areas 1B and 2B – HI to IR
2009-2 1/06/2009 Amending Article 1324.03 – Fees; Amending 1325.04(a)(2) Notice of
Hearings
2010-25 10/05/2010 Amending Article 1325.02 – Membership, Terms of Office, Compensation
2012-18 7/02/2012 Amending Article 1325.08 – Residential Treatment Facilities – 1,000 Ft.
Buffer
2012-21 8/07/2012 Re-enact & Replaced Zoning Ordinance Articles 1301 through 1327
2012-43 12/20/2012 Amending Article 1302.99 – Definitions – Recreational Vehicle; Amending Article
1319.03(i); 1319.06 - Parking of Recreational Vehicles in Residential Zoning
Districts
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE L
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
9
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinance Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Description
Number in Council
2012-44 12/20/2012 Amending Section 1304.04 - Reuse of Corner Commercial Uses Allowed in the RT
and RG Districts
2012-45 12/20/2012 Establishing Article 1317 – Floodway and Floodfringe Districts
2013-12 4/16/2013 Establishing Article 1321 – Landmarks and Historic Resources
2013-20 8/20/2013 Rezoning 2344 Center Street – I to R-RC
2013-21 9/17/2013 Amending Section 1321.07(c)(1)(2)(3) – Landmarks and Historic Resources
2013-21 9/17/2013 Amending Articles 1302, 1304, 1305, 1318, 1322, 1325, and 1326 – Kennels,
Retirement Complexes, Temporary Commercial Uses, Etc.
2014-20 7/15/2014 Replacing Article 1317 – Floodway and Fringe District
2015-16 4/07/2015 Adding regulations for solar energy devices. Added new Section 1302.08; deleted
Sections 1318.27(d) and (e); Added new Section 1318.29
2015-17 4/07/2015 Amending Section 1319.01 – Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
2015-25 7/07/2015 Amending Section 1318.28 – Tree Conservation
2015-27 7/07/2015 Amending Article 1306 (Dimensional Requirements in Each District). Amending
1306.01(a), titled Dimensional Regulations for Residential Districts, by creating a
maximum impervious Coverage in the R-R and R-S districts
2015-33 10/06/2015 Zoning Map Amendment - Rezoning RT to I – Moravian College parcel
2015-39 12/15/2015 Creating OMU Office Mixed Use District for the Martin Tower Site; Deleting the
CM-LTN Landmark Conservation and Traditional Neighborhood Overlay District
and replacing it with OMU Office Mixed Use District.
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE M
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (SALDO) AMENDMENTS
1
TABLE M - SALDO Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
The following amendments have been made to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO),
Ordinance Number 2458, adopted by Bethlehem City Council on January 21, 1975.
Ordinance Date Passed Ordinance Section(s) Amended
Number in Council
2531 10/08/1976 1343.02(F)(2)G – Geodetic Control
1349.08 – Planting
2581 10/19/1977 1351.03 - Variances
2614 5/24/1978 1341.02(a)(10)(11) - Purpose
1343.02(d) - Development
1343.02(f)(2)Q - Geodetic Control
1343.02(f)(3)R - Geodetic Control
1345.02 - Submitting Plan for Approval
1347.02(a) - Suitability of Land
1347.05(d) - Street Grades
1347.12 - Flood Plains
1349.03(c) - Temporary Sewage Disposal Facilities
1349.03(d) - Sewage Facilities in Flood Areas
1349.04(a) - Storm Sewers and surface Drainage
1349.05(h) - Water
1349.12 - Utility Flood Proofing
1349.13 - Final Acceptance of Improvements
1351.04 - Municipal Liability
2661 6/19/1979 1351.03 - Variance
2696 3/04/1980 1349.07 - Street Paving
2777 5/27/1981 1347.10(a) - Purpose
1347.10(b) - Applicability
2839 5/26/1982 1343.02(f)(2) - Geodetic Control
1343.02(f) - Geodetic Control
1349.02 - Street Grades
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE M
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (SALDO) AMENDMENTS
2
TABLE M - SALDO Amendments.docx
Updated 1.13.2016
Ordinance Date Passed Ordinance Section Amended
Number In Council
2849 10/20/1982 1347.13 - Noise Protection
3090 12/02/1986 1347.11(a) - Environmental Controls
1351.02 - Enforcement
3118 4/07/1987 1349.11 - Street Lights
3211 9/20/1988 1349.08 - Planting
1349.08(e) - Open space landscaping requirements
1349.08(f) - Use-specific landscaping requirements
1349.08(g) - Approval/inspection of planting plans
3244 2/07/1989 1351.02 - Increasing Penalties
3265 5/23/1989 1351.05 - Fees Subdivision and/or Site Plan Review
3477 5/05/1992 1349.04 - Storm Sewers and Surface Drainage
4140 9/03/2002 1345.02 - Submitting Plans for Approval
4316 3/15/2005 1347.14 - Traffic Impact Studies
4439 7/03/2007 1347.10 - Recreation Land and Fees
4441 9/04/2007 1343.02(f) - Geodetic Control
1343.02(g)(2)(R-U) - Plans
1343.02(g)(3)(R-V) - Subdivision Final Plan
4442 9/04/2007 1345.06 - Plan Compatibility with GIS/Autocad
2015-26 7/07/2015 1347.10 - Recreation Land and Fees
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Codified Ordinances
of the
City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
General Index
Comparative Section Table
Tables of Special Ordinances
Part One - Administrative Code
Part Three - Business Regulation and Taxation Code
Part Five - Traffic Code
Part Seven - General Offenses Code
Part Nine - Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code
Part Eleven - Public Health Code
Part Thirteen - Planning and Zoning Code
Part Fifteen - Fire Prevention Code
Part Seventeen - Building and Housing
TABLES OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE A - Annexations
TABLE B - Dedication of Streets
TABLE C - Vacating of Streets
TABLE D - Vacation by Non-Acceptance
TABLE E - Streets – Miscellaneous Action
TABLE F - Sanitary Sewer Extensions
TABLE G - Water Main Extensions
TABLE H - Bond Issues
TABLE I - Miscellaneous
TABLE J - Salaries
TABLE K - Taxes
TABLE L - Zoning Ordinances
TABLE M - Subdivision and Development Ordinances
Editor’s Note: The following tables list ordinances of a special nature
giving a brief description of the ordinance content. For
detailed study, the user must consult the ordinance file in
the City Clerk’s Office.
ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ordinance
Number Date Location Change
2234 02/02/71 Lots 10 & 11 on Clifton Avenue I to RS
2235 02/02/71 Land at Intersection of E. RT to LI
Fairview St. & Minsi Trail St.
2258 09/07/71 1.284 Acres on West Side of RG to CL
Schoenersville Rd.
2271 11/30/71 405.592 Acres bounded by RG to I'
Friedensville Rd., Mountain
Drive South, Seidersville Rd.
and Creek Rd.
2290 02/15/72 S.E. Corner of Locust and RT to I'
Masslich Streets
2311 08/08/72 East Side of Stefko Blvd., RT to CL
between Glenwood & Clermont Sts.
2312 08/08/72 North side of Catasauqua Rd. RG to I'
between Westgate Drive & Spur
Route (Interstate Highway 378)
2322 10/03/72 3.279 Acres North of Lehigh St. I to RM
(Between 11th & 13th Avenues)
2326 11/28/72 South Side of W. Lehigh St. from RM to CR
Baker St. to Eighth Ave.
2380 07/03/73 South Side of W. Walnut St. RT to CB
2391 11/27/73 Between Walnut & Market Sts. CB to RT
S.W. corner of New & Walnut Sts. RT to CB
2401 12/27/73 Pembroke Rd. at City Boundary RM to CS
2402 12/27/73 S.E. Corner of Stefko Blvd. & CG to LI
Pembroke Rd.
2420 04/02/74 West Side of Santee Rd. RS to I
C-1
Ordinance
Number Date Location Change
2423 06/11/74 South Side - 400' Scale Various
2424 06/11/74 North Side - 400' Scale Various
2430 07/02/74 City - 400' Scale Various
2575 09/21/77 City-Owned Lots on Johnston Dr. I to RR
2576 09/21/77 City-Owned Lots South of I to RG
Washington Ave.
2622 10/04/78 West Side of Stefko Blvd. RT to LI
2674 10/13/79 Washington Ave., Linwood & RG to RT
Minsi Trail St.
2704 06/18/80 S.W. Corner Washington Ave. & I' to RT
New St.
2711 08/06/80 First Presbyterian Church Property I' to R-RC
2718 10/23/80 East Third St. LI to CB
2721 11/06/80 West Lehigh St. CR & RM
to PI
2722 11/18/80 Dewberry Acres, Ronca Tract RS to RG
2723 11/18/80 442-454 Wyandotte St. RM to CG
2759 01/21/81 W. Broad St. between 13th & RG and RS
15th Avenues to CG
2767 02/18/81 Schoenersville Rd., Monocacy LI to CR
Creek Area
2783 09/01/81 South of Donegan School RM to CM
2784 09/01/81 West of Williams St. RG to CM
2785 09/08/81 Between Research Center & RG to CM
Seidersville Rd.
2786 09/08/81 North of Seidersville Rd. RG to RR
C-2

Ordinance
Number Date Location
Change
2787 09/08/81 East of Creek Rd. I to RR
2789 09/08/81 Intersection of William Street RG to
RR
Seidersville Rd & Creek Rd.
2791 10/21/81 South End of Creek Rd. RG to
RR
2791 10/21/81 East of Creek Rd. RG to I
2834 04/21/82 420-430 Main St. I' to CB
2845 08/04/82 360 Conestoga St. I to RM
2873 01/18/83 Wyandotte St. RM to
CG
2892 06/08/83 New St. & Elizabeth Ave. RT to
CG
2938 04/17/84 West Packer Ave. RM to I'
2946 06/19/84 Broad & Elm Sts. RT to
CG
2952 09/04/84 Center St. RT to I'
3104 01/20/87 W. Lehigh Street RM to
PI
3105 02/03/87 Eaton Ave. & Ralston Rd. CM to
RG
3196 02/17/87 W. Third St. LI to
CB
3273 07/12/89 N.E. Corner E. Fourth St. & RM to
CL
Hayes St.
3286 09/19/89 Burnside Plantation LI to I'
3289 10/17/89 W. Laurel St. RM to I'
3342 06/05/90 Ridge St., 8th St., Mountain RM to
RS
Dr., Atlantic St., Hillside Ave.
3351 09/18/90 Friedensville Rd. I' to RG
3471 04/08/92 434-38 Wyandotte St. RM to
CG
3494 10/21/92 Schoenersville Rd. & PI to
CS
Industrial Dr.
3537 04/07/93 Rear of 2980 Linden St. RS to
CS
3696 07/12/95 West Side of Hellertown Rd. LI to
CG
C-3
Ordinance
Number Date Location
Change
3712 12/06/95 N.E. Corner Hellertown Rd. & RM to
CG
Crest Ave.
3744 04/03/96 Bethlehem Steel Land HI to IR
3748 05/09/96 First Presbyterian Church I' to
RRC
3763 09/17/96 W. Third Street LI to
CB
3773 10/15/96 Pfeifle Field RM to
CR
3835 09/02/97 Old York Road I' to CB
3965 09/21/99 Creek Road I’ to RG
4006 05/02/00 Dakotah Street at Wyandotte Street RM to
CG
4030 09/15/00 1400 block of Cortland Street RS to I
4039 11/08/00 Between Club & Pennsylvania Avenues CS to
RC
4083 08/21/01 Between Monocacy, Durham, Orchard RM to I’
and West Laurel
4100 11/20/01 New and Morton Streets
Institutional
Overlay
District
NOTICE OF APPEAL
(Please type or print clearly.)
IN RE:
DATE OF APPLICATION OWNER
LOCATION ADDRESS
SIZE OF LOT LESSEE
USE APPLIED FOR ADDRESS
SIZE OF BUILDING APPLICANT
HEIGHT ADDRESS
WARD BLOCK PHONE NO.
ZONING DISTRICT
ZONING HEARING BOARD
BETHLEHEM, PA
BOARD MEMBERS,
I HAVE BEEN DENIED A ZONING PERMIT BY THE ZONING OFFICER AND HEREBY
APPEAL TO YOUR BOARD FROM SAID RULING AND DECISION FOR THE FOLLOWING
REASONS: (Use additional paper if necessary.)
I TRUST MY APPEAL WILL BE HEARD IN THE USUAL MANNER.
OWNER
(Please sign)
THIS NOTICE OF APPEAL TO BE SIGNED ADDRESS
BY THE OWNER, MEMBER OF FIRM OR
CORPORATION OFFICER. APPLICANT
(Please sign)
ATTORNEY
ADDRESS
INSP-20 (Rev. 9/01)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
CITY OF BETHLEHEM
ZONING ORDINANCE
PART 13 OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF BETHLEHEM,
LEHIGH AND NORTHAMPTON COUNTIES,
PENNSYLVANIA
Last Revised: July 17, 2018
Effective Date: June 15, 2012
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
Article 1301 Titles, Purpose and Interpretation ................................................................................ 1
Article 1302 Definitions .................................................................................................................... 3
Article 1303 Classification of Districts ........................................................................................... 23
Article 1304 Allowed Uses in Primarily Residential Districts ........................................................ 27
Article 1305 Allowed Uses in Primarily Non-Residential Districts ................................................ 32
Article 1306 Dimensional Requirements in Each District ............................................................... 45
Article 1307 Workforce Housing Incentive ..................................................................................... 60
Article 1308 Additional Requirements in the IR & IRR Districts…………………………...……63
Article 1309 Open Space Development Option in the RR District .................................................. 66
Article 1310 Additional Requirements for the RR-T and RR-F Overlay Districts .......................... 71
Article 1311 Design Guidelines in the CL, CB and RT Districts .................................................... 74
Article 1312 Additional Requirements in the I-O Institutional Overlay District ............................. 79
Article 1313 Additional Requirements for the CMU District .......................................................... 80
Article 1314 Additional Requirements for the OMU District .......................................................... 84
Article 1315 Additional Requirements in the IN-O Industrial Overlay District .............................. 89
Article 1316 Steep Slope Provisions ................................................................................................ 92
Article 1317 Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts .......................................................................... 95
Article 1318 General Regulations ................................................................................................. 117
Article 1319 Off-Street Parking and Loading ............................................................................... 131
Article 1320 Signs .......................................................................................................................... 143
Article 1321 Landmarks and Historic Resources ........................................................................... 154
Article 1322 Additional Requirements for Specific Uses .............................................................. 166
Article 1323 Procedures and Controls Governing Non-Conformities ........................................... 198
Article 1324 Administration, Permits and Penalties ...................................................................... 201
Article 1325 Zoning Hearing Board ............................................................................................... 204
Article 1326 Amendments ............................................................................................................. 208
INDEX ............................................................................................................................................. 210
See Also the Airport Approach Overlay Zoning Provisions in the City Codified
Ordinances, Article 1360, and the LVIA FAR Part 77 Imaginary Surfaces Map.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
1
ARTICLE 1301
TITLES, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
1301.01 Title. A Zoning Ordinance regulating and restricting the height, location, size and use of
buildings and/or land in the City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, the areas to be occupied by
buildings in proportion to the size of the lots upon which they stand: the size of yards and
other open spaces appurtenant thereto and the density of population, and for these
purposes establishing districts and boundaries, and other uses within such districts and
boundaries and providing for the appointment of a Zoning Hearing Board, and setting
forth the duties and functions of said Board and providing for administration, charges and
enforcement of this Ordinance and providing penalties for violation thereof.
1301.02 Short Title. This Zoning Code shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem.” This Ordinance is also known as “the Zoning Code”
or as “Part 13" of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem. It is also hereinafter
referred to as “the Zoning Ordinance” or “This Ordinance.”
1301.03 Purposes. The purposes of this Zoning Ordinance are to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare by:
(a) Encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
(b) Preventing the overcrowding of land.
(c) Conserving the value of land and buildings.
(d) Lessening the congestion of traffic on the roads.
(e) Protecting important natural features.
(f) Providing for adequate light and air.
(g) Securing safety from fire, flood and other dangers.
(h) Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and
other public facilities.
(i) Giving reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of districts and their
peculiar suitability for particular uses.
(j) Guiding and regulating the orderly growth, development, and redevelopment of the city in
accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Bethlehem, and to serve
the objectives and principles of such Plan.
(k) Carrying out the authorized purposes of a Zoning Ordinance, as provided in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(l) Carrying out the purposes of the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, as amended.
1301.04 Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, the
provision shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the City. Where the provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this Ordinance, the
provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
1301.05 Separability. It is hereby declared to the legislative intent that:
(a) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this Ordinance to be invalid
or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to those
provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all
other provisions of this Ordinance shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
2
(b) If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or provisions of
this Ordinance to any lot, building, or other structure, or tract of land, to be invalid or
ineffective, in whole or in part, the effect of such decisions shall be limited to the person,
property, or situation immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any
such provision to other persons, property or situations shall not be affected.
1301.06 Application to Public Utility Corporations. This Ordinance shall not apply to facilities of a
public utility corporation, if specifically exempted by Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission after a hearing under the provisions of Section 619 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
1301.07 Application to City and Municipal Authorities. This ordinance shall not apply to any lot,
existing or proposed structure, use thereof, of any expansion thereof, owned, used or to be
used by the City of Bethlehem, and/or by any Municipal Authority created by the City of
Bethlehem.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
3
ARTICLE 1302
DEFINITIONS
1302.01 General.
(a) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed
throughout this Ordinance to have the meanings herein indicated:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation, partnership, association and individual.
(4) The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
(5) The word "lot" includes the word "parcel", "tract", or "plot".
(6) The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed
to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
(7) The word "City" means the City of Bethlehem, Lehigh and Northampton Counties,
Pennsylvania; the terms "Council", "Zoning Board", "Planning Commission" mean
respectively, the City Council, the Zoning Hearing Board and the City Planning
Commission of the City. County refers to Lehigh County and/or Northampton
County, Pennsylvania.
(8) If a word is not defined in this Ordinance, but is defined in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO) of the City of Bethlehem, as amended, then the
SALDO definition shall also apply to this Ordinance. If a term is not defined in this
Ordinance or the SALDO, then the term shall have its plain and ordinary meaning,
within the context of the provision. A standard reference dictionary should be
consulted.
1302.02 Accessory Building or Use. A subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and
located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building. The term "Accessory
Building" may include a private garage, garden shed or barn, private playhouse, private
greenhouse, guesthouse, caretaker's cottage, or servants' quarters, as hereinafter provided.
An outdoor private swimming pool is an accessory use but not an accessory building.
Where any part of the wall of an accessory building is part of the wall of a main building,
or where the accessory building is attached to the main building by a roof, including
carports however covered, such accessory building shall be deemed part of the main
building. Unless specifically allowed otherwise by this Ordinance, a detached building
that is accessory to a dwelling shall not include cooking facilities, a shower or a bath tub,
and shall not be used for overnight sleeping purposes.
1302.03 Adult-Oriented Establishment (or “Adult Use”). The definition for this term and for all
uses included under this term shall apply as are provided in Title 68, Part II, Subpart E,
Chapter 55, Section 5502 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended. Such
definitions in Pennsylvania Statutes are hereby included by reference, including but not
limited to, the definitions for "Adult Bookstore," "Adult Entertainment," "Adult Mini-
Motion Picture Theater," "Adult Motion Picture Theater," "Sexual Activities," "Specified
Anatomical Areas," and "Specified Sexual Activities.
1302.04 After Hours Club. A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages by 5 or
more unrelated persons between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. and that involves some
form of monetary compensation paid by such persons for the alcohol or for the use of the
premises.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
4
1302.05 Alley. A public or private right-of-way having a right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet or
less, which affords a means of access to the rear or side of abutting property and is not
intended for general traffic circulation. Regardless of whether an alley is given a street
name, no new principal building shall have its frontage on an alley.
1302.06 Alteration. As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in
height, or the moving from one location or position to another, or conversion of one use to
another by virtue of interior change.
1302.07 Animal Shelter. A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, abused
or unwanted animals (dogs, cats, rabbits, hamsters) that is owned, operated, or maintained
by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection and humane treatment of animals.
1302.08 Architecturally Integrated Device. A device that is integrated in, as distinguished from
merely positioned on, the external surfaces of the shell of buildings or building structures.
(Amended by Ordinance 2015-16, April 7, 2015)
1302.09 Assisted Living Facility. Any premises in which food, shelter, assisted living services,
assistance or supervision and supplemental health care services are provided for a period
exceeding 24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who
require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial
management, evacuation from the residence in the event of an emergency or medication
prescribed for self administration.
1302.10 Auto Body/Auto Repair Shop. A facility where repairs to the frame or other structural
parts of motor vehicles, spray painting, and repair or replacement of fenders and similar
external portions of motor vehicles are conducted. Auto repairs to the mechanized parts
of a vehicle, including engine, motor, transmission, etc, shall also be included in this
definition.
1302.11 Basement. A floor level partly or completely below grade. A basement shall be considered
a story if more than one-third of the exterior perimeter walls are five (5) feet or more
above the finished grade level of the ground immediately adjacent to the walls.
1302.12 Bed and Breakfast Home. A detached dwelling which may provide overnight lodging and
serve breakfast to transient guests, and which includes the owner or primary operator
residing on the premises.
1302.13 Boarding or Rooming House. A dwelling in which at least two rooms are offered for rent,
payable in money or other consideration, whether or not meals are furnished to lodgers
and in which no transients are accommodated and no public restaurant is maintained. A
school or college dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, membership club with residents,
and other similar uses are not deemed a boarding or rooming house.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
5
1302.14 Billboard. A type of “Sign, Off-Premises” that has a sign area of greater than 10 square
feet.
1302.15 Buffer Yard. A strip of land planted with trees, shrubs and lawns and which is kept free of
outdoor storage, buildings and vehicles, and which serves to separate certain uses or
zoning districts. See also "Screening" in this Section.
1302.16 Building. A structure constructed or erected on the ground, with a roof supported by
columns or walls. Structures divided by unpierced masonry division walls extending from
the ground to the roof shall be deemed to be separate buildings. See also “Dwelling”.
(a) Detached Building. Any structure, having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for persons or animals, which is surrounded by
open space on the same lot and which has no party or division wall in common with any
other building.
(b) Completely Enclosed Building. A building separated on all sides from adjacent open
space, or from other buildings, by fixed exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by
windows, entrance or exit doors, and covered by a permanent roof.
1302.17 Building, Front of. The wall of a building most nearly parallel with and adjacent to the
front of the lot on which it is situated.
1302.18 Building, Main or Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In any residential zone, a dwelling shall be deemed a main
building on the lot on which the same is located, unless otherwise provided for elsewhere
in this Zoning Ordinance.
1302.19 Building Area. The aggregate of the ground floor area of all enclosed and roofed spaces of
the principal building and all accessory buildings. Such area shall be computed by using
the outside building dimensions of each building measured on a horizontal plane at floor
level. The area of any roof or any portion thereof which is at ground level or which has
direct access to ground level and which further provides usable plaza, park and/or similar
open unroofed area with vegetation shall not be considered in calculating building area,
even if there is building area or parking area under such plaza, park or similar area.
1302.20 Building Line or Building Setback Line. The line that separates the land areas that do not
allow the construction of a building from the land areas that do allow the construction of a
building, in areas that extend above the grade level. The building line is measured a
certain distance from lot lines and street rights-of-way, based upon the applicable
minimum yard. In the area between the building line and the adjacent lot line or right-ofway,
no portion of a building may be placed or constructed or expanded, except as
specifically provided otherwise. The building line is considered a vertical surface
intersecting the ground on such line.
1302.21 Building or Construction Permit. A type of permit required under the City Construction
Codes. See also “Zoning Permit.”
1302.22 Building Coverage. The total horizontal area covered by all buildings on a lot divided by
the lot area of that lot, expressed as a percentage. An outdoor in-ground or above ground
swimming pool shall not be counted as building area.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
6
1302.23 Bulk. The size and shape of building uses, and the exterior relationship of their exterior
walls, or their location, to lot lines and other buildings or other walls of the same building,
and all open spaces required in connection with a building. Bulk regulations include
regulations dealing with lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot width, height,
required yards, usable open space, spacing between buildings on a single lot, and the
length of buildings in a row.
1302.24 Business Office. A business establishment which does not offer a product or merchandise
for sale to the public. Personal services such as barber and beauty shops and repair
services are not deemed a business office.
1302.25 B.Y.O.B. Club. "B.Y.O.B. Club" means any business facility such as a dance hall, club or
association not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, wherein patrons
twenty-one (21) years of age and older may, after payment of an entry fee, cover charge
or membership fee, consume alcoholic beverages which said patrons have carried onto the
premises; also commonly referred to as "Bring Your Own Bottle" Clubs; provided that a
facility which is rented for a limited period of time, not to exceed six (6) hours, by
individual(s) or an organization for the purpose of a private party in which alcoholic
beverages are carried onto the premises shall not be considered a B.Y.O.B. Club under the
terms of this Ordinance. B.Y.O.B. Club shall not include a restaurant as defined in this
Section.
1302.26 Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate required under the City Construction Codes and
Zoning Ordinance that is issued by the City Staff after completion of construction or
alteration of a building or upon approval of a change in occupancy or use of a building.
An applicant may be required to prove compliance with requirements of this Ordinance
and any conditions established by the Zoning Hearing Board prior to receiving such
Certificate.
1302.27 Check Cashing Business. An establishment engaged in the cashing of checks by
individuals or the deferred deposit of personal checks whereby the check casher refrains
from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date; or the
offering of a loan until a paycheck would be received by the person receiving the loan.
This term shall not include any of the following: a) a state or federally chartered bank,
savings association, credit union, or industrial loan association, b) a Licensed Gaming
Facility (or any hotel related thereto), or c) a retail store engaged primarily in selling or
leasing items to retail customers and that cashes a check for a fee not routinely exceeding
one percent of the check amount as a service to its customers incidental to the retail store
principal use.
1302.28 Church. See “Place of Worship” in this Section.
1302.29 City Revitalization and Improvement Zone (CRIZ) Qualified Project. A project approved
by the Bethlehem Revitalization and Improvement Authority as a project that qualifies for
City Revitalization and Improvement Zone funds. (Amended 6/5/18, Ordinance 2018-12)
1302.30 Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Bethlehem.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
7
1302.31 Condominium. A form of ownership of individual units in a building or on a lot that was
established under applicable State law, such as the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of
1963 or the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended. Each
dwelling unit is owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such owners
assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate which is designated for
common ownership. Condominium dwellings shall meet the provisions for the type of
dwelling unit that is involved. For a condominium dwelling other than multi-family
dwellings, the applicant shall prove that each dwelling unit is able to meet the same
dimensional provisions that would apply if the dwellings would be placed on individual
lots, but the individual lot lines for each dwelling unit are not required to be actually
established.
1302.32 Construction Area. For the purposes of Article 1316 Steep Slopes Provisions,
"construction area" shall mean the total land areas proposed to be used for and/or within
20 feet of any and all of the following proposed features:
(a) Principal and accessory buildings.
(b) Gravel or paved areas (including driveways) other than walkways.
(c) Areas proposed to be graded.
1302.33 Curb Level. The mean curb level as established by the Department of Public Works or, in
the absence of an established curb level, the mean level of the existing curb or the lot at
the street line.
1302.34 Day Care Center, Adult. A use, not located in a dwelling unit, providing supervised care
and assistance to persons who need such daily assistance because of their old age or
disabilities. This use shall not include persons who need oversight because of behavior
that is criminal, violent or related to substance abuse. This use shall involve typical stays
of less than a total of 60 hours per week per person.
1302.35 Day Care, Child. A use involving the supervised care of children under age 16 outside of
the children's own home(s) primarily for periods of less than 18 hours per child during the
average day. This use may also include educational programs that are supplementary to
State-required education, including "nursery school" or "Head Start" programs. See also
definition of "adult day care center."
(a) The following three types of day care are permitted without regulation by this Ordinance:
1) care of children by their own "relatives," 2) care of children within a place of worship
during regularly scheduled religious services, and (3) care of 1 to 3 children within any
dwelling unit, in addition to children who are "relatives" of the caregiver.
(b) Family Day Care Home (or "Child Day Care as an Accessory Use"). A type of "day care"
use that: 1) is accessory to and occurs within the primary caregivers’ dwelling unit, and 2)
provides care for 4 to 6 children at one time who are not "relatives" of the primary
caregiver.
(c) Group Day Care Home. A type of "day care" use that: 1) provides care for between 7 and
12 children at one time who are not "relatives" of the primary caregiver, 2) provides care
within the primary caregivers’ dwelling unit, and 3) is registered with the applicable State
agency.*
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
8
(d) Day Care Center. A type of "day care" use that: 1) provides care for 7 or more children at
one time who are not "relatives" of the primary caregiver, 2) does not occur within a
dwelling unit, 3) is registered with the applicable State agency.*
*Note: As of the adoption date of this Ordinance, such agency was the PA Department of
Public Welfare.
1302.36 Driveway. An access to individual property, to be classified as follows:
(a) High volume driveway: A driveway used or expected to be used by more than 1,500
vehicles per day.
(b) Medium volume driveway: A driveway used or expected to be used by more than 750 but
less than 1,500 vehicles per day.
(c) Low volume driveway: A driveway used or expected to be used by more than 25 but less
than 750 vehicles per day.
(d) Minimum use driveway: A residential or other driveway which is used or expected to be
used by not more than 25 vehicles per day.
1302.37 Dump. A lot or part thereof used primarily for disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial,
burning, incineration, or any other means for whatever purpose, of garbage, offal, trash,
refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste materials of any
kind, and which does not meet State and City requirements for a Solid Waste Landfill.
1302.38 Dustless Surface. An adequate covering or paving with concrete, bituminous asphalt
products, paving blocks or other materials specifically approved by the City, and which is
maintained in good condition at all times. See the parking materials provisions in Article
1319.
1302.39 Dwelling. A building used as a residence.
(a) Single Family Detached Dwelling – A building occupied by only one dwelling unit, and
having no party wall in common with an adjacent building.
(b) Townhouse (also known as a Single Family Attached Dwelling or Row House) – A set of
3 or more attached dwelling units, which are completely separated from each other by one
or two vertical party walls.
(c) Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling (also known as a Twin Dwelling) – One dwelling
unit that is completely separated from a second dwelling unit by a vertical party wall.
(d) Two Family Detached Dwelling – A detached building occupied by 2 dwelling units,
which are not completely separated from each other by a vertical party wall.
(e) Two Family Semi-Detached Dwelling – A 2 family building on a single lot having one
party wall in common with an adjacent two-family building on an adjoining lot, with one
dwelling unit over the other, the two buildings together, however, accommodating but 4
families, 2 families living on either side of the party wall.
(f) Multi-Family Dwelling or Apartment – A building including 3 or more dwelling units,
other than Townhouses.
See also “Condominium” and “Manufactured Home” in this Section.
1302.40 Dwelling Unit. A single habitable living unit occupied by only one "family" (see
definition). To be considered a dwelling unit, each dwelling unit shall have: a) its own
toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping or cooking facilities and b) separate access to the
outside or to a common hallway or balcony that connects to outside access at ground
level. A dwelling unit shall not include two or more separate living areas that are
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
9
completely separated by interior walls so as to prevent interior access from one living area
to another. A second kitchen shall not be newly installed in a dwelling unit unless it is for
the purpose of accommodating a relative who needs special care and supervision because
of age or disability.
1302.41 Employees. The highest number of workers (including both part-time and full-time, both
compensated and volunteer, and both employees and contractors) present on a lot at any
one time, other than clearly temporary and occasional persons working on physical
improvements to the site.
1302.42 Essential Services or "Essential Public Utility Services." Utility or municipal uses that are
necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety and that are routine,
customary and appropriate to the character of the area in which they are to be located.
Essential services shall include the following and closely similar facilities: sanitary
sewage lines, water lines, electric distribution lines, stormwater management facilities,
cable television lines, natural gas distribution lines, fire hydrants, street lights and traffic
signals. Essential services shall not include a central sewage treatment plant, a solid waste
disposal area or facility, commercial communications towers, a power generating station,
septic or sludge disposal, offices, storage of trucks or equipment or bulk storage of
materials.
1302.43 Family. One or more individuals who are “related” to each other by blood, marriage or
adoption (including persons receiving formal foster care) or up to 5 unrelated individuals
who maintain a common household with common cooking facilities and certain rooms in
common, and who live within one dwelling unit. A family shall also expressly include
numbers of unrelated persons that may be allowed by the Group Home provision of this
Ordinance residing within an approved group home.
1302.44 Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of manufactured material or combination of
materials erected for enclosure of yard areas, storage areas, parking areas and for
screening.
1302.45 Flood . A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
(a) Floodplain –
(1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is
subject to partial or complete inundation.
(2) An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the 100-Year Floodplain as
defined in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Bethlehem prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(b) Floodway – The designated area of a flood plain required to carry and discharge flood
waters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the floodway shall be
capable of accommodating a flood of the 100 year magnitude without raising the 100-year
flood elevation more than one foot. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the floodway and
approximated flood plains, as defined in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and
Floodway Data Table prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(c) Flood Fringe – That portion of the flood plain outside the floodway.
(d) One Hundred Year Flood – A flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
10
(e) Regulatory Flood – The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis upon which
the flood plain management provisions of this and other ordinances have been prepared;
for purposes of this Ordinance, the One Hundred Year Flood.
(f) Regulatory Flood Elevation – For purposes of this Ordinance, the 100-Year Flood
Elevation.
(g) Floodproofing – Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
1302.46 Floor Area. The sum of the gross areas of the floors of every story of a building measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of common or party walls
separating two buildings. (Regardless of the internal arrangement of a building, it shall be
deemed to have at least one story for each 20 feet of height or fraction thereof.)
1302.47 Floor Area, Habitable. The enclosed indoor "floor area" that is designed and suitable for
residency by persons and which is heated. This term shall not include vehicle garages or
areas with a head room of less than 7 feet.
1302.48 Funeral Home. A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building
may contain space and facilities for (a) embalming and the performance of other services
used in the preparation of the dead for burial; (b) the performance of autopsies and other
surgical procedures; (c) the storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral
supplies; (d) the storage of funeral vehicles; and (e) facilities for cremation. A crematorium
is a location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for the use in and the
act of cremation.
1302.49 Garage. A building or part thereof used for the storage of one or more vehicles.
(a) Community or Public Garage – One or more garages other than a private garage used for
compensation. Only facilities for washing tenant's cars may be permitted.
(b) Private Garage – A garage used by the owner or tenant of the premises for vehicle parking
and household storage, and provided the use of such garage is consistent with the parking
space requirements.
(c) Repair Garage – Any garage other than a private garage, available to the public, operated
for gain, and which is used for the storage, servicing and repair of automobiles or other
motor vehicles, including painting and body work and the supply of gasoline or oil
products, but not including the sale of motor vehicles.
1302.50 Gas Station. An establishment servicing motor vehicles with fuel, supplies, accessories
and minor repairs, but not including the storage, sale or major repair of motor vehicles
such as, but not limited to, motor replacement, body and fender repair or spray painting.
1302.51 Group Home. A dwelling unit operated by a responsible individual, family or organization
with a program to provide a supportive living arrangement for individuals where special
care is needed by the persons served due to age, emotional, mental, developmental or
physical disability. This definition shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care
of persons with disabilities subject to protection under the Federal Fair Housing Act as
amended. Group Homes must be licensed where required by any appropriate government
agencies, and a copy of any such license must be delivered to the Zoning Officer prior to
the initiation of the use. A Group Home typically involves an individual residing on the
premises for more than 30 days at a time.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
11
(a) Group Homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations by the City as the
type of dwelling unit they occupy. (continued on next page)
(b) It is the express intent of the City to comply with all provisions of the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder, in the construction of
this term.
(c) A Group Home shall not include a "Treatment Center.”
1302.52 Half-Story. That portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates on at least two opposite exterior walls of which are five feet or less on average
above the floor level of such half-story. Provided that it is not used as a dwelling unit, a
top floor in which the floor area with 7 feet or more of head clearance equals 50 percent
or less of the floor area of the story next below shall be a “half-story”.
1302.53 Height of a Structure. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the average top of fascia height of a
pitched roof, or top of parapet wall of a flat roof, provided that there is no living space
above the fascia height of a pitched roof. If the area behind the pitched roof includes any
living space, then the height of the building shall be measured from the average finished
grade at front to the highest point of the structure.
1302.54 Heliport and Helistop. A facility used for the landing and take-off of helicopters. A
helistop is a facility that is typically used on average four or fewer times per week for
take-offs and/or landings. A heliport is a facility that is typically used more often.
1302.55 Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on Bethlehem’s inventory of historic places under a historic
preservation program that is included in the Historic Preservation Plan.
1302.56 Home Occupation. An accessory business that is conducted entirely within a dwelling or
one accessory building, or administered from a dwelling, and which is conducted solely
by residents of the dwelling and up to one non-resident employee, and which is clearly
incidental and accessory to the dwelling. No display of products shall be visible from the
exterior. On-site retail sales shall not be allowed as part of a home occupation, except for
routine accessory sales to customers in a barber shop or beauty shop.
(a) Major Home Occupation. A Home Occupation that does not meet the additional standards
for a Minor Home Occupation in Article 1322.
(b) Minor Home Occupation. A Home Occupation that meets the additional standards for a
Minor Home Occupation as provided in Article 1322. A Minor Home Occupation also
includes, but is not limited to, activity that meets all of the requirements for a “No Impact
Home-Based Business” as provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(Note - In most cases a Minor Home Occupation is permitted by right under Section 1304.01,
while in most cases a Major Home Occupation requires Zoning Hearing Board approval as a
special exception.)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
12
1. No Impact Home-Based Business - A type of Minor Home Occupation that meets the
following definition as provided in the PA Municipalities Planning Code, as may be
amended: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an
accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and
which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those
normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity must
satisfy the following requirements:
a) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property
and surrounding residential uses.
b) The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in
the dwelling.
c) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory
of a substantial nature.
d) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not
limited to, parking, signs or lights.
e) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference,
including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in
the neighborhood.
f) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in
volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the
neighborhood.
g) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not
occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
h) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
1302.57 Hospital. A building(s) which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health as a
Hospital, and which involves the diagnosis and treatment of human ailments, and which
may include behavioral health facilities and psychiatric hospitals operated in accordance
with all laws and regulations, provided the behavioral health facilities occupy no more
than 25% of the floor space of the hospital facilities directly associated with the diagnosis,
care, treatment, and sleeping facilities of patients. (Amended 7/5/17, Ord. 2017-15)
1302.58 Hotel. A building or groups of buildings which has a central office and which contains 1
or more rental units which are rented to transient visitors to the area, and which may also
include an accessory tavern, restaurant, pool, exercise facilities or meeting facilities.
(Amended 3/6/18, Ord. 2018-3)
1302.59 Impervious Coverage. The percentage of the lot area of a lot that is covered by building
roofs, gravel, concrete or asphalt, and/or other man-made surfaces having a coefficient of
runoff of 0.8 or greater. The City Engineer shall determine whether a surface would meet
this definition.
1302.60 Industrial Park. One or more allowed industrial or office uses on lots contiguously
arranged, so as to form a planned development of industrial sites, or buildings.
1302.61 Institution. Place of worship, school, college, medical center, hospital, society or
organization of a public character and/or the building or buildings used by such
organizations.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
13
1302.62 Junkyard. A lot or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage or
sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded material, or for the
collection, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running
condition, and for the sale of parts thereof.
1302.63 Kennel. Any commercial or private place where six or more dogs, cats or other animals
over three months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred, shown, treated or groomed.
(Amended 9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-22)
1302.64 Licensed Gaming Facility. A licensed gaming facility as authorized by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, pursuant to 4 Pa. C.S., Ch. 11, entitled "Pennsylvania
Race Horse Development and Gaming Act," as amended from time to time.
1302.65 Livestock. Generally accepted outdoor farm animals (i.e. cows, goats, horses, pigs,
barnyard fowl, etc.) not to include cats, dogs and other house pets.
1302.66 Live Work Unit. A type of Home Occupation that involves a dwelling unit which also
includes working space for a resident of the dwelling to pursue such occupations as:
creating art involving paintings, drawings, sculptures, ceramics, literature, music or
custom crafts; dance instruction, musical instruction or dramatic art; or having an office.
However, such use shall not involve more than 6 persons present at the same time for
instruction. See also Article 1322 (z), Additional Requirements for Specific Uses.
1302.67 Lot. A parcel of land fronting on a street used or designed to be used by one use or
structure or by a related group of uses or structures, and the accessory uses or structures
customarily incident thereto, including such open spaces as are arranged or designed and
required in connection with such structure or group of structures.
(a) Lot Area – The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
(b) Lot Corner – A lot whose lot lines form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the
intersection of 2 street lines. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot
if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street
lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
(c) Lot Coverage – The building area divided by the lot area expressed as a percent.
(d) Lot, Depth of – The distance along a straight line drawn from the mid-point of the front
line to the mid-point of the rear lot line.
(e) Lot, Interior – A lot other than a corner lot.
(f) Lot Line – Any boundary of a lot. (See Property Line in this Section 1302).
(g) Lot Line, Front – The street line at the front of a lot. In the case of a corner lot, the owner
may designate either street line as the front lot line.
(h) Lot Line, Rear – The lot line opposite to the front lot line.
(i) Lot Line, Side – Any lot line not a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
(j) Recorded Lot – A lot recorded as a separate and distinct parcel of land according to
official land records of the applicable County.
(k) Lot, Through – A lot having its front and rear yards each abutting on a street as herein
defined.
(l) Lot, Width – The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the minimum
prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated. In the event of a curved lot
line, such lot width at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line shall be measured
along the curve. Where buildings are permitted to be attached, the lot width shall be
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
14
measured from the center of the party wall. Where a pie-shaped lot fronts upon a cul-desac,
the minimum lot width may be reduced to 75 percent of the width that would
otherwise be required.
1302.68 Main Use of Building. The principal or most important use of a building on a lot.
1302.69 Manufactured (Mobile) Home. For a dwelling constructed after 1977, this term shall mean
a single family detached dwelling that was constructed under the Federal construction
requirements for Manufactured Housing under regulations of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development. For a dwelling constructed before 1977, this term shall
mean a transportable single family detached dwelling intended for permanent occupancy
that is contained in one unit or two or more units designed to be joined into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it can be used without a permanent perimeter
foundation. This term is different from a "Sectional Home," which meets the Construction
Codes of the City.
1302.70 Manufactured (Mobile) Home Park. A lot under single ownership which includes two or
more mobile/manufactured homes for residential use. The individual manufactured homes
may be individually owned. A development of mobile/ manufactured homes that is
subdivided into individual lots shall be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision of
site-built homes, and shall not be considered to be a "manufactured home park."
1302.71 Manufacturing. The treatment or processing of raw materials, the production of products
from raw or prepared materials by giving them new forms of qualities.
1302.72 Massage Parlor. An establishment that meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands and/or a mechanical
device on another person below the waist, in return for monetary compensation, and
which does not involve persons who are related to each other.
(b) The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the State as a health care
professional or a massage therapist certified by a recognized professional organization
that requires a minimum of 80 hours of professional training. Massage therapy by a
certified professional shall be considered "personal service."
(c) The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing home or an office of
a medical doctor or chiropractor or as an incidental accessory use to a permitted exercise
club or high school or college athletic program.
(d) The massages are conducted within private or semi-private rooms.
1302.73 Meal Center. A non-profit establishment where food is offered to the hungry for free or at
a reasonably low price.
1302.74 Medical Marijuana. Marijuana for certified medical use as legally permitted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16, as amended. (Added 7/2/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1302.75 Medical Marijuana Academic Clinic Research Center. An accredited medical school
within this Commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute care hospital licensed
within this Commonwealth. . (Added 7/2/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1302.76 Medical Marijuana Act 16. Pennsylvania “Medical Marijuana Act” (Act of Apr. 17, 2016,
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
15
P.L. 84, No. 16, a/k/a Act 2016-16, 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq, as amended. The related
Pennsylvania Department of Health regulations can be found at 28 Pa.Code, Part IX,
Chapters 1131 et seq. (Added 7/2/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1302.77 Medical Marijuana Dispensary. A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof, which holds a
permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Health (DOH) to dispense medical
marijuana. (Added 7/2/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1302.78 Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor. A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof, which holds a
permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Health (DOH) to grow and process medical
marijuana. (Added 7/2/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1302.79 Medical Marijuana Organization or Facility. A dispensary or a grower/processor of
marijuana for medical purposes. (Added 7/2/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1302.80 Medical Office Building. A building used exclusively by physicians and dentists for
treatment and examination of patients, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on
the premises.
1302.81 Membership Club. A building, structure, lot or land area used as a private club or social
organization not conducted for individual profit or gain.
1302.82 Mineral Extraction. The removal from the surface or beneath the surface of the land of
bulk mineral resources using significant machinery. This use also includes accessory
stockpiling and processing of mineral resources. "Mineral extraction" includes but is not
limited to the extraction of sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, oil, coal, clay,
shale, and iron ore. The routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during
construction shall not by itself be considered to be mineral extraction.
1302.83 Motel. Shall have the same meaning as “hotel.”
1302.84 Motor Vehicle Sales. An establishment which offers motor vehicles for sale to the general
public. This business may also perform any repair service to motor vehicles normally
performed in a repair garage.
1302.85 Municipalities Planning Code or State Planning Code. The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as reenacted and amended.
1302.86 Nightclub. An establishment that meets all of the following standards: (1) offers amplified
music after 12 midnight; (2) sells alcoholic beverages primarily for on-site consumption;
(3) includes hours open to patrons after 12 midnight; (4) has a building capacity of over
150 persons; and (5) has less than 20 percent of its total sales in food and non-alcoholic
beverages.
1302.87 Non-Conforming Lot. A lot of record lawfully existing at the date of passage of this
Zoning Ordinance or due to subsequent zoning changes, which does not have the
minimum lot area for the district in which it is located.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
16
1302.88 Non-Conforming Sign. A lawful sign existing at the date of the passage of this Ordinance
or any amendment thereto, which does not conform to the controls regulating signs in
Article 1320.
1302.89 Non-Conforming Structure. A structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this
Ordinance or any amendment thereto affecting such structure which does not conform to
the building regulations for the district in which it is situated.
1302.90 Non-Conforming Use. Any use of a building, structure, lot or land, or part thereof,
lawfully existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto
affecting such use, which does not conform to the regulations of this Ordinance applicable
to the use within the district in which it is situated.
1302.91 Ordinance, This. The Bethlehem City Zoning Ordinance, including the Official Zoning
Map, as amended.
1302.92 Open Area. An unoccupied area open to the sky, usually in a natural state but including
squares, plazas and formal gardens. Also the unoccupied area open to the sky on the same
lot with a principal and/or accessory building.
1302.93 PA. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
1320.94 Parking Area. A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles with
or without the payment of rent or charges in money or other consideration.
1302.95 Parking Space. A stall or berth used for parking motor vehicles, which meets the required
length and width of this ordinance, not including areas of a street or alley. A typical space
is 9’ x 18’.
1302.96 Parking Structure. A facility that has at least one level of vehicle parking above another
level of vehicle parking.
1302.97 Pawn Shop. An establishment engaged in retail sales of secondhand merchandise and that
offers personal loans secured by consumer goods, jewelry and other personal property
held by the Pawn Shop.
1302.98 Personal Care Home.
(i) A premise in which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided
for a period exceeding 24 hours, for four or more adults who are not relatives of the
operator, who do not require the services in or of a licensed long-term care facility, but
who do require assistance or supervision in activities of daily living or instrumental
activities of daily living.
(ii) The term includes a premise that has held or presently holds itself out as a personal
care home and provides food and shelter to four or more adults who need personal care
services, but who are not receiving the services.
1302.99 Place of Worship. Synagogues, churches, mosques, temples and similar buildings used
primarily for religious worship for more than 10 persons at a time on a regular basis and
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
17
that are operated for nonprofit and noncommercial purposes. A Place of Worship may
include up to 2 dwelling units for religious staff-persons and their families. If a religious
use includes other residential uses, they shall meet the requirements of such uses.
1302.100 Planned Office Development. Land under single ownership or agreement developed
according to a detailed plan to provide one or more sites for an office structure providing
adequate overall intensity of land use, access or amount of light, air and open space, while
permitting flexibility in placement and bulk and adequate safeguards protecting the
neighborhood from any adverse effects.1302.100 Planned Unit Development. A tract of
land that was planned and developed as a permanent, year-round residential tract and was
approved by the City of Bethlehem as a Planned Unit Development. A PUD allowed a
reasonable degree of flexibility in the placement, bulk, and interrelationship of buildings
and uses, while at the same time maintaining adequate overall intensity of land use,
density of population, and amounts of light, air, access, and open space. A new PUD is no
longer allowed by this Zoning Ordinance.
1302.101 Portable Structure. A structure or building, whether above or below grade level, designed
or intended for seasonal rather than year-round use, and not attached to a principal
building.
1302.102 Prison/correctional facility. Publicly or privately operated facilities housing persons
awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense.
1302.103 Private Power Generation Facility. A facility owned and operated by an entity, other than
a governmental body or public utility, which generates, transmits and/or distributes
electrical energy for sale.
1302.104 Professional Office. The office of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of
said profession. Such professions shall be limited to those of medicine, law, architecture,
engineering, art, religion, music, insurance, real estate, psychology and accounting.
1302.105 Property Line. A line forming the front, rear or sides of lots or parcels of property as
described in the recorded title.
1302.106 Public Notice. Notice of the time and place of a hearing, meeting, proceeding or other
matter published as provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or other
applicable State law.
1302.107Recreational Vehicle. Travel Trailers, folding tent trailers, motor homes, truck
campers removed from a truck or pickup truck, horse trailer, boat trailer with or
without boats, boats, utility trailers, watercraft, and all other vehicles designed
mainly to serve a person for primarily recreational instead of transportational
purposes. See also Section 1319.06. (Amended 12/24/12, Ord. 2012-43)
1302.108 Related or Relative. Persons who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or formal foster
relationship to result in one of the following relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent,
child, grandparent, great-grandparent, grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece,
nephew, cousin, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, or parent-in-law. This term specifically
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
18
shall not include relationships such as second, third, or more distant cousins. See
definition of "Dwelling Unit."
1302.109 Residential Retirement Complex. A planned residential development for persons of
retirement age located on 10 acres or more which is held in one ownership and which
provides certain health care facilities for the residents. Additional communal facilities
may also include dining, recreation, open space, parking and related facilities and
services.
1302.110 Restaurant. Any establishment, however designated, at which food is prepared and sold
for consumption on or off the premises. However, a concession stand at a public or a
community playground, playfield, park or swimming pool, operated by the same agency
operating the recreational facilities, and solely for the convenience of patrons of the
facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
1302.111 Restaurant, Drive-Through. An establishment where ready-to-eat food and drinks are
prepared and sold and which includes a facility for ordering and delivery of food and
drinks to customers while they are inside their own vehicles while on the premises.
1302.112 Restaurant, Fast-Casual. An establishment that serves food and beverages that does not
offer full table service, regardless of whether seats or other accommodations are provided
inside or outside of the building for patrons, but has a higher quality of food with fewer
frozen or processed ingredients than a fast-food restaurant. A Fast-Casual Restaurant may
or may not have a drive-through service. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1302.113 Restaurant, Fast-Food. An establishment that serves food and beverages prepared in a
highly-processed fashion, typically prepared on a large scale from bulk ingredients using
standardized cooking and production methods and equipment for consumption outside of
the building or in vehicles parked upon the premises, regardless of whether seats or other
accommodations are provided inside or outside of the building for patrons. A Fast-Food
Restaurant may or may not have a drive-through service. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-
39)
1302.114 Roadside Stand. A structure used for the sale of farm and nursery products 80% of which
shall be grown or produced by the owner and offered for sale.
1302.115 Satellite Earth Stations. A dish-shaped antenna designed to receive television broadcasts
relayed by microwave signals from earth orbiting communications satellites.
1302.116 Screen or Screening. A strip meeting Section 1318 densely planted with shrubs or trees.
The buffer yard shall have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof
except the following: for each entrance, one directional arrow and the name of the
establishment with "For Patrons Only" or like limitation, not over 2 square feet in area,
which shall be non-illuminated. See also definition of "Buffer Yard".
1302.117 Shopping Center. Five or more retail stores that are separated primarily by vertical walls
and are in a complex designed as an integrated unit served by common parking and
service facilities, and which has architectural and landscape unity. Such use may also
include allowed offices, restaurants and personal service uses.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
19
1302.118 Sign and Sign Types. See Sections 1320.02 and 1320.04.
1302.119 Single and Separate Ownership. The ownership of a lot by one or more persons,
partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any
adjoining lot.
1302.120 Slope of Construction Area. The slope of the construction area shall be defined as the
highest slope that is present within the construction area prior to disturbance. See
"Exceptions" in Article 1316, and the definition of Construction Area in Article 1302. The
contours of land regulated by this Section shall not be altered prior to documentation,
submission and regulation under this Section.
1302.121 Special Exception Uses. A use in one or more districts for which the Zoning Hearing
Board may grant a permit, pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
1302.122 State. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
1302.123 Steep Slope. Any area of land with a gradient in excess of 15 percent.
1302.124 Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor or roof above. (See Basement in this Section 1302). See
definition of “Half Story”.
1302.125 Street. Any road, highway, avenue, street, parkway, lane or other way, public or private,
set aside and commonly used to serve 3 or more lots primarily for vehicular traffic
purposes. An alley shall not be deemed a street.
(a) Street Curb Line – The official line with grade of an existing or proposed curb on any
street as approved by the Department of Public Works.
(b) Street Line – The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary of a public street or
street right-of-way, or between a lot and a private street which serves 2 or more separately
owned homes or buildings.
(c) Street Width – The perpendicular distance between street lines.
1302.126 Structure. Anything constructed or erected above or below the ground or upon another
structure.
1302.127 Substantial Damage. Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent
or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
1302.128 Substantial Improvement. Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (a)
before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and
is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of the definition
'substantial improvement' is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimension of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either (a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
20
safe living conditions, or (b) any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure”.
1302.129 Substation, Gas or Electric. An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than
generation or utilization, through which electric or gas energy in bulk is passed for the
purposes of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet the needs of the general
public, provided that an electric or gas substation permitted in a residential district shall
not include rotating equipment, storage of materials, trucks or repair facilities or housing
of repair crews.
1302.130 Swimming Pool, Private. Any receptacle or artificially constructed container for water,
whether erected above or below ground level, having a wall depth of 2 feet or more at any
point within its perimeter, intended or adapted for the purposes of immersion or partial
immersion of humans therein, used in connection with dwelling units, available only to
the family of the dwelling unit holder and his private guests, not open to the public, and
not otherwise regulated by any statutes or by rules and regulations other than those of the
City of Bethlehem.
1302.131 Swimming Pool, Public or Semi-Public. Any swimming pool other than a private
swimming pool, including publicly and privately owned pools open to the general public
and pools owned and operated in conjunction with membership organizations, motels,
hotels, and other similar uses.
1302.132 Tasting Room. A retail facility which may or may not be a part of a micro-brewery or
micro-distillery, that offers tastes of the product for primarily retail sales for off-site
consumption or carry-out. No on-site retail consumption is permitted. (Amended
12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1302.133 Tavern. A commercial use that involves sale of food and beverages to the public, and
which involves alcoholic beverages making up more than 50 percent of the total volume
of sales, and which does not meet the definition of a “Nightclub.” A commercial use that
involves a lower percentage shall be considered a Restaurant.
1302.134 Temporary Commercial Use. A retail sales use which primarily operates in the open air or
under a tent and which is open to the public for retail sales less than 90 days per calendar
year. The retail sales of trees or shrubs primarily grown in the ground on the premises
shall be allowed in any location.
1302.135 Temporary Shelter. A facility operated by a non-profit agency providing temporary
lodging, with or without meals, for persons of limited income with no ordinary or regular
residence or to persons who need such shelter to avoid an abusive situation or because of
a sudden event, such as fire, flood, domestic violence, condemnation, or court-ordered
conviction.
1302.136 Theaters, Drive-In. An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted
primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions, on a paid admission
basis, to patrons seated in an automobile or on outdoor seats.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
21
1302.137 Trailer. A vehicle designed to be pulled by another vehicle for on-street use, and that is
part of a tractor-trailer combination or that is used to transport excavating equipment,
boats or similar items.
1302.138 Treatment Center. A use involving any one or a combination of the following:
(a) A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for 3 or more unrelated
persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling because of:
1. criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house, or a facility for the housing
of persons judged to be juvenile delinquents, or a criminal work release or prerelease
facility;
2. current addiction to a controlled substance that was used in an illegal manner or
alcohol; and/or
3. a type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to be a threat to the
physical safety of others.
(b) A residential or non-residential Methadone Treatment Facility, which shall be defined as a
facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health, other than a Hospital, to use
the drug methadone in the treatment, maintenance or detoxification of persons.
(c) A lot upon which resides 2 or more persons who are required to register their place of
residence with the Pennsylvania State Police as a requirement of the Pennsylvania
Megan’s Law II, or its successor law, as amended.
(d) A use that otherwise meets the definition of a Group Home, except that it includes a
higher number of residents than is allowed in a Group Home, unless approved otherwise
under Section 1325.07(d).
(e) A behavioral health facility and/or a psychiatric hospital meeting the requirements of all
laws and regulations shall qualify as a Treatment Center. (Amended 7/5/17, Ord. 2017-25)
1302.139 Truck (State Police definition). A motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation
of property. The term includes motor vehicles designed with seats that may be readily
removed and reinstalled if those vehicles are primarily used for the transportation of
property.
(a) Tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles, equipment, or
implements of husbandry, and not so constructed as to carry and load thereon other than
part of the weight of the load being drawn.
(b) Truck, light. Light trucks are trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single
rear wheels.
(c) Truck, medium. Medium trucks are trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck tractors,
with single rear axles and dual rear wheels.
(d) Truck, heavy. Heavy trucks are trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with
two or more rear axles.
(e) Semi-trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its
weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
(f) Utility Trailer (State police Definition). A trailer, except a recreational trailer, which does
not have air brakes.
1302.140 Unit for Care of Relative. A dwelling unit that: a) is especially created for and limited to
occupancy by a close "relative" of the permanent residents of the principal dwelling unit,
b) is necessary to provide needed care and supervision to such relative, and c) meets the
requirements for such use in Section 1322.03.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
22
1302.141 Variance. The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing Board to use,
construct, expand, or alter land or structures in such a way that compliance is not required
with a specific requirement of the Zoning Ordinance. Any variance shall only be granted
within the limitations of the PA Municipalities Planning Code. See Article 1325 of this
Ordinance.
1302.142 Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon rails or
tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled wheelchair or an electrical mobility
device operated by and designed for the exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related
disability.
1302.143 Visitor Center. A use which shall include exhibit space, presentation space, informational
displays and/or retail space. The Visitor Center may also include ancillary and operational
spaces necessary to support the visitor center such as restaurants, administrative offices,
storage, etc.
1302.144 Yard. Any open space located on the same lot with a principal building situated between
the nearest roofed portion of the principal buildings and a lot line.
(a) Yard, Front – A yard extending across the full width of the lot abutting the front lot line.
(b) Yard, Rear – A yard extending across the full width of the lot, abutting the rear lot line.
(c) Yard, Side – A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, abutting the side lot
line.
(d) Yard, Width – The minimum perpendicular distance between the lot line and the nearest
roofed portion of the principal building.
1302.145 Zoning Officer. The duly constituted municipal official designated to administer and
enforce the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bethlehem.
1302.146 Zoning Permit. A permit stating that a structure and/or the proposed use of a building
and/or land is in conformity with all applicable city zoning regulations, to the best
knowledge of the City Staff. The City may utilize a separate Zoning Permit or may have
the applicable portions of a Permit serve the purposes of a Zoning Permit.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
23
ARTICLE 1303
CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
1303.01 Establishment of Districts. The City of Bethlehem is hereby divided into zoning districts
of different types, each type being of such number, shape, kind and area, and of such
common units or purpose and adaptability of use that is deemed most suitable to carry out
the objectives of this Ordinance. Each parcel of land and every building or other structure
in the City, except as otherwise provided by law or by the Ordinance, shall be subject to
the regulations, restrictions and requirements specified for the district in which it is
located.
1303.02 Classes of Districts. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the City is divided into
the following zoning districts:
RR Rural Residential District
RR-F Residential Overlay District - Friedensville Road
RR-T Residential Overlay District - Township Line Road
RS Single Family Residential District
RG Medium Density Residential District
RT High Density Residential District
R-RC Residential Retirement Complex District
I Institutional District
I-O Institutional Overlay District
CB Central Business District
CG General Commercial District
CL Limited Commercial District
CS Shopping Center District
CM Office - Research Center District
PI Planned Industrial District
LI Light Industrial District
IN Industrial District
IN-O Industrial Overlay District
IR Industrial Redevelopment District
IR-R Industrial Redevelopment - Residential Option District
CM-LTN Landmark Conservation and Traditional Neighborhood Development
Overlay District
CMU Mixed Use Commercial District
1303.03 Zoning Map. The Bethlehem Zoning Map shall consist of maps accurately showing the
boundaries of various zoning districts. The zoning map information may be maintained
and updated using computer files. At least one paper copy of the official map is also
maintained and available in the Zoning Office. The zoning map and all notations,
references and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this Zoning
Ordinance and shall be as much a part of this Zoning Ordinance as if all were fully
described herein.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
24
1303.04 District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries between
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply.
(a) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with streets, alleys,
waterways, or railroad rights-of-way, the center line of such features shall be construed to
be such boundaries unless otherwise indicated on the Map.
(b) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with lot lines that
existed at the time of the adoption of the Zoning Map, they shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(c) Where district boundaries do not coincide with a physical feature or lot line, and are not
fixed by dimensions on the Zoning Map or notes, the boundary shall be determined using
a scale. GIS NAD, 1983 PA South State Plane Coordinator Systems Zone 3702.
(d) All areas of the City which are under water and are now shown as included within any
district shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins
the water area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each
district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet
each other.
(e) Where land area has become a part of the City by annexation, the same shall
automatically be classed as being in the "R-R Residential" district until such classification
shall have been changed by an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance as provided herein.
(f) Whenever any street, alley, or other public right-of-way is vacated, the zoning district
adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public right-of-way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such vacation based on the GIS State Plane Coordinates the
street centerline boundary.
1303.05 Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts. For the regulations pertaining to the floodway and
flood fringe districts, which are overlays to the existing districts as shown on the Zoning
Map, refer to Article 1317.
1303.06 Airport Approach. See also the Airport Approach Overlay Zones in Article 1360 of the
City’s Codified Ordinances.
1303.07 Purposes of Each District.
(a) RR Rural Residential District – To provide for low density neighborhoods that are
primarily comprised of single family detached dwellings.
(b) RR-F and RR-T Residential Overlay Districts – See Article 1310.
(c) RS Single Family Residential District – To provide for medium density neighborhoods
that are primarily comprised of single family detached dwellings.
(d) RG Medium Density Residential District – To provide for medium high density
neighborhoods with a mix of housing types.
(e) RT High Density Residential District – To provide for higher density residential
neighborhoods with a mix of housing types.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
25
(f) R-RC Residential District – To provide for coordinated residential development for
persons of retirement age, including communal dining, open space, shared parking and
recreational facilities. To also allow for ancillary health care facilities.
(g) Institutional District – To provide areas for large educational, medical and health, and
public institutions within which facilities to meet their needs may be developed.
(h) Institutional Overlay District – See Article 1312.
(i) CB Central Business District – To provide for an orderly coordinated development of
varied commercial business and office uses in combination with limited intensive
residential development in the central business areas of North Bethlehem and South
Bethlehem, and to encourage excellence of design in the development of properties. To
promote pedestrian-friendly uses, as opposed to uses that are auto dependent.
(j) CG General Commercial District – To provide for a wide variety of commercial uses,
including more intensive commercial uses, in areas with few historic buildings and that
include few existing homes. To manage traffic to avoid congestion and safety hazards,
particularly in regards to access to major streets.
(k) CL Limited Commercial District – To provide for less intensive types of commercial
uses in areas that include many existing homes or small lots that are immediately adjacent
to residential neighborhoods. The intent is to control uses that are most likely to generate
nuisances or hazards for nearby residents, such as 24 hour operations.
(l) CS Shopping Center District – To provide for the development of modern, well-planned
shopping centers with coordinated traffic access, to provide for a variety of compatible
business uses. The district is intended to result in a group of properly related business and
compatible facilities comprising a single architectural scheme with appropriate
landscaping, off-street parking, screening and vehicular access. New residential uses are
proposed to be limited to above commercial uses.
(m) CM Office Research Center District – To provide for offices, research and development,
educational and complementary uses. To avoid uses that are most likely to generate heavy
tractor-trailer traffic, particularly on roads on the South Mountain.
(n) OMU Office Mixed Use District – In addition to serving the purposes of the City
Comprehensive Plan and the overall purposes of this Ordinance, this District is intended
to promote redevelopment of areas of the City that are currently underutilized and are
only partially developed. This District also recognizes that this area of Bethlehem is
unique in terms of its size and its proximity to ramps of a limited access expressway (PA.
Route 378). This District is also intended to provide transitional zoning provisions
adjacent to a County Park and recognized historical site, the Burnside Plantation. This
District also is intended to encourage ground-floor retail and service uses to create
connectivity between the residential and commercial buildings on the overall tract.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
26
(o) CMU Mixed Use Commercial District – To promote appropriate types of mixed uses,
including banks, offices and limited commercial uses. The intent is to only allow types of
commercial uses that would be compatible with adjacent dwellings. This District
recognizes areas that are uniquely situated compared to other areas of the City, and allows
future development consistent with such uniqueness. This District is also intended to
provide transitional zoning provisions adjacent to residential areas.
(p) PI Planned Industrial District – To permit and encourage modern industrial development
in a park-like setting. To provide a desirable location for those types of industry which are
harmonious with, and do not constitute a hazard or nuisance to surrounding areas. To
maintain landscaped area as part of each lot, to encourage architectural harmony, and to
create an aesthetically pleasing and functional business park.
(q) LI Light Industrial District – To permit and encourage modern light industrial
development that is located and designed to be compatible with adjacent uses and to
contribute to the economic base of the City. To minimize nuisances and hazards.
(r) IN Industrial District – To provide suitable areas for a wide variety of industrial uses and
compatible commercial uses.
(s) IN-O Industrial Overlay District – This overlay area is intended to promote the economic
revitalization of underutilized industrial properties and to provide suitable areas for the
use of business and industry. In order to accomplish this purpose, flexible design
standards will be applied during the plan approval process.
(t) IR Industrial Redevelopment District – To promote the economic revitalization on
underutilized properties that historically were used for older industrial uses. To allow a
variety of non-residential land uses, with flexible design standards applied during the site
plan approval process. This district is mainly intended to allow commercial, office,
research and light industrial uses.
(u) IR-R Industrial Redevelopment - Residential District – To promote the economic
revitalization on underutilized properties that historically were used for older industrial
uses. To allow a variety of non-residential land uses, with flexible design standards to be
applied during the site plan approval process. To also allow rental and condominium
apartment dwellings in combination with complementary commercial uses in the same
building.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1304
27
ARTICLE 1304
ALLOWED USES IN PRIMARILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
1304.01. Allowed Uses in Primarily Residential Districts.
(a) For the purposes of Articles 1304 and 1305, the following abbreviations shall have the
following meanings:
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by the Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not Permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Article 1322
(b) Unless otherwise provided by State or Federal law or specifically stated in this Ordinance
(including Section 1324.03), any land or structure shall only be used or occupied for a use
specifically listed in this Section 1304 or 1305 as being allowed in the zoning district where
the land or structure is located. Such uses shall only be permitted if the use complies with
all other requirements of this Ordinance. The following uses shall be allowed in the
following zoning districts:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1304
28
______________________________________________________________________________________________
USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) RR** RS RG RT RRC
______________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) RESIDENTIAL USES
Single Family Detached Dwelling P P P P N
(Note - Manufactured/mobile homes shall meet
the additional requirements of Section 1322)
Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling N N P P N
(Side-by-Side Twin)
Two-Family Detached Dwelling N N P P N
(Typically One Unit Above Another Unit)
Two-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling N N N P N
(Two Units Attached to Another Bldg.)
Townhouses (Single-Family Attached Dwellings or N N P P N
Rowhouses) (S. 1322)
Conversion of an Existing One Family Dwelling into
Two or More Dwelling Units (S. 1322) N N SE SE N
Group Home within a lawful existing dwelling unit
(S. 1322), not including a Treatment Center P P P P P
Multi-Family Dwelling, other than conversion of
an existing one family dwelling into 2 or more
dwellings (S. 1322) N N P P P
Open Space Development Option meeting P N N N N
Article 1309, with a 3 acre minimum tract size.
Residential Retirement Complex (S. 1322) N N N N P
(Amended 9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-22)
(2) COMMERCIAL USES
Bed & Breakfast Inn (S. 1322) N N SE SE N
Funeral Home (S. 1322) N N SE SE N
See also commercial uses allowed by Section 1304.04.
(3) INSTITUTIONAL / SEMI-PUBLIC USES
Cemetery (not including Crematorium) (S. 1322) P N N N N
Community Recreation Center N N P P P
Cultural Center or Museum N N N SE N
Day Care Center, Adult (S. 1322) N N N SE P
Day Care Center, Child (S. 1322) N N N SE N
(See also as an accessory use)
Membership Club meeting and non-commercial N N N SE N
recreational facilities, provided that an “After Hours Club”,
“Tavern” or uses listed separately in this Section
shall only be allowed if so listed in this table and if
the requirements for that use are also met.
Nursing Home and related health care facilities N N N SE P
Personal Care Home or Assisted Living Facility (S. 1322) N N SE SE P
Place of Worship (includes Church) SE P P P P
______________________________________________________________________________________________
** = The allowed uses in the RR-T and RR-F Overlay Districts shall be the same as the RR district, except that the RR-T and RRF
shall allow some additional housing types as provided in Article 1310.
P = Permitted By Right
SE = Permitted By Special Exception (Zoning Hearing Board Approval)
N = Not Permitted
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1304
29
______________________________________________________________________________________________
USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) RR** RS RG RT RRC
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(3) INSTITUTIONAL / SEMI-PUBLIC USES (Cont.)
School, Public or Private, Primary or Secondary SE P P P N
(4) PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC
City Government Uses P P P P P
Government Facility, other than uses listed SE SE SE SE SE
separately in Articles 1304 or 1305
Publicly Owned or Operated Recreation Park P P P P P
Public Utility Facility (See also Section 1301.06) SE SE SE SE SE
other than uses listed separately in Articles
1304 and 1305
Swimming Pool, Non-household (S. 1322) SE P P P P
(5) ACCESSORY USES
Communications Antennae meeting Section 1322. P P P P P
pertaining to antenna placed on certain
existing structures
Day Care Center (accessory to and on the same lot P P P P P
as an existing lawful Place of Worship)
Day Care (S. 1322) an accessory to a dwelling:
- Day care of a maximum of 3 adults or youth, in
addition to “Relatives” of the caregiver Not Regulated
- Group Day Care Home (7 – 12) N N N SE P
- Family Day Care Home (4 – 6) N SE SE SE P
Home Occupation, Major (S. 1322) SE SE SE SE SE
Home Occupation, Minor (S. 1322) P P P P P
Meal Center (accessory to and on the same lot
as an existing lawful place of worship) (< 50 meals) P P P P SE
(> 50 meals ) (S. 1322) SE SE SE SE SE
Meal Center that is NOT an accessory use (S. 1322) SE SE SE P N
Unit for Care of Relative (S. 1322) P P P P P
Wind Turbine, maximum of one on a lot that is an N N N N N
accessory use and is designed primarily for
on-site electricity use (S. 1322)
(6) MISCELLANEOUS USES
Roadside Stand P N N N N
Crop Farming P P P P P
Forestry P P P P P
Nature Preserve or Environmental Education Center P P P P P
Parking Lot as the Principal Use of a Lot (S. 1322) N N N SE N
Livestock and Poultry, Raising of *Article 1159 SE N N N N
Solar Energy Collection Systems P P P P P
Stable, or other keeping of horses (S. 1322) SE N N N N
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
** = The allowed uses in the RR-T and RR-F Overlay Districts shall be the same as the RR district, except that the RR-T and
RR-F shall allow some additional housing types as provided in Article 1310.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322)= See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1304
30
1304.02. Permitted Accessory Uses in All Districts. An accessory use of a dwelling is only permitted
if such use is customarily incidental to the residential use and is specifically permitted by this
Ordinance. The following are permitted by right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use
in all districts, within the requirements of Section 1322 and all other requirements of this
Ordinance:
(a) Antennae, Standard for television, radio and similar reception
(b) Fence (See Section 1318) or Wall
(c) Garage, Household
(d) Garage Sale
(e) Pets, Keeping of, in compliance with City Health regulations
(f) Parking or Loading, Off-Street, only to serve a use that is permitted in that district
(g) Recreational Facilities, limited to use by: residents of a development or students at a primary
or secondary school or center for the care and treatment of youth, and their occasional invited
guests
(h) Residential accessory structure
(i) Signs, as permitted by Section 1320
(j) Swimming Pool, Household
(k) Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer is clearly customary and incidental to a permitted by right, special exception
or conditional principal use.
1304.03. Reserved
1304.04. Reuse of Corner Commercial Uses Allowed in the RT and RG Districts. The following uses
shall be allowed in addition to uses allowed under Section 1304.01:
(a) As a special exception, uses that are small in scale, such as but not limited to a professional office,
barber/beauty shop, retail store, nail salon, coffee shop, retail bakery, art gallery, real estate office,
photography studio, green grocer, cafe, or antique store may be approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board (“the Board”) provided all of the following requirements are met:
(1) The lot shall be at the corner of 2 streets. The primary building shall have an existing
storefront character. This shall include such features as large first floor commercial
window(s) and a main entrance at the corner or along one of the street facades abutting the
commercial windows.
(2) At least a portion of the proposed business space shall have been occupied at one time
by a principal lawful business use. This subsection 2 may allow a business use to be
established even when a nonconforming use has been considered to have been
abandoned. This provision recognizes that some building space may have otherwise
lost its right to be occupied by a nonconforming use. The new business use shall not
necessarily be limited to the floor area that previously was occupied by a business use.
The business use shall be limited to within the existing building, and may not involve
building expansions for the use, other than as may be necessary for fire safety or
handicapped access.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1304
31
(3) In considering whether to approve the special exception use, the Board shall consider
whether the total impact upon the neighborhood and parking needed for all uses on the
lot after the new use would be in operation would exceed the total impact of all uses
on the lot that existed prior to the application. For example, this decision may consider
whether the applicant proposes to reduce the number of dwelling units on the lot.
(4) The Board shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions upon the singular use,
such as but not limited to: 1) limits on hours of operation, 2) limits on the maximum floor
area occupied by the use, 3) requirements that the operator of the use regularly collect litter
on the sidewalk and gutters at edge of street adjacent to the lot, and 4) conditions that
preserve and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood.
(5) As part of the special exception, the Board shall have the authority to modify off-street
parking requirements, considering the total impact of the new uses of the lot versus the
previous uses, and considering whether a percentage of customers are likely to arrive
by public transit and/or walking. The Board may also approve a reduction in the
required parking as part of the special exception approval if the applicant proves that
there is an excess of on-street parking spaces during hours when the business will be
in operation.
(6) Signs shall need approval as part of the special exception process. The Board may
approve a total sign area of up to 20 square feet, which shall be limited to projecting,
wall and/or window signs. No new sign shall be internally illuminated. Any lighting of
signs shall be limited to hours when the use is open to the public. All signs must comply
with any applicable Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB) and Historic
Conservation Commission (HCC) regulations and any other applicable laws and
regulations.
(7) A barber shop, beauty shop, or hairstyling/haircutting use, or nail salon use shall have a
licensed barber, cosmetologist, or nail technician on-site during all hours when the use is
open. The number of styling chairs shall be limited to two (2).
(8) The use shall not meet the definition of an Adult-Oriented Establishment or the definition
of a B.Y.O.B. Club.
(9) There shall be no on site frying of foods.
(10) Alcohol sales shall not be permitted.
(11) Tattoo parlors and pawn shops shall not be permitted.
(12) All uses must strictly comply with Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB) and/or
Historic Conservation Commission (HCC) regulations, if applicable, in such residential
districts.
(Entire Article 1304.04 Amended 12-24-12, Ord. 2012-44)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
32
ARTICLE 1305
ALLOWED USES IN PRIMARILY NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
1305.01 Allowed Uses in Primarily Non-Residential Districts. Only the following uses are allowed
in each respective zoning district, except as may be allowed by Section 1304.03:
For the Institutional Overlay District, see Section 1312.
For the OMU District, see Section 1314. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
For additional requirements in the CMU Mixed Use Commercial District, see Section 1313.
For additional requirements of IN-O, refer to Article 1315.
For additional requirements for the IR Industrial Redevelopment District and the IR-R Industrial
Redevelopment - Residential District, see Section 1316.
For manufacturing uses, the types of uses listed in this Section correspond approximately to the
categories of the North American Classification System, administered by the US Department of
Commerce. In case of question about the categorization, such system shall be consulted.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
33
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL CG CB LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
a. RESIDENTIAL USES
Single Family Detached Dwelling N N N N N N N N N N N P2
(Note - Manufactured/mobile homes shall meet
the additional requirements of Section 1322)
Two Family Semi-Detached Dwelling N N N N N N N N N N N P
Two Family Detached Dwelling N N N N N N N N N N N P
Two Family Attached Dwelling N N N N N N N N N N N P
Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling N N N N N N N N N N N P
(side-by-side)
Townhouse (Single Family Attached Dwelling) N N N N N N N N N N P P
(S. 1322)
Multi-Family Dwellings (S. 1322), other than
conversions of an existing one family P4 P1 P4 N N N N N N N P P3
dwelling into 2 or more dwellings
Boarding House (includes Rooming House)
(S. 1322) SE SE SE1 N N N N SE N N N N
Manufactured/Mobile Home Park (S. 1322) N SE N N N N N N N N N N
Group Home within a lawful existing dwelling
unit (S.1322), not including a Treatment Center P P P N N N N P N N N N
Conversion of an Existing One Family Dwelling into
Two or More Dwelling Units (See also N N N N N N N N N N N N
Unit for Care of Relative under Accessory Uses),
other than as allowed by the above Multi-Family
Dwellings provision with a street level commercial use.
Dormitories or other Housing Owned or
Operated by a College or University and N P1in CG P1 N N N N P N N P1 N
Limited to Occupancy by Students or Staff N in CS
of the College or University
(in addition to housing listed above)
Fraternity or Sorority N N N N N N N P N N N N
Live Work Unit in compliance with the P N P N N N N N N N P N
Home Occupation and Live Work
Provisions of Section 1322.03.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________
1 = Such housing shall be located in the same building as a principal commercial use that is on the front street level. This
requirement for a street level commercial use shall not apply to buildings fronting on local streets. See the optional
density bonus for workforce housing in Article 1307.
2 = In the OMU District the maximum lot size for any single family dwelling shall be 4,000 square feet
3 = Provision of Section 1322 shall not apply in the OMU District for multi-family dwellings
4 = Such housing shall be located in the same building as a principal retail, restaurant or personal service use that is on the
front street level. An office use, professional or otherwise, shall not be permitted on the front street level. This
requirement for a street level retail or service use shall not apply to buildings fronting on local streets. See the optional
density bonus for workforce housing in Article 1307.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
34
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
b. COMMERCIAL USES
Adult Oriented Establishment and N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Massage Parlors (S. 1322)
After Hours Club - Note - This use is effectively N N N N N N N N N N N N
prohibited by State Act 219 of 1990 (S. 1322).
Airport (S. 1322) (see also Heliport) N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Amusement Arcade N P N N N N N N N P P P
Amusement Park or Water Park N P N N N N N N N N N N
Animal Cemetery N P N P P P P P N N N N
Animal Shelter N N N P P N N N N N N N
Arena or Auditorium P P P P N P P P N P P N
Auditorium (Commercial), Arena, Performing Arts Center
or Exhibition-Trade Show Center P P P P P P P P N P P P
Auto Body Shop or Auto Repair Garage (S. 1322) N P N P P N N N N N N N
Auto, Boat or Mobile/Manufactured Home Sales
(S. 1322) N P N N N N N N N N P3 N
Bakery, Retail P P P N P N N N P P P P
Bed and Breakfast Inn (S. 1322) P P P N N N N P N P P P
Beverage Distributor (wholesale) N P N N N N N N N P P N
Bus Maintenance or Storage Yard N N N P P P N N N N N N
Bus, Taxi or Passenger Rail Terminal P P P P P P N N N P P N
BYOB Club in compliance with Section 1318.33 N N in CG N N N N N N N N N N
SE in CS
Car Wash (S. 1322) N P N N N N N N N N N N
Catering, Custom, for Off-Site Consumption P P P P P P P P N P P P
Check Cashing Business (S. 1322) N SE N N N N N N N N N N
Communications Antennae, Commercial (S. 1322),
limited to accessory antenna attached to
specified types of structures P P P P P P P P P P P P
Communications Tower, Commercial (S. 1322), N N N SE P SE SE SE N SE SE N
or other antennae that are not allowed under
the above provision
Conference Center or Exposition Center N P P P N P P P N P P N
Construction Company or Tradesperson's Headquarters
(including but not limited to landscaping,
building trades or janitorial contractor). See
also as Home Occupation. Accessory outdoor
storage shall be permitted provided it meets
the screening requirements of Section 1318.23 P2 P SE2 P P P P N N P P P4
Crafts or Artisan's Studio P P P P P P P P N P P P
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
2 = A maximum of 25% of lot shall be used for outdoor storage, which shall be screened by buildings and/or
landscaping from view of streets.
3 = Limited to sales of motor vehicles that is primarily conducted indoors.
4 = Outdoor storage is not permitted in OMU District.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
35
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
b. COMMERCIAL USES (Cont.)
Custom Printing, Copying, Faxing, Mailing or
Courier Service and similar services to
businesses P P P P P P P P P P P P
Dog Daycare P P N P P P P N P P P P
Exercise Club P P P P P P P P P P P P
Financial Institution (includes banks), with
Drive-Through facilities allowed in the CB and CL
district only if they use rear for vehicle entry and/or
exit. See Drive-through facilities regulations in
Section 1322.03. 4 P P P P P P P P P P P P
Flea Market/ Auction House P P P N P N N N N P P N
Funeral Home, without a crematorium (S. 1322) P P P N P N N P N P N N
Funeral Home with a crematorium (S. 1322) N N N SE P N N SE N N N N
Gaming Facility, Licensed (S. 1322), other than
small games of chance allowed under State law
and the State Lottery N N N N N N N N N P N N
Gas Station, which may occur with a retail store, N P N N P N N N N SE N P5
and which may also include fueling of vehicles
using hydrogen, natural gas or similar fuels (S. 1322)
Heliport (S. 1322) N N N P P P P P N P P N
Hotel or Motel (S. 1322) N P P N P N P N N P P P
Kennel (S. 1322) N N N P P N N N N N N N
Laundromat P P P N P N N P N3 P P P
Laundry, Commercial or Industrial N N N P P P N N N P P N
Lumber Yard N N N P P N N N N P P N
Medical Marijuana Academic Clinic Research
Center (s.1322) N N N P P P P P P N N P
Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor (S.1322) N N N P P P P N N N N N
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries (S. 1322) N P N N N N N N N P N N
Micro-brewery and/or Micro-distillery
(in combination with a restaurant and/or
tasting room) P P P N P N N N P P P P
Motor Vehicle Racetrack, Outdoor N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Nightclub N SE SE2 N P N N N N P P P
Office (May include medical clinics or labs) P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pawn Shop (S. 1322) N SE N N N N N N N N N N
Personal Services (includes tailoring, custom
dress-making, haircutting/styling, travel agency,
nail salon, dog grooming, dry-cleaning, shoe
repair, "massage therapy, certified” and closely
similar uses) P P P N N N N3 N3 N P P P
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
2 = Nightclub cannot be located within 120 feet of a Residential District boundary line
3 = Personal services, restaurants or cafeterias without drive-through service, a Laundromat, a financial institution, and retail stores
may be allowed as accessory uses in a hospital, medical office building, or college or university building provided they do not
have their own exterior entrance and are primarily designed to serve students, staff or patients of the institution. See also the I-O
Overlay District in Article 1312.
4 = In the OMU District, drive through facilities for a Financial Institution are limited to 2 lanes.
5 = Must front on a minor arterial street and must be within 450’ of the property boundary line of a highway interchange.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
36
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
b. COMMERCIAL USES (Cont.)
Planned Office Commercial Development in
compliance with Section 1313 (which
allows additional uses in the CMU
District; S. 1322) N N N N N N N N P N N N
Plant Nursery (other than a Retail Store) N P N P P P P P N P P N
Propane Retail Distributor, other than pre-packaged sales,
with a 150 feet minimum setback required between
any storage or dispensing facilities and any residential
district, and with Fire Department review. N N N SE P N N N N N N N
Recording Studio, Music P P P P P P P P N P P P
Recreation, Commercial Indoor (includes
bowling alley, roller or ice skating rink, batting
practice, and closely similar uses); other than
uses listed separately in this Article N P N N P N N P N P P N
Recreation, Commercial Outdoor (including miniature
golf course, golf driving range, archery, horseback
riding, paintball and closely similar uses); other
than uses listed separately in this Section 1305 N P N P P P N P N P2 P2 N
Repair Service, Household Appliance P P P N P N N N N P2 P2 N
Restaurant or Banquet Hall other than a Nightclub
- with drive-through service (S. 1322) N P N N N N N N N SE N N
- without drive-through service P3,4 P P N N N N3 N3 P P P P
Restaurant, Fast - Casual
- with a drive-through (S. 1322) N P N N N N N N N P P P5
- without a drive-through P3,4 P P N N N N3 N3 P P P P
Restaurant, Fast Food
- with drive-through service (S. 1322) N P N N N N N N N SE N N
- without drive-through service P3,4 P P N N N N3 N3 P P P P
Retail Store (not including uses listed individually in
this Section 1305). Any drive-through facilities
shall meet Section 1322.03. The only
drive-through retail facilities in the CB, OMU
or CL district shall be for a pharmacy. P4 P P N P N N3 N3 N P P P5
Self-Storage Development (S. 1322) N P N P P N N N N N N N
Shopping Center (S. 1322) P4 P P N N N N N N P P P
Target Range, Firearms
- Completely indoor and enclosed N P N P P N N N N P2 P2 N
- Other than above N N N N P N N N N N N N
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
2 = This use is not allowed on a lot that is adjacent to an arterial street (such as Route 412).
3 = Personal services, restaurants without drive-through service, a laundromat, a financial institution, and retail
stores may be allowed as accessory uses in a hospital, medical office building, or college or university building
provided they do not have their own exterior entrance and are primarily designed to serve students, staff or
patients of the institution.
4 = Each business establishment shall have a maximum floor area of 10,000 square feet on any one floor of a
building. This restriction shall not apply to existing structures at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.
5 = In the OMU District, any drive-through for a Fast-Casual Restaurant or a Pharmacy shall be limited to 1 lane.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
(Amended Fast Casual Drive-thru 6/5/18, Ordinance 2018-14)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
37
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
b. COMMERCIAL USES (Cont.)
Tasting Room P P P N P N N N P P P P
Tattoo or Body Piercing Establishment (other than
temporary tattoos or ear piercing, which are
personal service uses) P P P N N N N N N P P N
Tavern, other than a Nightclub 2 SE P P N P N N N N P P P
Television or Radio Broadcasting Studios P P P P P P P P N P P P
Theater, Indoor Movie or Live Theater, other
than an Adult Establishment P P P N P N P P N P P P
Trade/ Hobby School P P P P P P N P N P P N
Veterinarian Office P P P P P P P N P P P P
Visitor Center providing education and
promotional information P P P P P P P P N P P N
Wholesale Sales - see under Industrial Uses
c. INSTITUTIONAL / SEMI-PUBLIC USES
Cemetery (see Crematorium listed
separately; S. 1322) P P P N N N P P N N N N
College or University - Educational and Support
Buildings (See also under Residential Uses) P P P N P P P P N P P P
Community Recreation Center (limited to a government
sponsored or non-profit facility) or Library P P P P P P P P P P P P
Crematorium that is not part of a
funeral home (S. 1322) N N N SE SE N N SE N N N N
Cultural Center or Museum P P P N P P P P N P P N
Day Care Center, Adult (S. 1322) P P P N P P P P P P P P
Day Care Center, Child (S. 1322)
(See also as an accessory use) P P P N P P P P P P P P
Dormitory - See under Residential Uses in this table
Emergency Services Station or Training Facility P P P P P P P P P P P N
Hospital or Surgery Center (S. 1322) N P N N N P N P N P P P
Meal Center (S. 1322) SE SE N N N N N SE N N N N
Membership Club meeting and non-commercial
recreational facilities, provided that such use
shall not be open between 2 and 6 AM, and
provided that such use shall only be allowed in
combination with another use if the other use
is allowed in that district and if the requirements
for that use are also met. P P P P P N N N N P P N
Personal Care Home, Nursing Home or Assisted
Living (S. 1322) N P N N N N N P N N P P
Place of Worship (includes Church) P P P N N N P P P P P P
Prison/ Correctional Facility N N N N SE N N N N N N N
School, Public or Private, Primary or Secondary
(S.1322) P P P N P N P P N P P N
Sewage Pump Stations P P P P P P P P N P P N
Temporary Shelter (S. 1322) SE SE SE N N N N P N N N N
Treatment Center (S. 1322) N SE N SE SE N N N N N N N
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
2 = Tavern cannot be located within 120 feet of Residential District boundary line.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted (S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
38
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
d. PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC USES
City Government Uses and Facilities, such as Public
Works Facilities. See also Section 1301.07. P P P P P P P P P P P P
Government Facility, other than offices and other
than uses listed separately in this Section SE SE SE SE P SE SE SE SE SE SE P
Prison or Similar Correctional Institution N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Publicly Owned or Operated Park P P P P P P P P P P P P
Public Utility Facility, other than City-owned
facilities and other than uses listed separately
in this Section. See also Section 1301.06. SE SE SE SE P SE SE SE SE SE SE P
Swimming Pool, Non-household (S. 1322) P P P P P N P P P P P P
U.S. Postal Service Facility, which may include a
leased facility. P P P P P P P P P P P P
e. INDUSTRIAL USES
Asphalt Plant N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Assembly or Finishing of Products Using Materials
Produced Elsewhere (such as products from
plastics manufactured off-site) N N N P P P P N N P N P
Building Supplies and Building Materials, N P N P P N N N N P N N
Wholesale Sales of
Data Centers N N N P P P N N N N N N
Distribution as a principal use (other than N N N P P N N N N SE N N
Trucking Company Terminal)
Electric Power Generating Plant (Other than
Putrescent Solid Waste to Energy, Solar
Energy or Wind Turbines) N N N SE P N N N N SE N N
Industrial Equipment Sales, Rental and Service,
other than vehicles primarily intended to
be operated on public streets N P N P P P N N N P P N
Junk - outdoor storage, display or processing of,
other than within an approved junkyard or
solid waste disposal area N N N N N N N N N N N N
Junk Yard (S. 1322) N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Liquid or Gas Fuel Storage, Bulk, for off-site
distribution, which shall require a 150 feet
setback from a residential district and
review by the Fire Department of any
proposed facilities; other than: auto service
station, retail propane distributor as listed
separately, pre-packaged sales or N N N SE SE N N N N N N N
fuel tanks for company vehicles
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
39
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
e. INDUSTRIAL USES (Cont.)
Manufacture and/or bulk processing of the following,
provided manufacturing occurs only indoors:
Agricultural Chemicals, Fertilizers or
Pesticides N N N SE SE N N N N SE N N
Apparel, Textiles, Shoes and Apparel Accessories
(see also Crafts Studio) N N N P P P N N N P N N
Cement Manufacture N N N N P N N N N N N N
Ceramics Products (other than Crafts
Studio) N N N P P P N N N P N N
Chemicals, Manufacture or Bulk Processing of,
other than pharmaceuticals and types listed
separately N N N SE SE SE N N N SE N N
Clay, Brick, Tile and Refractory Products N N N P P N N N N SE N N
Computers and Electronic and Microelectronic
Products N N N P P P P N N P N P
Concrete, Lime and Gypsum Products, N N N SE P SE N N N SE N N
other than actual manufacture of cement
Electrical Equipment, Appliances &
Components N N N P P P P N N P N P
Explosives, Fireworks or Ammunition N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Fabricated Metal Products (except N N N P P P N N N P N N
Explosives, Fireworks or Ammunition)
and/or Machine Shops
Food (Human) and Beverage Products,
at an industrial scale as opposed to a
clearly retail scale N N N P P P N N N P P N
Food Products for animals N N N P P P N N N P N N
Glass & Glass Products (other than Crafts
Studio) N N N P P P N N N P N N
Incineration, Reduction, Distillation, Storage or
Dumping of Slaughterhouse Refuse, Rancid Fats,
Garbage, Dead Animals or Offal (other than within
an approved solid waste facility) N N N N N N N N N N N N
Jewelry and Silverware N N N P P P N N N P P N
Leather and Allied Products (other than Crafts
Studio or Tannery) N N N P P P N N N P P N
Machinery or Gaskets N N N P P P SE N N P N N
Manufactured or Modular Housing
Manufacture N N N P P P N N N P N N
Medical Equipment and Supplies N P N P P P P N N P P P
Metal Products, Primary N N N SE P SE N N N N N N
Mineral Products, Non-metallic (other than
Mineral Extraction) N N N P P P N N N P N N
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
40
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL1 CG1 CB1 LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
e. INDUSTRIAL USES (Cont.)
Manufacture and/or bulk processing of the following,
Provided manufacturing occurs only indoors:
Paper and Paper Products (including recycling,
but not including manufacture of raw paper
pulp) N N N P P P N N N P N N
Paper - Raw Pulp N N N N P N N N N N N N
Paving Materials, other than bulk manufacture of
asphalt N N N P P N N N N N N N
Pharmaceuticals and Medicines N N N P P P P N N P N P
Plastics, Polymers, Resins, Vinyl, Coatings,
Cleaning Compounds, Soaps, Adhesives,
Paints, Printing Ink or Photographic
Film N N N P P P N N N P N N
Products from Previously Manufactured Materials,
such as glass, leather, plastics, cellophane, textiles,
rubber or synthetic rubber N N N P P N N N N N N N
Roofing Materials and Asphalt Saturated N N N P P P N N N SE N N
Materials or Natural or Synthetic Rubber
Scientific, Electronic and Other Precision
Instruments N N P N P P P P N P P P
Sporting Goods, Toys, Games, Musical
Instruments or Signs N P N P P P P P N P P N
Transportation Equipment N N N P P P N N N P N N
Truck Stop N N N N P N N N N N N N
Wood Products and Furniture (not including raw
paper pulp) N P N P P P N N N P P N
See Section 1305.04 for uses that are not listed
Mineral Extraction (S. 1322) and related processing,
stock-piling and storage of materials
removed from the site, other than as part
of preparation of a development site N N N SE SE N N N N N N N
Packaging N P N P P P N N N P P N
Package Delivery Services Distribution N N N P P P N N N P N N
Center
Petroleum Refining or Manufacture of Ethanol or
Other alternative fuels N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Printing or Bookbinding N P N P P P P N N P P N
Recycling Center, Bulk Processing, provided all
operations of an industrial scale occur within
an enclosed building (this use does not include
a solid waste disposal or transfer
facility) N N N P P N N N N P N N
1 = All retail and service uses must be enclosed within a building.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322)= See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
41
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL CG CB LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
e. INDUSTRIAL USES (Cont.)
Research and Development, Engineering or Testing
Facility or Laboratory (other than medical laboratories,
which is considered an office use) and related
manufacture of prototypes N N N P P P P N N P P P
Sawmill/ Planing Mill N N N P P N N N N P N N
Slaughterhouse, Stockyard or Tannery, with a N N N N SE N N N N N N N
400 feet minimum setback from all lot lines
Solid Waste Landfill (S. 1322) N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Solid Waste Transfer Facility or Putrescent Waste
to Energy Facility (S. 1322) N N N N SE N N N N N N N
Trucking Company Terminal N N N SE P N N N N SE N N
Warehousing or Storage as a principal use N N N P P N N N N SE N N
Warehousing or Storage as an on-site P P P P P P P P N P P N
accessory use
Welding N N N P P P P N N P N N
Wholesale Sales (other than Motor Vehicles) N SE N P P P N N N P P N
f. ACCESSORY USES
See list of additional permitted uses in Section 1306.03
such as Residential Accessory Structure or Use
See Additional Requirements in Section 1322 for Specific
Accessory Uses
Bus Shelter P P P P P P P P P P P P
Composting, other than leaves, tree bark or
materials generated on-site which are
permitted by right N N N P P N N N N N N N
Day Care Center accessory to and on the
same lot as an existing lawful Place of
Worship or permitted use P P P P P P P P P P P P
Day Care (S. 1322) as accessory to an existing dwelling:
Day care of a maximum of 3 adults or youth, in
addition to relatives of the caregiver, which
does not need a permit P P P N N N P P P P P N
Day Care (S. 1322) as accessory to an existing dwelling:
- Group Day Care Home (S. 1322) P P P N N N P P N P P N
- Family Day Care Home (S. 1322) P P P N N N P P N P P P
Home Occupation, Major or Minor (S. 1322) P P P P P P P P P P P P
Meal Center (S. 1322) P P N N N N N P N N N N
Outdoor retail sales and display as accessory to
a Principal Commercial Use (S. 1322) P P P N N N N N P P P P2
Outdoor Storage and Display as accessory to a
business use shall also comply with buffer yard
provisions P1 P P1 P P P P N N P P N
1 = A maximum of 25% of lot shall be used for outdoor storage, which shall be screened by buildings and/or landscaping
from view of streets.
2 = Outdoor Retail Sales shall only be adjacent to the building on the sidewalk, but shall maintain a 5’ walking path on
said sidewalk.
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
42
TYPES OF USES ZONING DISTRICTS
(See definitions in Section 1302) CL CG CB LI IN PI CM I CMU IR IR-R OMU
&CS
f. ACCESSORY USES (Cont.)
Retail Sales as Accessory to a Principal Industrial N N N P P P N N N P P N
Use, limited to items produced or distributed
on the premises, and limited to a maximum of
5% of the floor area of the principal use
Unit for Care of Relative (S. 1322) on the lot of
an existing dwelling P P P N N N N N N P N N
g. MISCELLANEOUS USES
Crop Farming and Wholesale Greenhouses N P N P P P P P P P P N
Forestry (S. 1322) P P P P P P P P P P P P
Livestock or Poultry, Raising of 1 N N N N N N N N N N N N
Nature Preserve/Environmental Education Center P P P P P P P P P P P P
Parking Lot as an accessory use P P P P P P P P P P P P
Parking Lot as a principal use that does not
primarily serve tractor-trailer trucks or
trailers N P P P P P P P P P P P
Parking Structure of 2 or More Levels
that does not primarily serve tractor-trailer
trucks or trailers N P P P P P P P N P P P
Parking Lot or Structure that primarily
serves tractor-trailer trucks or trailers N N N P P N N N N SE SE N
Parking Lot for Carpooling N P N P P P P P P P P N
Recycling Collection Center N P N P P P P P N P P N
Sewage Treatment Plant N N N N P N N N N N N N
Solar Energy Collection Systems P P P P P P P P P P P N
Wind turbines:
- Maximum of one on a lot that is an P P P P P P P P P P P P
accessory use and is designed primarily for
on-site electricity use (S. 1322)
- One or more wind turbines, other than N N N SE P SE SE SE N SE SE N
above (S. 1322)
All Uses that will be unable to comply with the
performance standards of this ordinance. See the
Environmental Protection requirements of
Article 5 N N N N N N N N N N N N
1 = See City Ordinance article 1159
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning Hearing Board)
N = Not permitted
(S. 1322) = See Additional Requirements in Section 1322
(Entire Chart Amended 12/16/15. Ord. 2015
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
43
1305.02. Permitted Accessory Uses in All Districts. Section 1304.02 shall apply.
1305.03. Permitted Accessory Uses to Business and Institutional Uses. The following are permitted
by right accessory uses only to a permitted by right or special exception commercial,
industrial or institutional use, provided that all requirements of this Ordinance are met:
(a) Storage of fuels for on-site use or to fuel company vehicles.
(b) The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly limited to employees, patients,
residents and families of employees of the use and their occasional invited guests:
(1) Internal cafeteria without drive-through service,
(2) Day care center or
(3) Recreational facilities.
(c) Automatic Transaction Machine
1305.04 Uses Not Specifically Regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by right or as a Special
Exception Use by this Ordinance within any non-residential Zoning District, the use is
prohibited, except that the Zoning Hearing Board may permit such use as a Special Exception
Use if the applicant specifically proves to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that
all of the following conditions would be met:
(a) the proposed use would be no more intensive with respect to external impacts and nuisances
than uses that are permitted in the District,
(b) the proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character to uses permitted in that
District,
(c) the use would meet the standards that would apply under Section 1325.07 to a Special
Exception Use, and
(d) the use is not specifically prohibited in that District.
(e) Similar Uses in the CM District. As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board in
the CM District may approve an industrial use of the same general character as the uses
permitted, provided that the application for special exception shall include evidence
satisfactory to the Zoning Hearing Board that the use will be conducted without creating
nuisance conditions beyond the limits of its lot by reason of the emission of smoke, dust,
odor, or other air pollutants, noise, vibration, light, electrical disturbance, or water
pollutants. Such evidence may include the proposed use of proven special structural or
technological innovations. In no case, however, shall any uses that are specifically listed
as prohibited in the CM District in Article 1305 be approved under this section.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1305
44
1305.05 Additional Use Provisions in the IR and IR-R Districts.
(a) Modifications to Permitted Uses. The Planning and Zoning Bureau and the City Planning
Commission, in the IR and IR-R districts, may approve a use of the same general character
as the uses permitted, provided that the application include evidence satisfactory to the
Planning and Zoning Bureau and City Planning Commission that the use will be conducted
without creating nuisance conditions beyond the limits of its lot by reason of the emission
of smoke, dust, odor, or other air pollutants, noise, vibration, light, electrical disturbance, or
water pollutants. Such evidence may include the proposed use of proven special structural
or technological innovations. In no case, however, shall any uses that are specifically listed
as prohibited in the IR and IR-R districts in Article 1305 or Section 1316.04 be approved
under this section.
(b) Specifically Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited within the IR
and IR-R districts:
(1) Prison facility.
(2) Trash or Waste Incinerator Facility.
(3) Storage of Used or Discarded Motor Vehicle Tires.
(4) Junkyard.
(5) Landfill.
(6) Cement Manufacturing Plant.
(7) Manufacture of Asphalt.
(8) Manufacture of Paint.
(9) Petroleum Refining Storage or Distribution.
(10) Pawn Shop.
(11) Adult-Oriented Establishment.
(12) Massage Parlor.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
45
ARTICLE 1306
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN EACH DISTRICT
1306.01 The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply for the specified zoning
district, unless a more restrictive requirement for a specific use is required by Section 1322
or another section of this Ordinance. All measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise
stated. See definitions of terms (such as lot width) in Section 1302. Each dwelling unit and
each principal building shall be served by both public water and public sewer service.
For the OMU District, see Section 1314. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
For additional regulations in the CMU Mixed Use Commercial District, see Section 1313.
For the Institutional Overlay District, see Section 1312.
For the RR-T and RR-F Overlay Districts, see Section 1310.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
46
1306.01(a) DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning
District
Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Maximum Height
(Whichever is more restrictive)
See 1306.02 (a) for accessory
bldgs.
Max.
Bldg.
Cov.
Max.
Imp.
Cov
Tract
Size
Lot Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
Width
(a)
Front
(b)
Rear
(d)
Each
Side
(d)
Max.
Stories
Max.
Feet
Square Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
(%)
(%)
1. RR
Residential
District
Single Family Detached Dwelling
Non-Residential and Other Allowed
Uses
Agricultural Uses
See also Open Space Development
Option in Article 1309.
15,000
15,000
43,560
15,000
--
15,000
100
100
150
25
25
100
40
40
75
15
25
75
2.5
2.5
2.5
35
35
35
15%
15%
15%
50%
50%
50%
2. RS
Residential
District
Single Family Detached Dwelling
Non-Residential and Other Allowed
Uses
8,000
--
8,000
--
75
75
25
25
35
35
8
25
2.5
2.5
35
35
25%
25%
75%
75%
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
47
Zoning
District
Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Maximum Height
(Whichever is more restrictive)
See 1306.02 (a) for accessory
bldgs.
Max.
Bldg.
Cov.
Max.
Imp.
Cov
Tract
Size
Lot Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
Width
(a)
Front
(b)
Rear
(d)
Each
Side
(d)
Max.
Stories
Max.
Feet
Square Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
(%)
(%)
3. RG
Residential
District
Single Family Detached Dwelling
Single Family Semi-Detached
Dwelling
Multi-Family Dwelling (2-1/2 Stories
& Less) or Duplex
Multi-Family Dwelling (More than 2-
1/2 Stories)
Single Family Attached Dwelling
Non-Residential and Other Allowed
Uses
6,500
8,000
12,000
43,560
12,000
6,500
6,500
4,000
4,000
4,000
4,000 (c)
--
60
40 per
unit
100
100
20 (c)
60
20
20
20
40
20
20
30
30
30
60 f
30
30
6
6
25
25 f
25(c)
10
2.5
2.5
2.5
5.0
2.5
2.5
35
35
35
60
35
35
35%
25%
25%
35%
35%
35%
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
48
Zoning
District
Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Maximum Height
(Whichever is more restrictive)
See 1306.02 (a) for accessory
bldgs.
Max.
Bldg.
Cov.
Max.
Imp.
Cov
Tract
Size
Lot Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
Width
(a)
Front
(b)
Rear
(d)
Each
Side
(d)
Max.
Stories
Max.
Feet
Square Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
(%)
(%)
4. RT
Residential
District
See additional
standards in
Article 1311.
Single Family Detached Dwelling
Single Family Semi-Detached
Dwelling
Two-Family Detached Dwelling
Two-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling
Multi-Family Dwelling (3-1/2 Stories
or Less)
Multi-Family Dwelling (More than 3-
1/2 Stories)
Single Family Attached Dwelling
Non-Residential and Other Allowed
Uses
4,000
6,000
6,000
12,000
9,000
9,000
9,000
6,500
4,000
3,000
3,000
3,000
2,500
1,200
2,200
--
40
30 per
unit
60
120
90
90
20c
60
--
--
--
--
--
10
--
--
20
20
20
20
20
20 f
20
20
4
4
4
12
15
15 f
25 c
6
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
3.5
5
2.5 e
2.5
35
35
35
35
35
60
35 e
35
35%
35%
35%
35%
30%
30%
40%
35%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
49
Zoning
District
Use
Minimum Lot Requirements
Minimum Yard
Requirements
Maximum Height
(Whichever is more restrictive)
See 1306.02 (a) for accessory
bldgs.
Max.
Bldg.
Cov.
Max.
Imp.
Cov
Tract
Size
Lot Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
Width
(a)
Front
(b)
Rear
(d)
Each
Side
(d)
Max.
Stories
Max.
Feet
Square Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
Feet
(%)
(%)
5. R-RC
Residential
Retirement
Complex
District
Residential Retirement Complex
Other Allowed Uses
10 acres
2 acres
2,000
2,000
100
100
50
50
50
50
50
50
4.0
4.0
45
45
25%
25%
-
-
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
50
Section 1306.01(a) Continued. Notes to the above table:
(a) = The lot width requirement may be reduced to 70 percent of the required lot width for those lots fronting on
the bulb of a cul-de-sac except that the full lot width must be met at the front wall of the building located
closest to the street right of way. In addition, a minimum of 50% of the lots utilizing this provision must
provide 3 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(b) = Setbacks shall be measured from the existing street right-of-way. An unenclosed front porch may intrude
up to 10 feet into the minimum front yard. This porch may be covered by a roof, but may not have a second
floor intruding into the front yard. Steps and stoops may also intrude into this setback. See also mandatory
build to building setbacks that apply in certain districts.
(c) = The following provisions apply to single family attached dwellings (townhouses):
- In the RG district, a maximum of 4 single family attached (townhouse) dwelling units may be attached
in any row or grouping and shall not exceed a total combined building length of 120 feet.
- In the RT district, a maximum of 8 single family attached (townhouse) dwelling units may be attached
in any row or grouping and shall not exceed a total combined building length of 200 feet.
- The minimum lot area requirement for single family attached dwellings may be averaged for each
attached set of such dwellings, provided that also the minimum lot area may be averaged for up to 3
adjacent attached sets of single family attached dwellings that front onto the same street.
- Where a condominium arrangement is approved, the applicant shall prove that the buildings will be
spaced so that the dimensional requirements would have been met if the dwellings were on individual
non-condominium lots.
- The maximum building and impervious coverage requirements may be met as an average across a
tract after development, as opposed to regulating each individual lot.
- New vehicle parking in the front yard of single family attached dwellings shall only be allowed where
the applicant proves that there is no feasible alternative. Where it is allowed, off-street parking and
accompanying driveway area shall not occupy more 50 percent of a required front yard.
- Access easements to rear yards must be provided to middle units.
- The side yard setback requirements shall be reduced to 10’ for developments that do not exceed 4
units in a row for the entire development.
(d) = The following exceptions shall apply:
For accessory structures and uses, see Section 1306.03.
Structures shall not obstruct minimum sight clearance at intersections.
See Section 1318.07 pertaining to Corner Lots.
See Section 1318 regarding permitted reductions in setbacks to reflect average setbacks of adjacent
buildings.
(e) = In the RT district, within 500 feet from the right-of-way of an interstate highway, the maximum height
shall be 3.5 stories or 50 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
(f) = For each one (1) foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet, the side and rear yards shall be increased by
not less than one-half (1/2) foot.
[Section 1306.01a, Maximum Impervious Coverage regulations for the RR and RG zones, were added by Ordinance
No. 2015-27 on July 7, 2015]
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
51
1306.01.(b) DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PRIMARILY NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning District: Type of Use
Min. Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
(Note E)
Min. Lot
Width
Measured at
Min.
Building
Setback Line
(ft.)
Min. Front Yard
Setback (ft.)
(Note D). See
also Section
1306.07.
Min. Rear
Yard
Setback
(ft.) **
Min. Side
Yard
Setback **
(each) (ft.)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Height
See also
Section
1306.02
1. CB Central Business District:
a) Non-Residential Uses – See
Note I (Amended 3/6/18,
Ord. 2018-3)
b) Mixed Use Standards – See
Note I
See additional standards in Article
1311.
(Amended 6/5/18, Ordinance
2018-13)
a) 0
b) 1,800
a) 0
b) 18
All uses: 0
No new vehicle
parking spaces
shall be located
between the front
lot line of a public
street and the front
of a principal
building. Also see
Section 1311
Design Standards.
All uses:
0 (Note B)
All uses:
0 (Note B)
All uses:
100%
100%
All uses:
100%
All uses:
150 feet
(Note J)
2. CL Limited Commercial
District:
a) Allowed Residential Uses -
The requirements of the RT
District (multi-family
provisions) shall apply in
the CL District.
b) Other Allowed Uses
See additional standards in Article
1311.
------
b) 2,000
------
b) 20
All uses: 0
No new vehicle
parking spaces
shall be located
between the front
lot line along a
public street and
the front of a
principal building.
Also see Section
1311.
-----
b) 10
(Note B)
-----
b) 4
(Note B)
All uses:
80%
All uses:
90%
All uses:
5 stories or
60 feet,
whichever
is more
restrictive.
See Section
1306.
02(d and e).
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
52
Zoning District: Type of Use
Min. Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
(Note E)
Min. Lot
Width
Measured at
Min.
Building
Setback Line
(ft.)
Min. Front Yard
Setback (ft.)
(Note D). See
also Section
1306.07.
Min. Rear
Yard
Setback
(ft.) **
Min. Side
Yard
Setback **
(each) (ft.)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Height
See also
Section
1306.02
3. CG General Commercial
District:
a) Allowed Residential Uses -
The requirements of the RT
District (multi-family
provisions) shall apply in
the CG District.
b) Other Allowed Uses
-----
2,000
-----
20
-----
b) 0, except 35 if
any new vehicle
parking is provided
between the front
lot line of a public
street and the front
of a principal
building
-----
10
(Note b)
-----
10
(Note b)
-----
65%
-----
90%
-----
b) 60 feet.
See Section
1306. 02(c).
4. CS Shopping Center District:
Allowed Use
A minimum average of 2,000
square feet of lot area shall be
required per dwelling unit.
2 acres
(Note C)
300
(Note C)
40
25
25
40%
90%
80 feet. See
Section
1306.
02(c).
5. CM Office Research District:
Allowed Use
2 acres
(Note C)
300
(Note C)
40
40
40
40%
80%
50 feet
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
53
Zoning District: Type of Use
Min. Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
(Note E)
Min. Lot
Width
Measured at
Min.
Building
Setback Line
(ft.)
Min. Front Yard
Setback (ft.)
(Note D). See
also Section
1306.07.
Min. Rear
Yard
Setback
(ft.) **
Min. Side
Yard
Setback **
(each) (ft.)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Height
See also
Section
1306.02
6. PI Planned Industrial District:
Allowed Use
1 acre
140
40. No new vehicle
parking spaces
shall be located
within 25 feet from
the curb line of a
public street.
30
20
60%
80%
60 feet or 5
stories,
whichever
is more
restrictive.
7. LI Light Industrial District:
Allowed Use
10,000
80
20
15
(Note A)
15
(Note A)
65%
90%
80 feet. See
Section
1306.
02(c).
8. IN Industrial District:
1 acre
150
20
15
(Note A)
15
(Note A)
65%
90%
80 feet. See
Section
1306.
02(c).
9. I Institutional District
Allowed Use
2 acre
minimum tract
size.
2,000
minimum lot
size.
20
20
15
(Note B)
15
(Note B)
65%
(Note G)
80%
(Note G)
See Section
1306.02.c.f
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
54
Zoning District: Type of Use
Min. Lot
Area (sq. ft.)
(Note E)
Min. Lot
Width
Measured at
Min.
Building
Setback Line
(ft.)
Min. Front Yard
Setback (ft.)
(Note D). See
also Section
1306.07.
Min. Rear
Yard
Setback
(ft.) **
Min. Side
Yard
Setback **
(each) (ft.)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
(Note F)
Maximum
Height
See also
Section
1306.02
10. IR Industrial Redevelopment
and IR-R Industrial
Redevelopment - Residential.
a) Principal Industrial Use
b) Other Allowed Use
No new vehicle parking areas
shall be located within the first 15
feet from the curb line of a public
street. No truck loading or
unloading areas shall be located
within the first 30 feet from the
curb line of a public street.
See also Article 1307 for
workforce housing incentives
a) 20,000
b) 2,000
a) 60
b) 30, except
20 if attached
buildings are
approved
within a
subdivision or
land
development
plan
a) 10
b) 10
a) 20 (Note
A)
b) 10 (Note
A)
a) 20 (Note
A)
b) 10 (Note
A), except 0
if attached
buildings are
approved
within a
subdivision
or land
development
plan
a) 90%
b) 90%
a) 90%
b) 90%
200 feet.
See Section
1306.
02(d).
11. CMU District:
See Article 1313.
12. OMU District:
See Articles 1311 and 1314.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
55
Section 1306.0l(b) Continued: Notes for the Above Table:
** = The following exceptions shall apply:
For accessory structures and uses, see Section 1306.03.
Structures shall not obstruct minimum sight clearance at intersections.
See Section 1318.07 pertaining to Corner Lots.
See Section 1318 regarding permitted reductions in setbacks to reflect average
setbacks of adjacent buildings.
Abbreviations: sq. ft. = square feet; min. = minimum; max. = maximum; ft. = feet
(Note A) = Except 25 feet side and 50 feet rear for a principal non-residential building where such side
or rear yard would be adjacent to a lot in a residential district that is occupied by one or
more existing dwellings. Such side and rear yard shall be increased to 60 feet for any
building area or land area used for manufacturing or a tractor-trailer truck loading dock
from such a lot.
(Note B) = Except 20 feet side and 20 feet rear for a principal non-residential building or multi-family
building or dormitory where such side or rear would be adjacent to a lot in a residential
district that is occupied by one or more existing dwellings.
(Note C) = Lots with a minimum lot area of one half acre and a minimum lot width of 150 feet may
be created, provided each such lot includes a legally binding and recorded restriction
stating that there will not be vehicle access directly from the lot onto a public street. Any
such lot shall have vehicle access using a system of internal driveways with such access
being fully coordinated among all of the uses within the development tract.
(Note D) = Setbacks shall be measured from the existing street right-of-way. An unenclosed front
porch may intrude up to 10 feet into the minimum front yard. This porch may be covered
by a roof, but may not have a second floor intruding into the front yard. Steps and stoops
may also intrude into this setback. See also the required front yard building setback that
applies in certain cases under Section 1306.07.
(Note E) = See steep slope provisions in Article 1316.
(Note F) = Where allowed, for single family attached dwellings (townhouses) and single family semidetached
dwellings, the maximum building and impervious coverage requirements may be
met as an average across a tract after development, as opposed to regulating each individual
lot.
(Note G) = Abutting lots in common ownership may be calculated together to show compliance with
the maximum coverages.
(Note H) = The lot width requirement may be reduced to 70 percent of the required lot width for those
lots fronting on the bulb of the cul-de-sac except that the full lot width must be met at the
front wall of the building located closest to the street right of way. In addition, a minimum
of 50% of the lots utilizing this provision must provide 3 off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit.
(Note I) = Multi-family dwelling units are permitted by right uses in existing structures. However, the
first floor of a structure must contain a retail, restaurant or personal service use along the
street frontage. There is no maximum density per acre, as long as all other restrictions are
met. (Amended 3/6/18, Ord. 2018-2) (Amended 6/5/18, Ord. 2018-14)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
56
(Note J) = Where the rear lot line of a property zoned CB abuts or is across a street or alley from a
residential zone, the maximum height permitted in the rear 60’ of the CB lot shall be
reduced to 75 feet.
1306.02 Additional Height Restrictions. Except as provided in Section 1318.20, or as specified
otherwise in this Ordinance for a particular use, the following maximum structure height
shall apply in all zoning districts:
(a) Any structure that is accessory to a dwelling shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
(b) If a building is accessory to a non-residential use, it shall have a maximum height of 25 feet,
unless it meets the minimum setbacks for a principal building, in which case the maximum
height for a principal building shall apply.
(c) In the CS, CG, LI, I, IO, IR and IN districts, if a building is proposed to have a height
exceeding 35 feet, then one foot of additional setback shall be required from an abutting lot
line of an existing dwelling in a residential district for each 3 feet of building height over 35
feet. If such dwelling is in common ownership at the time of construction of the taller
building with the use providing the setback, the additional setback may be waived.
(d) In the CL, IR and IR-R Districts, any new principal building fronting upon Main Street, 3rd
Street, 4th Street, Broad Street, Daly Avenue or Route 412 or anywhere in the CB District
shall have a minimum building height of 20 feet.
(e) In the CL district, any portion of a principal building exceeding 4 stories or 45 feet shall be
set back a minimum of 50 feet from any rear property line adjacent to a residential zone.
(f) In the Institutional Zone, height of buildings may equal the right-of-way of an adjacent street.
Buildings may exceed this height if building is set back, in addition to the required setback,
one (1) foot for each three (3) feet, or fraction thereof by which such building exceeds the
width of the street.
(g) See also the Airport Approach Overlay Zoning in the Codified Ordinances. (Article 1360)
1306.03 Accessory Structures and Uses.
(a) Accessory structures and uses shall meet the minimum yard setbacks provided for in Section
1306.01 above, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, including this Section
1306.03.
(b) The minimum side and rear yard setback for a permitted detached structure that is accessory
to a dwelling shall be 2 feet, except in the following cases:
1. A vehicle garage door shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from the right-of-way line
property line of a rear or side alley that provides access to the garage.
2. A side yard setback is not required for a structure that is accessory to a dwelling from a
lot line along which two dwellings are attached (such as a lot line shared by semidetached
dwellings). However, such structure shall still meet the minimum side yard on
a lot line where the dwellings are not attached.
3. See Section 1318.05, 1318.16 and 1318.17 concerning porches, decks and other features
intruding into setbacks. Space under an unenclosed porch may be used for household
storage. See notes in the earlier tables concerning porches in front yard setbacks.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
57
4. The water surface of a swimming pool shall be setback a minimum of 6 feet from any
side or rear lot line.
(c) No accessory building and no swimming pool shall be allowed between the principal
building and the front lot line.
(d) In no case shall the floor area of an accessory building exceed 1,000 square feet in a
residential district.
1306.04 Rear Yard Abutting a Street. If a new principal building is constructed with its rear lot line
abutting a public street, a row of landscaping shall be placed between such street and the
rear yard, and any fencing shall be placed on the inside of such landscaping. This
requirement shall not apply where the landscaping would interfere with required sight
distances or a vehicle driveway or garage.
1306.05 Build-To Line for Front Building Setback. In the CL or CB districts, where more than 70
percent of the lots on the same side of a block are already developed with principal buildings,
and the block includes more than 3 lots, and where the Zoning Officer determines that a
minimum of 60 percent of the lots on the same side of the block have a front yard building
setback that is consistent or that varies by no more than 5 feet from the average existing front
yard setback along such block, then if a new principal building is proposed, the front building
wall of such new building shall have a front yard building setback that is not more than 5
feet larger and not less than 5 feet smaller than such average front yard setback.
(a) However, in no case, shall this Subsection require a front yard setback greater than 30 feet.
For a corner lot, this subsection shall only apply to the primary front yard, which is defined
as the street that the building is primarily fronting upon.
(b) A block shall be considered to be lots that front upon one street between a second street and
the nearest approximately perpendicular third street.
1306.06 Additional Requirements in the PI District.
(a) A minimum of 20 percent of the lot area shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs.
(b) All manufacturing and industrial processing shall occur within an enclosed building.
(c) Any outdoor storage shall be enclosed by dense landscaping, mostly solid fence or a wall of
architectural masonry that is in harmony with the principal building. Such screen shall be a
minimum height of 6 feet. No outdoor storage area shall be permitted between the principal
building and a street.
(d) Lots shall only have vehicle access onto streets that are not arterial streets, unless specifically
required otherwise by PennDOT or specifically allowed otherwise by the City Planning
Commission.
(e) The City Planning Commission shall have the authority to limit the number and location of
vehicle access points onto a public street.
1306.07 Dimensional Standards for Use Variances and Nonconforming Uses.
(a) This Section 1306.07 shall only apply if a use is a lawful nonconforming use or was
lawfully established by a use variance, and dimensional regulations were not established
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
58
(b) In such case, such use shall be regulated by the dimensional regulations that are listed for
the applicable zoning district as provided in the row for Allowed Uses or Other Allowed
Uses.
1306.08 Dimensional Requirements for CRIZ Qualified Projects. In order to maximize the
benefit from City of Bethlehem City Revitalization and Improvement Zone (CRIZ) funds and more
precisely channel CRIZ funds to CRIZ-qualified projects and not adjacent lands, no dimensional
setbacks, minimum lot size, building coverage or any other lateral dimensional requirements shall
apply to the parcel on which a CRIZ qualified project is located as long as the following provisions
are met:
(a) Structures to be erected as part of a CRIZ-qualified project may be placed on a separate
lot, hereafter known as the “CRIZ-qualified lot”, from adjacent lands functioning as a front, side or
rear yard, or which provides parking, storm water–related management facilities or runoff, and other
site-related accessory functions. Such adjacent lands may be placed on a separate lot hereafter known
as the “support lot”. If a property owner elects to proceed in this fashion, the following shall apply:
1. Structures comprising or found on the CRIZ-qualified lot shall be exempt from all
dimensional setbacks, minimum lot size, building coverage or any other lateral
dimensional requirements as measured from the boundaries of the CRIZ qualified lot
provided the deed restrictions of this Ordinance are met.
2. For purposes of measuring setbacks from abutting streets and lot lines the structures on
the CRIZ qualified lot shall be required to comply with those set back requirements,
but may count any intervening distances found on the support lot between such streets
and lot lines and the CRIZ qualified lot. The support lot shall be governed by all
applicable dimensional setbacks, minimum lot size, building coverage and any other
lateral dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
3. A support lot may serve 2 or more CRIZ-qualified lots so long as the parking, storm
water–related management facilities or runoff, and other site-related accessory
requirements of each and every associated CRIZ-qualified lot are met by the support
lot.
(b) If a property owner elects to proceed under subsection(a), deed restrictions shall be placed
in every deed containing land from which a CRIZ-qualified project was created, specifically the
CRIZ-qualified lot and its support lot. Such deed restrictions shall contain all of the following
provisions:
1. covenants that the CRIZ-qualified lot(s) and its support lot must be continuously held,
possessed and used together without any severance whatsoever by the same record
owners, lessees, licensees, or persons (i.e. artificial and/or natural) holding by or under
any other right, title privilege, or assignment.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1306
59
2. appropriate cross access and/or parking easements protecting the CRIZ-qualified
lot(s). The easement language and descriptions shall be reviewed and approved by the
City of Bethlehem.
3. language providing that the deed restrictions shall run with the land in perpetuity,
unless the Director of Planning and Zoning of the City of Bethlehem consents to the
consolidation of the CRIZ-qualified lot(s) and its support lot into a single merged lot
following the expiration the CRIZ program benefitting the CRIZ-qualified lot(s). In
such event, the CRIZ-qualified lot(s) and its support lot may be merged as part of a
reverse minor subdivision plan which when duly-approved and recorded shall
constitute a termination and release of the deed restrictions required by this Ordinance.
4. language stating that these deed restrictions shall be enforceable by the City of
Bethlehem against any person (i.e. artificial and/or natural) claiming any right, title or
interest in, from, under or as successor to the CRIZ-qualified lot(s) and/or its support
lot, and subject to any and all penalties and remedies available to the City of Bethlehem
for violations of the Zoning Ordinance. (Entire Article 1306.08 Added 6/5/18,
Ordinance 2018-12)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1307
60
ARTICLE 1307
WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE
1307.01 Workforce dwellings are rental or owner-occupied dwelling units that meet the standards
of this Article 1307. This Article 1307 shall only apply within the CM-LTN, IR-R, RT,
CB and CS zoning districts. All of the requirements of this Ordinance shall continue to
apply, except for provisions specifically modified by this Article 1307.
1307.02 This Article 1307 shall only be available if a development will include 20 or more new
dwelling units. If a minimum of 10% of the total dwelling units in a development will be
sold or leased as workforce dwellings, then a density bonus shall be allowed. If more than
30 percent of the total dwelling units in a development are workforce housing units, the
density bonus shall only be available for that first 30 percent of the total dwelling units.
The density bonus shall be that for every workforce dwelling unit, 1.5 additional dwelling
units shall be allowed in the development beyond the number of dwelling units that would
otherwise be allowed. However, in no case shall the total density of the development
exceed a minimum average lot area of 1,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The
restrictions of this Article shall be established and enforced by lease and by deed. The
bonus may be rounded to the nearest whole number. The following are examples of how
these provisions are intended to function:
(a) If a development is permitted to have the minimum 20 dwelling units and the
applicant chooses to use the 30 percent workforce (WF) housing (14 market rate
(“MR”) + 6 WF), they may construct 6 x 1.5, or 9 additional units:
29 units total (23 MR + 6 WF)
(b) If a development is permitted to have 40 dwelling units total (36 MR + 4 WF), the
applicant may construct 4 x 1.5, or 6 additional units:
46 units total (42 MR + 4 WF)
(c) If a development is permitted to have 100 dwelling units total (90 MR + 10 WF), the
applicant may construct 10 x 1.5, or 15 additional units:
115 units total (105 MR + 10 WF)
(d) If a development is permitted to have 100 dwelling units total and the applicant
chooses to build 30 WF units (70 MR + 30 WF), using the maximum 30 percent
workforce bonus provision, the applicant may construct 30 x 1.5, or 45 additional
units:
145 units total (115 MR + 30 WF)
(e) If a development is permitted to have 100 dwelling units total and the applicant
chooses to build 40 WF units (60 + 40 WF), they may construct 30 x 1.5, or 45
additional units.*
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1307
61
1307.03 A workforce dwelling unit shall be affordable to households with an income not to exceed
80 percent of the Area Median Income for the Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton Metropolitan
Statistical Area as estimated annually by the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development, or its successor estimate. Income shall be based upon the calendar year
prior to the date of the sale or rental. Households whose income does not exceed 80
percent of such Area Median Income as adjusted for household size are eligible to
purchase or lease a workforce dwelling unit.
1307.04 For a rental workforce dwelling unit, the monthly rent payment and any maintenance fees
shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the Fair Market Rents for the number of
bedrooms, for the Metropolitan Statistical Area as published annually by the U.S.
Department of Housing & Urban Development, or its successor measurement. Costs for
utilities are not included in such maximum.
1307.05 For owner-occupied workforce housing units, the Administrative Agency shall establish a
maximum sales price for the initial sale of the dwelling unit. The maximum sales price
shall be affordable to a household with total household income that is no more than 80
percent of the Area Median Income, as calculated above. Such affordable sales price shall
be based upon a currently available typical 30 year fixed rate mortgage, a down payment
of no more than 15 percent of the purchase price, an estimate of property taxes and
homeowner insurance premiums, and an estimate of any homeowners/condominium
association fees. The sales price shall be set so that the total of such costs at the time of
the initial sale will not exceed 30 percent of the gross income by a household earning 80
percent of the Area Median Income.
1307.06 In order to lease or purchase a workforce dwelling unit, the household must receive a
“Certificate of Qualification” from the City-designated Administrative Agency. The
Administrative Agency shall be a non-profit organization, governmental bureau or agency
or housing authority that has agreed to accept responsibility for such matter and has been
designated by the City of Bethlehem Department of Community and Economic
Development as being the designated Administrative Agency.
(a) The owner shall provide the Administrative Agency with a minimum of 60 days of
advance written notice of the seller’s intent to put a workforce dwelling on the
market. For owner-occupied workforce housing units, the Administrative Agency
shall establish a maximum sales price for any re-sale of each dwelling unit. The
seller shall reimburse the Administrative Agency for the cost of a professional
appraisal of the current market value of the dwelling unit. Such maximum sales price
shall be based upon the actual sales price paid by the owner, plus 50 percent of the
change in the market value of the dwelling unit from the time of most recent previous
sale to the present day. In addition, the sales price may include the costs directly
associated with the actual sale of the dwelling, including any realtor commissions.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1307
62
1307.07 The restriction upon the workforce dwelling units shall continue for 20 years after each
workforce dwelling unit is initially occupied. At the end of such 20 year period, the sales or rental
prices of the workforce dwelling units shall not be restricted, and the proceeds of sales shall be
controlled by the then-current owner. The restriction upon the workforce housing shall apply at the
time of the initial lease or sale of the dwelling units and any subsequent sale, lease or sublease of
the dwelling units to a different household. The income determination shall be based upon the
income of the inhabitants of the dwelling unit during the calendar year prior to the sale or lease,
regardless of changes in income that may occur by that same household in subsequent years. This
Article shall not require a household to move out of a workforce dwelling unit because their income
has increased.
1307.08 The applicant shall as part of its zoning application, provide documentation as to how this
program shall be funded, monitored, implemented and enforced and shall agree that the
program conditions and requirements will be made a condition of City approval.
Applicants must contract with the Administrative Agency to oversee compliance with this
section, with that Administrative Agency responsible to periodically certify compliance in
writing to the City Department of Community and Economic Development.
1307.09 The proposed workforce dwelling units shall be integrated throughout the development, as
opposed to being isolated to one portion of a development or one floor of a building. The
workforce dwelling units shall have the same exterior facade materials as market rate
dwellings in the development, and be indistinguishable in appearance. The workforce
housing units shall have no greater percentage of multi-family units than the market rate
dwellings.
1307.10 The workforce dwelling unit shall be occupied by the household that has a “Certificate of
Qualification” as their primary place of residence. Any sale, lease or sublease shall require
re-certification of the owner/tenant by the Administrative Agency. The owner shall have
the right to select a buyer or tenant provided the requirements of this Article are met.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1308
63
ARTICLE 1308
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN THE IR AND IR-R DISTRICTS
1308.01 Additional Requirements in the IR and IR-R Districts.
(a) Special Requirements -- The property owner shall submit the following to the City Planning
Commission for approval:
1. A description of the general character of the proposed development including:
(i) Goals and objectives for development;
(ii) Potential future uses;
(iii) Anticipated demand on existing utilities including storm drains, stormwater
management, sanitary sewer, and water lines; and
(iv) Potential site access points.
(b) Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. Off-street parking shall be permitted on a lot
other than the proposed development site, provided adequate assurances are given that such
parking will not be eliminated by future development. The City Planning Commission shall
consider modifications to these standards based on existing site conditions, the proposed use,
hardships, or innovations in technology in accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of
the Subdivision and Development Ordinance and such modifications shall include but not
be limited to:
1. Shared parking pursuant to Section 1319.02;
2. Providing for up to 30% of the total parking required as compact spaces; compact spaces
shall have a minimum dimension of 8.5 feet in width and 16 feet in length; except that
an 8 feet width shall be allowed in a parking structure and provided the spaces shall be
well marked;
3. Credit for other methods of transportation to the site, including bus, shuttle and rail
service; and
4. Recent authoritative information regarding parking standards for individual uses will be
employed.
(c) Modifications. Upon receipt of a written request, the Planning and Zoning Bureau and City
Planning Commission shall consider modifications to the standards of this Ordinance based
on the existing site conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or innovations in technology in
accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
1. The City Planning Commission may consider requested modifications to such things as
signage provisions or dimensional requirements in accordance with the terms of Article
1351.03 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1308
64
(d) Residential Uses in the IR-R District.
1. In the IR-R district, allowed types of dwelling units may be developed provided there
is a minimum average of 1,200 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit.
(i) No maximum density shall apply to the conversion into dwelling units of building
floor area that was constructed as office space and which existed prior to the
adoption of this Section, provided that each dwelling unit shall include a minimum
of 500 square feet of habitable floor area.
2. The minimum average lot area provision is intended to allow flexibility in the placement
of individual dwelling units, regardless of whether the homes are in condominium
ownership or individual lots, and regardless of whether public streets, private streets or
parking courts are used. The minimum average lot area per dwelling unit establishes
the maximum number of units permitted on a tract of land. The minimum average lot
area per dwelling unit shall be calculated after deleting legal street right-of-way of
existing and proposed streets and alleys, but shall include: rights-of-way of private
streets and alleys and areas of parking courts, common open space and stormwater
detention basins. Lot area of buildings that are entirely non-residential and lot area of
parking areas needing to serve non-residential uses shall not count as lot area for the
purposes of determining residential density.
3. See Workforce Housing Incentive in Article 1307, which may allow a higher density.
(e) Design Standards in the IR and IR-R Districts.
1. To the maximum extent feasible, surface off-street parking and any garage doors shall
be located to the rear or side of principal buildings, as opposed to being newly placed
between the front lot line along a street and the front wall of a new principal building.
This provision shall not limit rearrangement of spaces within existing parking areas. If
such lot is adjacent to two or more streets, this restriction may only apply to the one
street that is the most heavily traveled by vehicles.
2. See City sidewalks requirements and City street tree requirements in separate
ordinances. An average of at least one street tree shall be planted for each 40 feet of
street length, unless existing trees will be preserved to serve the same purpose. The
spacing of such trees may vary to provide for driveways, growth habit, sight distance
and other features, provided the average separation of trees is met.
3. A new principal building shall not have a front facade comprised of more than 25
percent vinyl or aluminum siding.
4. A new principal building of over 150 feet in length along a street shall include variations
in rooflines, overhangs, architectural details, setbacks, colors or facade materials or use
canopies, porches and awnings. A long new principal building should have the
appearance of smaller connected buildings.
5. Blank walls without at least one door and one window are not permitted to face 4th
Street, 3rd Street or Daly Avenue.
6. Truck loading docks and service areas are discouraged from being visible from a street.
7. Chain-link exposed metal fencing shall not be placed in the minimum front yard.
Picket or ornamental fences are encouraged. Highway-style metal guide rails should
not be used if visible from a street.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1308
65
8. The applicant for a new principal building shall submit a set of preliminary architectural
elevations of the front facade and a description of proposed front facade materials to the
Bureau of Planning and Zoning. The Bureau of Planning and Zoning may offer such
materials to the City Planning Commission or other City staff or boards for review and
comment.
9. Pedestrian crosswalks should be provided along arterial street corridors using materials
and colors that visually distinguish the crosswalk from the street surface and that include
some texture. The use of pavers, patterned concrete or stamped textured asphalt is
encouraged.
10. Pedestrian traffic should be separated from major vehicle routes. Developments should
be designed in such a way as to be inviting for pedestrian traffic and to provide
convenient walking routes from any public transit stops.
11. See bicycle parking provisions in Section 1319.
12. Business buildings shall have their main pedestrian entrance facing a street or a
pedestrian walkway/plaza.
13. Various signs on a property should be coordinated. Internally illuminated signs of boxtype
construction should be avoided. Signs should not cover architectural details.
Awnings that extend at a straight angle from a building are encouraged to provide
continuity along a block front and weather protection. The front panel of an awning
may be used for a sign provided the sign image is integrated with the awning and the
awning has the appearance of a fabric-type material.
14. No new off-street parking spaces shall be placed between a new principal building and
the curbline of an arterial street, except for parking for persons with disabilities. Existing
parking spaces may be re-arranged, provided they do not result in an increase in offstreet
parking spaces in such location. This provision shall not prohibit vehicle parking
to the side of a principal building adjacent to a street.
15. Parking areas should be well-screened from an arterial street by landscaping and a
decorative masonry wall. Where rear parking is not practical, then parking should be
provided to the side of a building.
16. If approved by the City, the applicant shall have the option of offering a building as a
Live Work Unit, such as a building that encourages a person to work on the first floor
and live in the upper stories.
17. No outdoor bulk storage shall be permitted unless it is screened from view of streets by
landscaping and/or buildings.
18. Individual buildings and pedestrian entrances and parking areas shall be laid out to
promote pedestrian access among different uses.
(f) Slopes. The steep slope provisions of Article 1308 shall not apply in the IR and IR-R
districts.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1309
66
ARTICLE 1309
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT OPTION IN THE RR DISTRICT
1309.01. Purposes. To allow reasonable amounts of flexibility in site planning of residential
development to: a) protect environmentally sensitive areas and avoid severe soil erosion
and sedimentation, b) avoid severely increased storm water flows and velocities, c) direct
development to those areas that are more physically suited for it, d) avoid construction of
steep roads and driveways that are difficult, time-consuming, and expensive to maintain
and plow snow upon, e) avoid increased use of steep roads and driveways that are
dangerous to drive upon in snow and ice, and f) conserve forested areas that are an
important part of the ecological cycle, providing for groundwater recharge, air pollution
reduction and wildlife habitats.
1309.02 Applicability. This Article 1309 allows an applicant who controls a minimum tract size
of 3 acres the option to reduce the minimum lot area if the applicant proves compliance
with all of the requirements of this Section 1309 to the satisfaction of the City. This
option shall only be allowed in the RR district.
(a) An "Open Space Development" is a residential development that meets the requirements
of this Article 1309 and is granted approval by the City as an Open Space Development.
(b) Uses. Open Space Development shall only include the following uses: single family
detached dwellings, nature preserves, publicly-owned outdoor recreation, outdoor
recreation uses that the City approves to be within the preserved open space, crop
farming, raising and keeping of horses, utilities necessary to serve the development, and
customary permitted accessory uses. A manufactured home park shall not qualify as an
Open Space Development.
(c) A tract shall be eligible for approval for an Open Space Development if it includes a
minimum of 3 acres of lot area in common ownership. Such land area shall be
contiguous, except that portions of the tract may be separated only by existing or proposed
streets or creeks.
(1) The amount of Preserved Open Space shall be based upon the total lot area of all lots
within the development, prior to subdivision, and prior to deletion of rights-of-way
of future streets and before deleting the area of any environmental features. Land
area of future rights-of-way of streets shall be deleted from the total lot area before
calculating the required amount of Preserved Open Space.
(i) Areas that were preserved by a conservation or agricultural preservation
easement or deed restriction prior to the submittal of the subdivision plan shall
not be counted towards the area of the tract in calculating Preserved Open Space
or allowed density.
(2) Areas used for a principal non-residential use (other than uses approved by the City
to be part of the preserved open space, such as an agricultural barn) shall not be
included within the land area used to calculate residential density.
(3) Conservation easements or deed restrictions shall be established on lots as necessary
to ensure that the maximum density requirement is met over time. Such conservation
easements shall prevent the re-subdivision of lots in a manner that would violate this
Article.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1309
67
(d) An Open Space Development shall be designed as a unified, coordinated residential
development, and shall be approved with a single development plan proposed by a single
development entity. After final subdivision approval and within an approved
development agreement(s) and phasing plan, portions of the development may be
transferred to different entities, provided that there is compliance with the approved
development plan and this Article 1309.
(e) Procedures
(1) Applicants are strongly encouraged to first submit a Layout Plan for review by the
City for zoning compliance, before completing detailed fully-engineered preliminary
subdivision plans. This two-step process will allow the City and the applicant to
mutually agree upon the preserved open space and development layout before large
sums of money are spent by the applicant on detailed engineering. Detailed
stormwater, grading, utility, profile and erosion control plans shall not be required at
the zoning compliance review stage if such matters will be submitted as part of the
subdivision or land development approval process.
1309.03 Density, Open Space and Lot Standards. The maximum number of dwelling units on the
tract shall be determined based upon a Yield Plan.
(a) An Existing Features Map shall be required to be submitted as part of the application for
an Open Space Development. This Existing Features Map shall accurately show the
locations of the following at a minimum: wetlands, 100 year floodplains, areas of
woodland, existing topography, existing buildings with a description of any buildings
over 70 years old, areas of 15 to 25 percent slopes and 25 percent and greater slopes and
existing healthy trees over 8 inches DBH. (Diameter at Breast Height)
(b) A Yield Plan shall be submitted to the City by the applicant. The Yield Plan shall
accurately show the maximum number of dwelling units that would be possible under
current City ordinances if the Open Space Development provisions would not be used,
and instead the provisions for conventional development in the RR district would be used.
The Yield Plan shall be completed to an accurate scale. The Yield Plan shall show
potential lots, streets, and retention / detention pond locations. However, the Yield Plan
shall not serve as, and is not required to contain, the engineering detail requirements of a
preliminary subdivision plan.
(c) The Yield Plan shall be reviewed by the Planning & Zoning Bureau, Planning
Commission and/or the City Engineer, and then determined by the Zoning Officer as to
whether it represents a reasonably accurate estimate of the number of dwelling units
possible on the site, both physically and legally. If such estimates are determined to be
inaccurate, the applicant shall be required by the Zoning Officer to revise the Yield Plan
until it is accurate.
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on the tract through Open Space
Development shall be 20 percent greater than the number of dwelling units that is
determined by the City to be possible under the City-accepted Yield Plan.
(2) The allowed number of dwelling units may be rounded to the nearest whole number.
(3) The Yield Plan shall not have any legal standing except for the purposes of
determining density for an Open Space Development.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1309
68
(d) All provisions of this zoning ordinance and the applicable zoning district shall apply,
except for provisions that are specifically modified by this Article 1309. The following
dimensional requirements shall apply, provided that the total maximum density for the
tract is not exceeded:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet and the minimum lot width shall
be 80 feet. A minimum of 35 percent of the total lot area of the tract (prior to
subdivision) shall be preserved as Preserved Open Space.
(e) Utilities. Any lot with a lot area of less than one acre per dwelling unit shall be served by
City-approved centralized sewer service and a City-approved centralized water system.
(f) The configuration of the Preserved Open Space shall be subject to approval by the City
Planning Commission. The applicant shall prove that the Preserved Open Space is
contiguous to the maximum extent feasible and serves the purposes of this Article,
considering the unique characteristics of the tract.
1309.04. Conditions for Approval. An Open Space Development shall only be approved if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the City that the following additional conditions
shall be met:
(a) That the Open Space Development would clearly serve a valid public purpose that would
result in a development that would be superior to what would result if the land would be
developed as a conventional development. Such valid public purposes include but are not
limited to the following:
(1) The permanent preservation of dense forests, steep slopes, wetlands, creek valleys,
mountain ridges, important wildlife corridors/habitats, highly scenic areas or other
sensitive natural features, or
(2) The dedication of recreation land at a site deemed appropriate by the City Planning
Commission and that involves land that is clearly suitable for passive recreation.
(b) The applicant shall prove that the proposed Open Space Development has been designed
in full consideration of important natural features, including mature woodlands, creek
valleys, steep slopes and wetlands. The natural features of the site shall be a major factor
in determining the siting of dwelling units and streets.
(c) The City Planning Commission may require the use of conservation easements within an
Open Space Development to limit the disturbance of natural slopes over 15 percent,
wetlands, mature forests, creek valleys and other important natural features. No new
principal building shall be constructed on slopes of greater than 15 percent.
1309.05 Preserved Open Space.
(a) The Preserved Open Space requirements of this Article 1309 shall be in addition to the
Recreation Land or Fee-in-Lieu of Land requirements of the City Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO).
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1309
69
(b) Required Preserved Open Spaces shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Preserved Open Space shall be permanently deed-restricted or protected by an
appropriate conservation easement to prevent the construction of buildings or the use
for any non-agricultural commercial purposes. Removal of healthy mature trees
shall be limited to selective cutting following a City-approved forest management
plan that follows best management practices. The management plan shall include
tree protection measures for existing trees and vegetation to remain. Land approved
as required Preserved Open Space shall only be used for non-commercial passive
recreation, a nature preserve, a Christmas Tree Farm, a horse farm, a wholesale plant
nursery, crop farming and/or another City-approved agricultural use.
(2) Improvements to Open Spaces. Where Preserved Open Space is proposed to be used
for recreation and/or dedicated to the City, the application shall include a detailed
and legally binding (if approved) description of what improvements the applicant
will make to any land to make it suitable for its intended purpose.
(i) Examples of such improvements include preservation and planting of trees,
development of trails, stabilization of creek banks and removal of undesirable
vegetation.
(ii) Type of Maintenance. The final subdivision plan shall state the intended type of
maintenance of the open space, such as lawn areas that are regularly mowed, or
natural areas for passive recreation that are intended for minimal maintenance.
(3) All proposed Preserved Open Space shall be cleared of construction debris, materials
from illegal dumping and any rocks that were not naturally on the land, unless those
rocks are incorporated into landscaping improvements.
(c) Open Space Ownership. The method(s) to be used to own, preserve and maintain any
Preserved Open Space shall be acceptable to the City Planning Commission.
(1) The method of ownership and use of any required preserved open space shall be
determined prior to subdivision or land development approval. If the preserved open
space will not be owned by the City, then the preserved open space shall be
permanently preserved by one or a combination of the following methods that are
found to be acceptable to the City Planning Commission:
(i) Dedication to the County as public open space, if the County Commissioners
agree in writing to such dedication.
(ii) Dedication to the School District if such Board of Education agrees in writing to
accept such dedication and to use and maintain the land for school recreation,
public recreation, environmental education and/or related open space.
(iii) Dedication to a homeowners association as preserved open space, with the
homeowners legally bound to pay fees for the maintenance and other expenses
of owning such land, and with such homeowners association being incorporated
with covenants and bylaws providing for the filing of assessments and/or
municipal liens for the non-payment of maintenance costs for preserved open
space that is not publicly-owned. Such responsibilities shall be specified as part
of each deed prior to sale of each lot or dwelling unit.
(iv) Dedication of the land to an established nature conservation organization
acceptable to the City Planning Commission for maintenance as a nature
preserve or passive recreation area.
(v) Dedication of a permanent conservation easement that results in the land being
used for a City-approved agricultural use, such as crop farming, and which may
include one of the allowed dwelling units on the lot.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1309
70
(2) Legal documents providing for ownership and/or maintenance of required preserved
open space shall be reviewed by the City Solicitor and be subject to approval by the
City Planning Commission prior to recording of the final plan.
(3) Proper notations shall be required on the Recorded Plan. For example, if the
preserved open space is intended to be owned by a homeowner association as
recreation land, a statement should be included that the designated open space shall
not be further subdivided and shall not be used for the construction of any buildings.
(d) Changes in Open Space Uses. If the required Preserved Open Space is proposed to be
used for purposes that were not authorized in the City approval, then a revised approval
by the City Planning Commission shall be required for the changed use
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1310
71
ARTICLE 1310
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
RR-T and RR-F OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Areas in the RR-T and RR-F shall meet the requirements of the RR district, except for provisions
that are specifically modified by this Article.
1310.01 Additional Requirements in the RR-F Residential Overlay District -Friedensville Road.
(a) Purpose – This overlay recognizes that this specific area is uniquely situated and allows
development consistent with such uniqueness. Specifically, portions of Creek Road are
rural in nature and have historical significance to the City. At the same time, there are
severe development pressures on the overlay area created by the abutting and surrounding
residential and commercial uses located along Friedensville Road. In addition,
Friedensville Road has a much higher volume of traffic than Creek Road. Moreover,
Lower Saucon Township is located across Friedensville Road, which portion of the
Township is zoned for higher density uses. The purpose of this overlay is to provide the
opportunity to develop the area so that it conforms to certain unique rural residential
characteristics of the Creek Road area, including the lessening of the potential impact on
Creek Road, yet at the same time recognizes and allows development consistent with
certain higher-density characteristics of the area.
(b) This Section creates an RR-F Overlay District, which shall consist of the geographic area
in the R-R District in Ward 16 of the City, bounded by Creek Road on the East,
Friedensville Road on the South, the R-G District to the West and the property identified
as Northampton County Tax Map No. Q7-8- 6A to the North.
(c) Single family semi-detached dwelling units shall be permitted following review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of
Article 1322, subject to the following requirements:
(1) The overall gross density for such use shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 15,000
sq. ft. of the entire development tract.
(2) The minimum lot area for each semi-detached dwelling unit shall be 7,500 square
feet.
(3) The front yard setback for such use shall be 30 feet.
(4) The rear yard setback for such use shall be 20 feet.
(5) Each unit shall be required to meet one side yard setback of 6 feet.
(6) The maximum building coverage for such use shall be 35%.
(7) The minimum lot width per dwelling unit shall be 30 feet.
(8) The maximum height limitations shall be 2.5 stories and 35 feet.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1310
72
(9) There shall be a 30 foot buffer yard around the entire overlay district, which area
shall be measured after the dedication of any rights-of-way to the City. Adequate
visual screening approved by the Planning Commission during land development
review shall be placed within the buffer area, which may include but is not limited to
landscaping, fencing and berms. The buffer yard may include any required setbacks.
(10) The dwelling units shall be designed as a single architectural project and shall not
detract from the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
1310.02 Additional Requirements in the RR-T Residential Overlay District - Township Line Road.
(a) Purpose – This overlay recognizes that this specific area is uniquely situated and allows
development consistent with such uniqueness. Specifically, portions of land lying along
the west side of Township Line Road are agricultural in nature and have significance to
the City as a natural buffer and transitional zone between U.S. Rt. 22 and other adjacent
residential land. At the same time, there are severe development pressures on this overlay
area created by the presence of the largest arterial highway, U.S. Rt. 22, in the Lehigh
Valley immediately adjacent to the overlay area, as well as a major industrial park, LVIP
IV, located immediately adjacent in Hanover and Bethlehem Townships. It is becoming
increasingly more difficult to economically farm the overlay area or utilize it for
agricultural purposes, especially as adjacent lands are developed and/or abandoned as
agricultural uses. In addition, Township Line Road is a narrow, rural road as are a number
of the connecting roads to this overlay area. The overlay is limited to age restricted
housing (over age 55) and the traffic generation from any development utilizing the
overlay will be less than if the overlay area was developed under traditional R-R
regulations thereby continuing the rural nature and environment of the surrounding and
adjacent lands as well as the overlay area. The purpose of this overlay is to provide the
opportunity to develop this overlay area while continuing to utilize it as a buffer between
U.S. Rt. 22 and other residential lands and at the same time managing the traffic impact
on Township Line Road and other adjacent roads leading to the overlay area, and thereby
maintaining a transitional zone compatible with sound planning.
(b) An Age Qualified Development (as hereinafter defined) is subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The dwellings must be deed restricted to the satisfaction of the City to persons at
least 55 years of age and their spouses with no children routinely living in the
development under the age of 18 ("Age Qualified Development").
(2) Prior to final approval of the development plans, the City must be satisfied with and
agree to the legal arrangements and contracts to ensure the age restrictions will be
adhered to.
(3) A minimum tract size of 9 acres is required.
(4) A maximum density of 5 dwelling units per acre is permitted.
(5) The dwelling units shall be designed as a single architectural project and shall not
detract from the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(6) Unit types allowed shall include single family detached, single family semi-detached
and single family attached units up to three units in a row which shall not exceed 132
feet in length.
(7) The front yard setback for such use shall be 35 feet.
(8) The rear yard setback for such use shall be 40 feet.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1310
73
(9) The side yard setback for such use shall be 25 feet.
(10) The minimum building separation for such use shall be 20 feet.
(11) The maximum building coverage for such use shall be 35%.
(12) The maximum height limitations shall be 2.5 stories or 35 feet.
(13) There shall be a 100 foot buffer yard along the right-of-way of Route 22. Adequate
visual screening approved by the Planning Commission during land development
review shall be placed within the buffer area, which may include but is not limited to
landscaping, fencing and berms. The buffer yard may include any required setbacks.
(14) If the total development includes more than 50 units, then a community center must
be provided for residents and their occasional guests. The community center may
include a library, exercise room, craft shop, restroom facilities, restaurant, kitchen
and dining area and community room.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1311
74
ARTICLE 1311
DESIGN STANDARDS IN THE CL, CB, RT AND OMU DISTRICTS.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1311.01 Purposes.
(a) Encourage appropriate redevelopment and reuse of underutilized sites.
(b) Promote a mix of appropriate light business and residential uses in the same building.
(c) Expand use of the public transit system and pedestrian and bicycle circulation.
(d) Create opportunities to live, shop and work in the same area.
(e) Improve the appearance of the City’s commercial corridors.
(f) Attract new customers and new sources of employment and tax revenue.
(g) Encourage principals of Smart Growth to promote compact mixed-use development.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1311.02 Applicability.
(a) Where a provision of this Section directly regulates the same matter as another section of
this Ordinance or another City Ordinance, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
(b) Provisions using the word “shall” are mandatory. Provisions using the word “should” are
strongly recommended, and may be the basis of a condition upon a special exception or
variance approval.
(c) Provisions of Section 1311.05 and 1311.06 shall not apply to the RT District.
1311.03 Modifications. Upon receipt of a written request, the Planning and Zoning Bureau and
City Planning Commission shall consider modifications to the standards of this Article
1311 based on the existing site conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or innovations in
technology in accordance with the terms of Article 1325.06(b) of this Ordinance.
1311.04 Building and Site Layouts and Setbacks.
(a) See Section 1306.05, Build-To Line for Front Building Setback, which establishes
required front setbacks along certain streets to maintain consistency with existing
buildings on that block.
(b) Surface off-street parking and any garage doors shall be located to the rear or side of
principal buildings, as opposed to being newly placed between the front lot line along a
street and the front wall of a new principal building. In the OMU District, garage doors
shall be located to the rear or side of principal non-residential and mixed-use buildings.
This provision shall not limit rearrangement of spaces within existing parking areas. If
such lot is adjacent to two or more streets, this restriction shall only apply to the one street
that is the most heavily traveled by vehicles. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(c) See City sidewalks requirements and City street tree requirements in separate ordinances.
An average of at least one street tree shall be planted for each 30 feet of street length,
unless existing trees will be preserved to serve the same purpose. The spacing of such
trees may vary to provide for driveways, sight distance and other features, provided the
average separation of trees is met.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1311
75
(d) For a use involving a new principal commercial building, a site plan shall be submitted to
the City showing locations for garbage storage, truck loading areas and parking areas, if
applicable. Such locations shall be subject to approval by the City to minimize conflicts
with sidewalks and dwellings.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1311.05 Design Requirements.
(a) A new principal non-residential, multi-family, or mixed use building shall not have a
front facade comprised of more than 33 percent vinyl or aluminum siding.
(b) New parking lot lights installed by a developer shall have a maximum total height of 20
feet and use a decorative design approved by the City. Light fixtures on private property
are encouraged to use designs that are similar to any decorative fixtures used on the
adjacent street.
(c) A new principal building of over 150 feet in length along a street shall include variations
in rooflines, overhangs, architectural details, setbacks, colors or facade materials or use
canopies, porches and awnings.
(d) A new principal building of over 150 feet should have the appearance of smaller
connected buildings. Article 1311.05(d) does not apply to the OMU District. (Amended
12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(e) Blank walls without at least one door and one window shall not face an arterial street.
Retail stores shall have display windows facing onto a street. Such display windows do
not necessarily have to be open to the inside of the store, if there are security issues. The
windows should have sufficient visibility from the street for security purposes and be
inviting to customers. In the OMU District, landscape screening and decorative plantings
or architectural elements of such walls may replace the requirement of the placement of
windows and doors. Such landscaping shall be approved by the City Forester. (Amended
12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(f) Tractor-trailer truck loading docks and service areas shall not be visible from any street
frontage. In the OMU District, tractor-trailer truck loading docks and service areas shall
be well screened from any street frontage by landscaping or ornamental fencing of at least
4’ in height when planted, and be of such species and spacing that can be expected to
produce, within 3 years, a complete visual screen of at least 6’ in height. (Amended
12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(g) Chain-link exposed metal fencing shall not be placed along any street frontage. Picket or
ornamental fences are encouraged. Highway-style metal guide rails shall not be used if
visible from a street or public right-of-way.
(h) The applicant for a new principal building, except for single family detached or semidetached
dwellings, shall submit a set of preliminary architectural sketch or elevation
plans of the front facade and a description of proposed front facade materials to the City.
Such materials may be offered to the City Planning Commission or other boards for
review and comment, as appropriate.
(i) New construction should have rooflines that are similar to adjacent older buildings. Flat
roofs should be avoided, except when a decorative cornice or parapet is used. Where a
pitched roof is not practical, then the roof should at least appear to have angles and a
pitch when viewed from the street.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1311
76
1311.06 Sidewalks and Pedestrian Access.
(a) New or replaced sidewalks in front of an arterial street should include use of decorative
brick, concrete pavers, patterned concrete or similar material that has the appearance of
decorative masonry. Such materials may be used as accents, with the majority of the
sidewalk being regular concrete. See guidelines from Public Works Department.
(Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(b) Pedestrian crosswalks should be provided along arterial street corridors using materials
and colors that visually distinguish the crosswalk from the street surface and that include
some texture. The use of pavers, patterned concrete or stamped textured asphalt is
encouraged.
(c) Pedestrian traffic should be separated from major vehicle routes. Developments should be
designed in such a way as to be inviting for pedestrian traffic and to provide convenient
walking routes from public transit stops.
(d) See bike racks provisions in Article 1319 – Parking, 1319.02(n).
(e) Commercial buildings shall have their main pedestrian entrance facing a street or a
pedestrian walkway/plaza.
(f) City-approved tree grates or similar measures may be used in sidewalk areas, with
attention to providing sufficient planting area to sustain the root area of large size shade
trees. The City may approve outdoor seating that intrudes into the sidewalk, provided a 5
foot continuous pedestrian and wheelchair accessible pathway is provided within the
sidewalk width. See Article 721, Streets and Sidewalks
(g) Any encroachment into the public right-of-way requires an Encroachment Permit from the
City Department of Public Works.
1311.07 Signs
(a) Various signs on a property should be coordinated. Internally illuminated signs of boxtype
construction should be avoided. Signs should not cover architectural details.
Awnings that extend at a straight angle from a building are encouraged to provide
continuity along a block front and weather protection. The front panel of an awning may
be used for a sign provided the sign image is integrated with the awning and the awning
has the appearance of a fabric-type material. Any encroachment into the public right-ofway
requires an Encroachment Permit from the City Department of Public Works.
1311.08 Parking and Driveways.
(a) No new off-street parking spaces shall be placed between a principal building and the
curb line of an arterial street along the front of the lot. Existing parking spaces may be rearranged,
provided they do not result in an increase in off-street parking spaces in such
location. In the OMU District, parking spaces placed between a principal commercial
building and the curb line of an arterial street along the front of the lot shall be limited to
one (1) driving aisle and one (1) row of parking spaces. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-
39)
(b) No new vehicle driveway shall enter or exit onto an arterial street, unless the applicant
proves that no feasible alternative exists, such as use of alleys or a side street.
(c) Parking areas shall be well-screened from the street by landscaping. See Section 1318.23.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1311
77
(d) See Section 1319.02(b) which allows some flexibility in parking requirements. Shared
parking among property owners and businesses is encouraged where adequate parking
spaces exist for shared usage. See Section 1319.02(g) regarding landscaping between
parking lots and streets. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(e) Parking areas should be well-screened from arterial and collector streets by landscaping of
at least 4 feet in height. Any wall or fence shall be on the inside of a row of shrubs or
trees unless otherwise approved by the City. Where rear parking is not possible, then
parking shall be provided to the side of a building. Where a driveway needs to enter from
the front to access a garage, the garage shall be setback further from the street than the
house, and the driveway should be as narrow as practical through the front yard. Article
1311.08(e) does not apply to the OMU District. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1311.09 Alleys and Side Access.
(a) When a new principal building is proposed, if a rear or side alley exists adjacent to the lot
or an existing alley can feasibly be extended, it shall be used as access for any new
vehicle garage, driveway or parking spaces, except a corner lot may have a garage,
driveway or parking accessing a street that is not along the front lot line. This subsection
shall not apply if an alternative point of vehicle access is specifically required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or the City Planning Commission.
1311.10 Additional Requirements.
(a) Architectural designs shall be used to minimize the visual impact of non-residential
garage doors when they front upon a street, when such locations are allowed. (Amended
12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(b) If approved by the City, the applicant shall have the option of offering a building as a
“Live Work Unit” in the CL, CB and IR-R districts under Section 1322.03(z).
(c) No outdoor bulk storage shall be permitted in the front yard and shall only be permitted in
the side or rear yard if it is screened from view of streets by landscaping and/or buildings.
(d) Individual buildings and pedestrian entrances and parking areas shall be laid out to
promote pedestrian access among different uses.
(e) Every effort should be made to preserve and reuse older buildings and to rehabilitate
historic features. Modern additions and features should be placed towards the rear of the
property. Article 1311.10(e) does not apply to the OMU District. (Amended 12/16/15,
Ord. 2015-39)
(f) Where existing adjacent older buildings have a certain horizontal or vertical pattern, that
orientation or pattern should be continued in new construction. Where existing older
buildings have a certain spacing of windows and doors, similar spacing (and similar sizes
of windows and doors) should be continued. Article 1311.10(f) does not apply to the
OMU District. (Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
(g) Overly modernistic or bland buildings devoid of details should be avoided when adjacent
buildings have architectural details.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1311
78
(h) Uninterrupted continuity of pedestrian-related uses are encouraged along arterial and
collector streets, particularly in areas of present activity. Outward street orientation with
storefronts, entrances and windows relating to the street, rather than an inward focus away
from the street, shall be emphasized in new buildings. Street-oriented parking lots and
non-pedestrian-related uses are not permitted in front yards along arterial and collector
streets.
(i) Existing older porches should be maintained and new porches should be considered on the
front of new buildings.
(j) Commercial HVAC systems shall be screened from view from the front of a lot using
walls, fencing, roof elements or landscaping. Noise or odor producing ventilation
equipment should be placed as far away from dwellings as is feasible.
(k) New exterior fire escapes should not be constructed on the front facade of a building, if an
alternative location exists.
(l) Solid or mostly solid security gates or roll-down metal window covers shall not be
permitted. Security doors or window covers that are mostly transparent may be used, and
should be installed from the inside, within the window or door frames, or on the outside
with a coil box that is concealed by architectural features or an awning.
(m) Buildings should be constructed to a height compatible with existing surrounding
buildings. One story buildings shall be avoided on blocks where existing structures are 2
stories or higher. Where an applicant finds that a 2 story building is not possible, they are
required to construct a building that has the appearance of a 2 story building when viewed
from the street (such as using decorative dormers). Such alternative shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Bureau if the building is not located in an existing local
ordinance historic district.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1312
79
ARTICLE 1312
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN THE I-O
INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
1312.01 Applicability.
(a) The I-O Institutional Overlay District shall serve as an overlay district to the I Institutional
District. The I-O District shall exist within land areas designated on the Zoning Map.
Within the I-O District, all of the same regulations shall apply as apply within the I
District, except for provisions specifically modified by this Article 1312.
(b) The I-O District is intended to serve as a transitional area between a college or university
campus and a CB District.
1312.02 Additional Uses Allowed in the I-O District.
(a) Within the I-O District, the following additional uses shall be allowed, in addition to uses
allowed in the I District:
(1) Multiple family dwellings
(2) Retail stores, such as pharmacy, drugstore, clothing store, grocery store, convenience
store, newsstand, bookstore, movie store or music store, but not including sale of onroad
motor vehicles
(3) Personal service uses, such as Barber or Beauty Shop, Salon, Day Spa or Tanning
Business
(4) Restaurants and retail bakeries
(5) Laundromats and dry cleaning shops
(6) Copy centers
(7) Bicycle sales and service shop enclosed within a building
(8) Post office
(9) Computer sales and repair store and custom assembly
(10) Financial institutions
1312.03 Additional Requirements in the I-O District.
(a) The total floor area of the commercial uses within the overlay district shall not exceed
20% of the total floor area within the overlay district.
(b) Although the commercial uses shall be open to the public, each building and use shall be
designed as part of the college/university and intended to serve the college/university
community including students, employees and visitors.
(c) Setbacks and building facade designs shall match and/or provide an orderly transition
between the college and adjacent commercial properties.
(d) Pedestrian access to the commercial uses shall be provided in a safe, attractive, and
convenient manner, including such features as parks, plazas, atriums or courtyards.
(e) Sales of gasoline or similar vehicle fuels shall be prohibited.
(f) Vehicle drive-through facilities shall be prohibited.
(g) Adult Oriented Establishments shall be prohibited.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1313
80
ARTICLE 1313
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN THE CMU DISTRICT
1313.01 Purposes.
(a) In addition to serving the purposes of the City Comprehensive Plan and the overall
purposes of this Ordinance, the CMU District is intended to promote appropriate types of
mixed uses, including banks, offices and limited commercial uses. The intent is to only
allow types of commercial uses that would be compatible with adjacent dwellings. This
District recognizes areas of Bethlehem that are uniquely situated compared to other areas
of the City, and allows future development consistent with such uniqueness.
(b) This District is also intended to provide transitional zoning provisions adjacent to
residential areas.
1313.02 Use Regulations.
(a) Section 1305 shall apply. In addition, a Planned Office Commercial Development
(“POCD”) is permitted by right if it meets Section 1322.
(b) An "Adult Oriented Establishment," as defined by State law in 68 Pa. C.S.A. §5501, et
seq., shall not be allowed within the CMU District.
1313.03 Area, Yard and Building Regulations.
(a) The following Area, Yard and Building Regulations shall apply for all uses within the
CMU District, unless more restrictive provisions are established by another section of this
Ordinance for a particular use:
(1) Minimum Lot Area - 1 Acre, provided that a POCD shall meet the minimum tract
size requirements*
(2) Minimum Lot Width of 150 feet measured at the street right-of-way line, except 250
feet for a POCD. If an existing lot does not meet this requirement, it shall not be
allowed to be developed into a new principal commercial use unless it is merged
with another lot to meet the 150 feet requirement. This larger lot width requirement
shall not apply when one commercial use is changed to a different commercial use.
(3) Minimum Principal and Accessory Building Setback:
(i) For a principal non-residential use from the lot line of a Residential Zoning
District boundary line: 100 feet ****
(ii) For any building from the right-of-way of a public street or from any other lot
line or street or alley right-of-way line: 15 feet.
(4) Maximum Building Height (Stories) – 3 above-ground stories or 45 feet, whichever
is more restrictive, except as follows:
(i) an office building shall have a maximum building height of 10 above ground
stories or 130 feet, whichever is more restrictive, provided that a) any part of the
building that exceeds 45 feet in height shall be located a minimum of 200 feet
from a lot line of an existing dwelling; and/or b) portions of a peaked roof that
are not occupied by persons may exceed 45 feet for the purposes of architectural
design and/or to screen mechanical equipment.
(5) Maximum Building Coverage 40%***
(6) Minimum Percentage of a Lot which shall be improved and maintained as
Landscaped Area and be planted in trees and shrubs and associated vegetated ground
cover – 10%**
(7) Buffer Yard Required Yes
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1313
81
(8) Land Development Plan Review by City Planning Commission Yes
(9) Landscaping Plan Required Yes
* See Section 1322 regarding lots and uses.
** The minimum Landscaped Area may be based upon the entire tract, as opposed to
each lot within a development tract. Buffer yards may count towards this
requirement.
*** The maximum Building Coverage shall be based upon the ground level footprint of
all buildings on the overall tract divided by the total area of the tract. Individual lots
may have a higher building coverage, provided that the maximum is not exceeded for
the tract.
**** This 100 feet setback shall be reduced to 50 feet if the following additional
requirements are met:
(i) A majority of healthy mature trees that have a trunk diameter greater than 8
inches that are within 25 feet of a residential zoning district shall be preserved.
A plan shall be submitted to ensure that such trees are protected during
construction and remain afterwards; and
(ii) A landscaped earthen berm shall be provided abutting a residential zoning
district along the maximum length that is feasible in the determination of the
City and the Planning Commission. This berm shall have an average height of 3
feet or more above the ground level on the residential side and a maximum 3:1
slope on the residential side. The commercial side of the berm may be a
retaining wall. A row, staggered to allow room for future growth, of primarily
evergreen trees and shrubs shall be placed between the residential lot line and
any new or expanded commercial use or parking for a commercial use. The
evergreen trees shall have a minimum height when planted of 8 feet. The trees
and shrubs shall be designed to provide a complete visual screen at least 6 feet
in height within 2 years after planting. Where deciduous trees will not be
preserved, then an average of one new deciduous tree shall also be planted for
every 40 feet of buffer length. Required deciduous trees shall meet the
requirements of Section 1313.04(c); and
(iii) In place of or in addition to the earth berm, the City Planning Commission may
also require the installation of a fence or a decorative masonry wall between
new non-residential development and existing adjacent dwellings to create a
visual barrier. Any such fence shall be constructed of attractive weather resistant
materials, such as a vinyl plank fence and shall be reviewed and approved by
the City Planning Commission. Any fence or decorative masonry wall shall
have a minimum height of 5 feet. The fence shall be placed on the business side
of required evergreen plantings.
(10) Any garbage dumpster for a commercial use or loading area used by tractor-trailer
trucks shall be setback a minimum of 70 feet from any residential zoning district.
Each garbage dumpster shall be surrounded by a decorative masonry wall and/ or a
weather-resistant decorative board fence and gate. Loading or unloading of trucks
that occurs within 200 feet of a lot line of an existing dwelling shall not be allowed
between the hours of 11 pm. and 6 am.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1313
82
(11) Lighting. New exterior light fixtures that are within the right-of-way or within 50
feet of a public street shall be of a decorative design, such as "acorn" style luminares,
as approved by the City and the Planning Commission. New exterior light fixtures
that are within 150 feet of a residential zoning district shall be of a full cutoff design
and shall not allow any spillover of light onto the horizontal surface of a lot occupied
by a dwelling. No new exterior light pole outside of a street right-of-way shall have a
total height greater than 20 feet above the ground.
(12) Each lot shall have an internal pedestrian circulation system that uses hard-surface
sidewalks or pedestrian pathways that meet ADA requirements. Such pedestrian
system shall connect sidewalks along public streets with major destinations within
the lot and adjacent lots.
(13) The edge of the cartway of any new commercial driveway (not including curb radius)
shall be setback a minimum of 150 feet from the nearest edge of cartway (not
including curb radius) of any existing street that intersects the same street as the
driveway. Such setback shall only apply to intersections entering along the same side
of the street.
1313.04 Landscaping and Buffer Requirements. The following requirements shall apply:
(a) See also the buffer and landscaping provisions in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and note "****" above. A vegetated buffer yard with a minimum width of 20
feet shall be located between any new parking area, commercial driveway or nonresidential
building and any residentially-zoned lot that is occupied by an existing
dwelling.
(b) A minimum 8 foot wide landscaped planting area shall be located abutting any public
street. This planting area may include a combination of land inside and outside of the
right-of-way, and areas between the curb and the sidewalk may count towards this width.
This planting area shall include shrubbery and other landscaping that is designed and
located to avoid conflicts with safe sight distances at intersections. This planting area may
include decorative walls or fences of masonry and/or materials with the appearance of
wrought iron with a maximum height of 4 feet, but shall not include any walls or fences
greater than 4 feet in height. Any wall or fence shall be on the inside of a row of shrubs or
trees unless otherwise approved by the City.
(c) Street trees meeting requirements of the City shall be required on each side of every
public and private street. A minimum average of one street tree shall be required for each
30 feet of public or private street length, unless existing trees will be preserved to serve
the same purpose, or unless the City allows an average of 1 tree of every 50 feet for trees
with larger canopies. In addition, a minimum average of one deciduous tree shall be
required for every 10 surface parking spaces. Such deciduous trees shall meet the street
trees requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. No more than 12
consecutive surface parking spaces shall be located in a straight row without being
separated by a landscaped island with a deciduous tree.
(d) Required deciduous trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of 2.5 inches measured 6
inches above the ground, and minimum 10 feet height above the ground when planted.
Each required deciduous tree within a parking lot shall be surrounded by a minimum 5
feet wide by 5 feet long vegetated area. The City may require curbing or other methods to
protect trees from damage by vehicles. Only species of trees that are on the City's list of
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1313
83
approved street trees shall be used to meet a requirement of this Ordinance for a required
deciduous tree.
1313.05 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. Article 1319 shall apply. If a lot or tract
includes two or more different types of commercial uses (such as offices and retail), the
City may approve a 5 percent reduction in the total number of required off-street parking
spaces if parking will be shared among the uses and if there is a pedestrian circulation
system that encourages persons to walk between the uses.
1313.06 Sign Regulations.
(a) For a lot with a principal non-residential use, the sign requirements of Section 1320.09
shall apply, except for the following regulations that shall apply within the CMU District.
(1) The maximum height above the ground for a freestanding sign shall be 8 feet, except
that freestanding signs for individual buildings and uses shall not be allowed within a
Planned Office Commercial Development, except for approved directional signs.
(2) No internally illuminated sign shall face directly onto a contiguous abutting
residential district.
(3) For a Planned Office Commercial Development, in place of Section 1320.09(a)(3),
the following requirement shall apply:
(i) One freestanding sign shall be allowed at each of two vehicle entrances to a
Planned Office Commercial Development. Each such entrance sign shall have a
maximum total height of 12 feet and a maximum total sign area of 100 square
feet and shall not be internally illuminated. If such entrance sign is attached to a
decorative masonry wall, then sections of the wall that extend in length beyond
the sign area shall not be regulated as part of the sign area, provided the wall is
not more than 6 feet in height. Such entrance signs shall not obstruct safe sight
distances.
(b) For a lot that does not have a principal non-residential use, the sign requirements of
Section 1320.08 shall apply.
1313.07 Sketch Plan Review Requirements. Article 1322 shall apply.
City of Bethlehem Article 1314
84
ARTICLE 1314
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OMU DISTRICT
(Entire Article Amended 12/16/15, Ord. 2015-39)
1314.01 Purposes.
(a) In addition to serving the purposes of the City Comprehensive Plan and the overall
purposes of this Ordinance, this District is intended to promote redevelopment of areas of
the City that are currently underutilized and are only partially developed. This District
also recognizes that this area of Bethlehem is unique in terms of its size (over 50 acres)
and its proximity to ramps of a limited access expressway (PA. Route 378). This District
is also intended to provide transitional zoning provisions adjacent to a County Park and
recognized historical site, the Burnside Plantation. This District also is intended to
encourage ground-floor retail and service uses to create connectivity between the
residential and commercial buildings on the overall tract.
1314.02 Area, Yard and Building Regulations.
(a) The following Area, Yard and Building Regulations shall apply for all residential uses;
however, these regulations in subsection (a) shall not apply to a change of use of a
building that existed on the tract prior to the enactment of this District:
(1) Maximum Density 21 Dwelling Units/Acre*
(2) Minimum Lot Area Per Phase 1.0 Acre ****
(3) Minimum Lot Width Per Phase 100 Feet ****
(4) Minimum Building Setback 25 Feet except along Schoenersville
from the Perimeter of the Road and Eaton Avenue where
Tract and from Rights-of-Way the minimum building setback
of Existing Public Streets shall be 40 feet
(5) Minimum Interior Front
Yard Setback 5 Feet**
(6) Minimum Interior
Rear Yard Setback 20 Feet**
(7) Minimum Interior Side Yard
Setback 5 Feet (Each)**, except that a 35 feet minimum
separation from any other building shall be
required for a building that includes 4 or more
stories.
(8) Maximum Building Height 4 habitable stories. ** In addition, a building
may have a maximum of one above-ground
parking level.
(9) Maximum Building Coverage 60%***
(10) Buffer Yard Required No
(11) Site Plan Review by
City Planning Commission Yes
City of Bethlehem Article 1314
85
* The Maximum Density applicable to all residential uses shall be based upon the gross
acreage of the District, without any deletions other than for rights-of-way of existing or
proposed public streets, however, specifically excluding proposed public streets that shall
be controlled and/or maintained by a Homeowners’ Association.
** A building may exceed 4 habitable stories if the following additional setback requirement
is met from any District boundary other than Eighth Avenue: for each foot of building
height over 50 feet, two additional feet of building setback shall be required. However, in
no case shall a new building exceed a total height of more than 120 feet or 12 stories,
whichever is more restrictive. An unenclosed front or side porch or stoop or steps or
handicapped ramp or roof overhang or bay window may intrude up to 5 feet into the
minimum front or side yards. An unenclosed deck may extend up to 10 feet into the rear
yard. A detached rear garage shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from the travel lanes of
a rear alley.
*** The maximum Building Coverage shall be based upon the ground level footprint of all
buildings in the District divided by the total area of the District. Individual lots may have
a higher building coverage, provided that the maximum is not exceeded for the District.
**** Individual dwelling units may be owned in a condominium arrangement, without each
condominium unit needing to meet the minimum yard requirements.
(b) The following Area, Yard and Building Regulations shall apply for all non-residential
uses, however, these regulations in subsection (b) shall not apply to a change of use of a
building that existed in the District prior to the enactment of this Overlay District:
(1) Minimum Lot Size 0.5 Acres ***
(2) Minimum Lot Width 30 Feet ***
(3) Minimum Building Setback
from the Perimeter of the
Tract and from Rights-of-Way
of Existing Public Streets 25 Feet except along
Schoenersville
Road and Eaton Avenue where
the minimum building
setback shall be 40 feet
(4) Front Yard Setback 5 Feet***
(5) Minimum Rear Yard Setback 30 Feet***
(6) Minimum Side Yard Setback 10 Feet (Each)***, except that a 35
feet minimum separation from any
other building shall be required for a
building that includes 4 or more
stories.
(7) Maximum Building Height 4 habitable stories. ** In
addition, a building may have a
maximum of one above-ground
parking level.
(8) Maximum Building Coverage 60%*
(9) Buffer Yard Required No
(10) Site Plan Review by City Yes
City of Bethlehem Article 1314
86
* The maximum Building Coverage shall be based upon the ground level footprint of all
buildings in the District divided by the total area of the District. Individual lots may have
a higher building coverage, provided that the maximum is not exceeded for the District.
** A building may exceed 4 habitable stories if the following additional setback requirement
is met from any District boundary line other than Eighth Avenue: for each foot of building
height over 50 feet, two additional feet of building setback shall be required. However, in
no case shall a new building exceed a total height of more than 120 feet or 12 stories,
whichever is more restrictive.
*** Individual uses or buildings may be owned in a condominium arrangement, without each
condominium unit needing to meet the minimum yard requirements. An unenclosed front
or side porch, roof overhang or stoop, steps or handicapped ramp, awning, bay window, or
pedestrian arcade may intrude up to 5 feet into the minimum front or side yards.
(c) A maximum 300,000 square feet of new building footprint is permitted to be of one (1)
habitable story design.
(d) A minimum of 10 percent of the total area of the District shall be set aside in open land that
is available for active or passive outdoor recreational use by the residents of the District or by
invitees of such residents. Such open land shall be maintained in existing trees or planted
with new trees and shrubs or improved for outdoor recreation facilities. This open space
provision may include steep slope areas and/or other natural areas and may include a
recreational trail as described below.
At least one recreation trail available for both public and private use shall be provided to
connect dwellings to two points along the perimeter of the tract. Such open land shall be
regulated by a Conservation Easement or Deed Restriction established by the applicant
and enforceable by the City of Bethlehem, which prohibits the construction of buildings
upon and the further subdivision of the required open land. Areas used for buildings or
vehicle parking shall not count towards the open land requirement.
(1) Unless another form of ownership is approved by the City of Bethlehem as part of a
final subdivision and land development plan, such open land shall be owned and
maintained by a legally binding association of property-owners on the tract. The
form of the property-owners’ legal documents shall be subject to acceptance by the
City Solicitor. If there is mutual written agreement between the applicant and the
City Council, part or all of the open land may be maintained as a public park.
(e) A minimum 100 feet setback shall apply between any new principal building and the lot
line of any public park that existed prior to the adoption of the OMU District, unless a
larger setback is required by another section of this Ordinance. This 100 feet setback shall
be reduced to a minimum of 75 feet if the building has a maximum of 4 habitable stories
and if the building is separated by the public park by a row of primarily evergreen trees
with an initial height of 5 feet, in addition to preservation of existing healthy mature trees
within such setback.
City of Bethlehem Article 1314
87
1314.03 Overall Master Plan, Phasing and Deed Restrictions.
(a) Prior to the development of any new building under the District’s provisions, the applicant
shall submit an Overall Master Plan for the District. The Overall Master Plan shall show
the approximate locations, heights and uses of all buildings, as well as the approximate
locations of proposed parking, streets, and open land. The Master Plan may include a
range of allowed uses, as opposed to identifying each specific use; however the Overall
Master Plan shall show proposed uses in enough detail to verify that the ultimate build out
of the site will include mixed use development. Therefore, at each phase of development
the Overall Master Plan shall show uses in the following mix or proportion in the overall
District:
Minimum % Maximum %
bldg. floor bldg. floor
area area
a. Office, Institutional, Light Industrial
and related uses 5% 70%
b. Retail, Restaurant, Entertainment 5% 65%
and related uses
c. Residential uses 5% 85%
The Overall Master Plan shall be made available for review for a minimum of 30 days by
the City Planning Commission, Planning and Zoning Bureau and the City Engineer. All
phases proposed for development shall be developed in accordance with the Overall
Master Plan that has been approved by the Planning Commission. If a proposed
subdivision or phase of development is not consistent with the Overall Master Plan, the
Overall Master Plan shall be revised provided that it still complies with the applicable
sections of Article 1311 and 1314 and is approved by the Planning Commission. The
Overall Master Plan shall be designed to reflect the overall provisions of the Purpose
section of Article 1311, Design Standards.
(b) Design standards outlined in Article 1311 shall apply to all properties located in the
District.
1314.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
(a) Article 1319 shall apply, except as follows:
(1) On-street parking spaces along new streets for non-residential uses may be used to
meet up to 25 percent of the required off-street parking requirements for uses that are
within 300 feet of such parking spaces. Off-street parking spaces are not required to
be on the same lot as the use that is served by the parking provided that: a) the
parking is located within 300 feet of the use that is served by the parking, and b) the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Bureau that there will
be sufficient legal mechanisms in place to ensure that the parking will continue to be
available as long as the use is in existence.
(2) No portion of the front facade of any non-residential building shall be composed of
vehicle garage door(s). For residential buildings, no more than 60% of the first floor
front façade of any building shall be composed of vehicle garage doors.
City of Bethlehem Article 1314
88
(3) To ensure the availability of visitor parking for residential uses in the development,
an additional one (1) parking space shall be created for every two (2) dwelling units
(excluding multi-family dwellings) and such spaces shall be available within 400 feet
of the units they are intended to serve. These spaces may be on-street or clustered
parking spaces within the development.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1315
89
ARTICLE 1315
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN THE IN-O INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
1315.01 Purposes. This overlay area is intended to promote the economic revitalization of
underutilized industrial properties and to provide suitable areas for the use of business and
industry. In order to accomplish this purpose, flexible design standards will be applied
during the plan approval process.
1315.02 Modifications. Upon receipt of a written request, the Planning and Zoning Bureau and the
City Planning Commission shall consider modifications to the standards of this Ordinance
based on the existing site conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or innovations in
technology in accordance with the terms of Article 1351.03 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
1315.03 Applicability and Use Regulations.
(a) Within IN-O Overlay District, all of the regulations of the IN Industrial District shall
apply except for provisions specifically provided otherwise in this Article 1315.
(b) A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following purposes, subject to applicable provisions of Article 1318, “General
Regulations”, and other applicable provisions of this and other city ordinances.
(1) Any use or accessory use permitted by right or by special exception in the
Industrial Zoning District (IN) is allowed in the same manner within the
Industrial Overlay (IN-O) Zone.
(2) In no case shall the following uses be allowed in the IN-O District:
(i) Storage of Used or Discarded Motor Vehicles Tires.
(ii) Landfill.
(3) The definition of an accessory use in this Overlay Zone shall be expanded to
include any use that 1) is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal
use and 2) contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the principal
use.
(4) Personal service, convenience and indoor recreational facilities planned for the
use of the employees of the district and only incidentally for the general public,
such as a bank, branch post office, day care service, retail, restaurant, barber or
beauty salon, dry cleaning, offices, exercise facilities or other indoor recreation,
if developed in an integrated way with the primary uses at the site.
1315.04 Area, Yard and Building Regulations.
(a) If the property is adjacent to a lot in a residential district, then the setback requirements of
the Industrial Zoning District shall apply. If the adjacent property is NOT in a Residential
Zoning District, then the front yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet, and there shall be no
rear or side yard setback requirements under this Zoning Code.
(b) There is no maximum building coverage limitation. There is no minimum lot width
requirement.
(c) The City Planning Commission may consider requested modifications to these standards
in accordance with the terms of the Modification, Waiver and/or Variance Section of the
Subdivision & Development Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1315
90
(d) The provisions of section 1306 shall be deemed to be either amended or suspended so as
to conform with Section 1315 as set forth in this Article 1315. Except as provided above,
all other Dimensional Requirements of the Industrial (IN) District shall apply.
1315.05 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. Off street parking and loading regulations
shall be governed by Article 1319, Off-Street Parking and Loading, except as modified by
this section.
(a) Shared parking shall be permitted pursuant to Section 1319.02.
(b) Shade Trees. If the applicant can provide information that an area is not visible from a
public way and there is no access to the area or visibility to the area by the public, then the
Planning Commission may consider waiving or partially waiving the shade tree
requirements of Section 1319.02(j) and 1319.03, as applicable, following review and
recommendation by the City’s Planning and Zoning Bureau. The Planning Commission
may consider requiring a contribution in lieu of actual tree planting. Such contribution
shall be utilized by the City to install appropriate trees elsewhere in this vicinity of the
City, such as the South Bethlehem Greenway.
(c) Off-street parking shall be permitted on a lot other than the proposed development site,
provided adequate assurances are given that such parking will not be eliminated by future
development.
(d) The City Planning Commission may approve a reasonable reduction of the minimum offstreet
parking and loading facilities standards based on the proposed use. Such reductions
shall include but not be limited to:
(1) providing for up to 30% of total parking required as compact spaces; compact spaces
shall have a minimum dimension of 8 feet in width and 16 feet in length;
(2) credit for other methods of transportation to the site, including bus and rail service;
and
(3) recent authoritative standards information including parking use studies supplied by
the applicant regarding parking standards for individual uses shall be employed.
(e) The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(1) A maximum of one hundred fifteen (115) feet at the curb line for one-way use only.
(2) For two-way use, a maximum of one hundred thirty (130) feet measured along the
curb line between the points of intersection of the two opposing driveway curb
returns. Depressed curb driveway aprons shall not be required.
1315.06 Additional Provisions. Because of the extremely large lots proposed within the Industrial
Overlay Zone and the proposed limited access by the general public and the unique access
provisions of the combined rail and truck access, the following general provisions are also
permitted in the Industrial Overlay Zone.
(a) The steep slope provisions of section 1316 shall not apply in the Industrial Overlay Zone.
(b) The Planning Commission may consider waivers from sections 1322.02(d) (4), utilities,
and (5), special features, pursuant to Section 1351 of the Subdivision and Development
Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1315
91
1315.07 Sign Regulations. Sign regulations shall be governed by Article 1320. The City Planning
Commission may consider modifications to the standards based on the existing site
conditions, the proposed use, hardships, or innovations in technology in accordance with
the terms of Article 1351.03 of the Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1316
92
ARTICLE 1316
STEEP SLOPES
1316.01 Development Standards For Steep Slopes. For the purpose of these regulations, any land
with a gradient in excess of 15% shall be deemed subject to these regulations.
(a) Intent. This section is intended to serve the following purposes, to avoid problems that
typically accompany development of steeply sloped and adjacent areas:
(1) To avoid severe soil erosion and sedimentation, especially considering steep areas
are highly vulnerable to erosion.
(2) To avoid severely increased stormwater flow rates and velocities.
(3) To recognize the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan for Lehigh and
Northampton Counties (which identifies the majority of the areas affected by this
Section as “Natural Resource Areas”), and more specifically, the Model Steep Slope
Ordinance recommended by the LVPC in 2008.
(4) To steer development to areas that are more physically suited for it, and where the
City has allowed for intense development.
(5) To avoid construction of steep roads that are difficult, time-consuming and expensive
to maintain.
(6) To avoid increased use of steep roads and driveways that are dangerous to drive upon
in snow and ice, and that are difficult for fire trucks to access.
(7) To seek to conserve forested areas that are important parts of the ecological cycle,
providing for groundwater recharge, air pollution reduction and wildlife habitats,
especially along the Monocacy Creek.
(8) To recognize that many of the areas affected by this section include natural springs,
wetlands and major drainage channels that are important parts of the hydrological
cycle, affecting water quality, water quantity, aquatic habitats and public water
supplies.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) Small Areas Of Slope – If the total areas of over 15 percent slope within the
construction area are less than 500 square feet, the City Engineer may waive the
requirements related to development of steep slopes.
(2) Existing Streets – The disturbance of sloped areas for widening, alignment
improvement, sight distance improvement or similar improvement of an existing
street for public safety reasons or that is required by, approved by or accomplished
by the City or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(3) Man-Made Slopes – The walls of a detention basin, slopes created by quarry
activities, and excavated banks along streets shall not be regulated by this Section
1316. Other existing slopes that were clearly and lawfully man-made shall not be
regulated by this Section 1316, unless the grading creating said man-made slope
occurred prior to 1960. Any slope created greater than 75 years before the plan
submission shall be considered natural.
(4) Building Expansion – An expansion of a building that existed and for which a valid
building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this Section shall not by
itself cause the requirements of this Section to apply.
(5) Public Open Space – The development of public open space uses by a governmental
agency or an established nature conservation organization shall not by itself cause
the requirements of this Section to apply.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1316
93
(6) Municipal Uses – Uses owned by the City of Bethlehem or its authorized municipal
authorities for legitimate governmental purposes shall not be bound by the
requirements of this Section.
(7) Utilities – Grading necessary for the installation of public water or public sewer line
extensions of other underground utilities shall not by itself cause the requirements of
this Section to apply.
(8) IN District – Land located in the IN Industrial Zoning District which is more than
500 feet from an open waterway.
(c) Minimum Lot Area And Maximum Impervious Coverage In Steep Areas.
(1) The following shall apply whenever one or both of the following, together with the
related "construction area", would involve the alteration or disturbance of slopes over
15 percent:
(i) The development of a new principal building; or
(ii) The expansion by over 1,000 square feet in building coverage of an existing
principal building (which did not exist at the time of the effective date of this
Section):
If the maximum slope with- The minimum lot The maximum impervious
in the construction area is: area shall be: coverage of the lot shall be:
Over 15% and up to 25% 1 Acre 25%
Over 25% and up to 35% 4 Acres 10%
Over 35% 10 Acres 5%
(d) Maximum Slope Of Driveways. No driveway shall have a maximum slope greater than 10
percent. The initial 20 feet of a driveway from the cartway of a public street which the
driveway enters into shall not exceed 6 percent. To the maximum extent feasible,
driveways and streets shall follow the natural grades.
(e) Maximum Vertical Drop Of Terraces. When terraces or retaining walls are utilized to
cope with steep slopes, the maximum vertical drop per terrace shall be 5 feet.
Furthermore, at the discretion of the City, an appropriate fence may be required.
(f) Submittal Requirements. Applicants proposing uses affected by this Section shall provide
the following information to the City as part of subdivision plan review for a proposed lot,
or on a separate plot plan for an existing lot. Such designated construction area shall be
binding upon future owners of each lot unless such applicant then provides a revised site
plan that proves to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that a revised construction area
location would not cause a larger lot area to be required and would meet all other
requirements of this Ordinance.
(1) Mapping of slopes within areas proposed to be disturbed, with identification of the
following slope intervals, based upon 2 feet contours, unless the City Engineer preapproves
a different contour interval:
(i) Over 15% and up to 25%.
(ii) Over 25% and up to 35%.
(iii) Over 35%.
(2) Location of proposed construction area.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1316
94
(3) Locations of areas where healthy trees of over 6 inches in trunk width measured at
4.5’ DBH (diameter at breast height) and heavy brush growth are to be removed or
preserved as a result of the development of the proposed use or structure. The
applicant shall minimize the cutting or removal of healthy trees with a diameter of 6
inches or more.
(g) Non-Impervious Areas. Areas used to meet the non-impervious area requirements of this
Section shall be permanently set aside by deed restrictions which will run with the land
and be placed in the Deeds of Conveyance by the applicant to its grantees. The language
of such deed restriction shall be in a form acceptable to the City Solicitor.
(h) On areas with a slope of 25 percent or greater, a maximum of 25 percent of the tree
canopy shall be cut or removed, within any 3 year period.
(i) Finished slopes of all cuts and fills shall not exceed 33 percent, unless the applicant can
demonstrate that steeper slopes can be stabilized and maintained adequately to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(j) Any disturbance of steep slopes shall be completed within one construction season, and
disturbed areas shall not be left bare and exposed during the winter and spring thaw
periods. Permanent vegetative cover shall be planted within 3 days after completion of
grading or in accordance with an approved erosion control plan.
(k) If a lot, subdivision or tract (whichever is more inclusive) involves more than 3 acres of
all areas with greater than 25 percent slopes, then the following additional regulations
shall apply:
(1) A maximum total of 35 percent of all land areas with a slope of 15 to 25 percent
shall be disturbed, regraded, built upon or be affected by tree cutting.
(2) A maximum total of 10 percent of all land areas with a slope of more than 25 percent
shall be disturbed, regraded, built upon or be affected by tree cutting.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
95
ARTICLE 1317
FLOODWAY AND FLOOD-FRINGE DISTRICTS
(Entire Article amended 7-16-14 by Ordinance 2014-20)
1317.01 Intent
The intent of this Ordinance is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units, and its residents,
by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
1317.02 Applicability
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause
to be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within the City of Bethlehem
unless a Permit has been obtained.
B. A Permit shall not be required for minor repairs (as defined in Section 1317.30.A.15 of this
Ordinance) to existing buildings or structures.
1317.03 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Bethlehem or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
96
1317.04 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this ordinance and is referred to
herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: (A) Fulfill the duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in
these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees,
or (C) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector entity
to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these
regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22.
1317.05 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a Permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application
for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and
federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act
1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);
and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33, U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued until
this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to
enter any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the
permit application or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false
statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke
the Permit and report such fact to the Zoning Hearing Board for whatever action it considers
necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this ordinance including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation
data, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to the
FEMA concerning community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
97
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate
responsibility lies with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain
administrator/manager
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate
responsibility lies with the person identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain
administrator/manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 PA Code and the 2009
IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
1317.06 Application Procedures and Requirements
A. Application for such a Permit shall be made, in writing, to the Bureau of Code Enforcement
on the standard City of Bethlehem Bureau of Code Enforcement Application for Permit.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any
identified floodplain area, applicants for Permits shall also provide all the necessary
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Code Enforcement Bureau and
Engineering Bureau to determine that:
1. all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform
with the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
2. all utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
3. adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
4. structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement;
5. building materials are flood-resistant;
6. appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used; and
7. electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or
accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information
as may be required by the Bureau of Code Enforcement to make the above determination:
1. A completed Permit Application Form.
2. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one (1) inch being
equal to one hundred (100) feet or less, showing the following:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
98
a. north arrow, scale, and date;
b. topographic contour lines; the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location of any existing or
proposed subdivision and development;
c. the location of all existing streets, drives, and other access ways; and
d.the location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified
floodplain areas, and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway,
and the flow of water including direction and velocities.
3. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable
scale showing the following:
a. the proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon
North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
b. the elevation of the base flood;
c. supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA Code, the 2009
IBC or the 2009 IRC.
4. The following data and documentation:
a. if available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood; and
b. detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing measures and
corresponding elevations.
c. documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to
show that the cumulative effect of any proposed development within an AE
Area/District with floodway (See section 1317.14 A) when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation at any point.
d. A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
which states that the proposed construction or development has been
adequately designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces associated with the base flood.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of flood
proofing measures which have been incorporated into the design of the
structure and/or the development.
e. detailed information needed to determine compliance with Section 1317.20
F., Storage, and Section 1317.21, Development Which May Endanger
Human Life, including:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
99
i. the amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances
referred to in Sections 1317.20 F. and 1317.21 which are intended
to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site.
ii. a description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the
proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous
materials or substances listed in Section 1317.21 during a base flood.
f. the appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's
"Planning Module for Land Development."
g. where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements
of the Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
D. Applications for Permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality based
upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the current fee schedule
at the Bureau of Code Enforcement.
1317.07 Review of Application by Others
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to
any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g. planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
1317.08 Changes
After the issuance of a Permit by the Bureau of Code Enforcement, no changes of any kind shall be
made to the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with
the application without the written consent or approval of the Bureau of Code Enforcement. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Bureau of Code
Enforcement for consideration.
1317.09 Placards
In addition to the Permit, the Bureau of Code Enforcement shall issue a placard which shall be
displayed on the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the
number of the Permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Bureau.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
100
1317.10 Start of Construction
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance and shall be completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the Permit or
the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Bureau of Code
Enforcement. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Bureau of Code Enforcement to approve such a request.
1317.11 Enforcement
A. Notices
The provisions of Article 1324 of this Zoning Ordinance shall govern and apply to any person
or entity who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this Article.
B. Penalties
Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this Article
shall be liable if convicted of all of the penalties and procedures described in Article 1324 of
this Zoning Ordinance.
1317.12 Appeals
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning
the administration of the provisions of this Article 1317, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board as described in Article 1325 of this Ordinance. Such appeal must be filed, in writing,
within thirty (30) days after the decision, determination or action of the Zoning Officer of
Building Official.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
101
1317.13 Identification of Floodplain Areas
The identified floodplain area shall be:
A. any areas of the City of Bethlehem, classified as Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) in
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) dated July 16, 2014 and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of
the Flood Insurance Study. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by the City of Bethlehem and declared to be a
part of this ordinance.
1317.14 Description and Special Requirements of Identified Floodplain Areas
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS which represents the channel of
a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one (1) foot
at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those Special Flood Hazard Areas where no
floodway has been identified in the FIS.
1. Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development shall not be permitted unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would
not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge.
2. No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from
the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in
the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided.
1. The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations
have been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
102
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no one-percent (1%) annual chance flood elevations
have been provided. For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other Federal,
State, or other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be determined by using the
elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation
with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow
a thorough technical review by the municipality.
1317.15 Changes in Identification of Area
The Identified Floodplain Area may be revised or modified by the City of Bethlehem Planning
Commission following review, input and recommendation by the City Engineering Bureau where
studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change to the Special Flood Hazard Area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the Special Flood
Hazard Area by submitting technical or scientific data. See 1317.18 (B) for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
1317.16 Boundary Disputes
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall
be made by the City of Bethlehem Planning Commission. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
1317.17 Jurisdictional Boundary Changes
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject
to boundary changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas
subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in CFR 44 60.
1317.18 TECHNICAL PROVISIONS - General
A. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse
1. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action
have been notified by the municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
first been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
103
2. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any
watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way.
3. In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
? any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway;
or
? any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated
floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or
? alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and
bridges)
The applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
1. Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur.
2. Upon receipt of the Administrator’s conditional approval of map change and prior to
approving the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to
FEMA of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating the
increased base flood elevations and / or revised floodway reflecting the post-project
condition.
3. Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such
certifications in accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified
floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this
Ordinance and any other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any Identified Floodplain Area (See Section 1317.14), no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured fifty (50) feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
104
1317.19 Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements
A. Residential Structures
1. In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation.
2. In A Zones, where there are no Base Flood Elevations specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with Section 1317.14.C of this ordinance.
3. The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code
(IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters
401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Non-residential Structures
1. In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up
to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the
space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
a. is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and,
b. has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy:
2. In A Zones, where no Base Flood Elevations are specified on the FIRM, any new
construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with Section 1317.14.C of this ordinance.
3. Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the WI or W2 space
classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended
March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for
such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods
of construction are in conformance with the above referenced standards.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
105
4. The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code
(IRC) or the most recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 PA Code (Chapters
401-405 as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor
1. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area
other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on
exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
2. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. a minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one (1)
square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
b. the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
c. openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic Structures
Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial
improvement as defined in this ordinance, must comply with all ordinance requirements that
do not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures
Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain
dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
1. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall be limited
to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related
to the principal use or activity.
2. Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
3. The structure will have a low damage potential.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
106
4. The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow
of flood waters.
5. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
6. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters,
washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
7. Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
8. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or movement and shall
be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. a minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one (1)
square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
b. the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
c. openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
1317.20 Design and Construction Standards
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within
any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill - If fill is used, it shall:
1. extend laterally at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the building line from all points;
2. consist of soil or small rock materials only - Sanitary Landfills shall not be permitted;
3. be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring,
or settling;
4. be no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal feet unless substantiated data
justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
and
5. be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
107
B. Drainage Facilities
Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe
and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems
1. All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall
be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of flood waters.
2. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of
untreated sewage into flood waters.
3. No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all State and local regulations for such systems.
If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
4. The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #348, “Protecting
Building Utilities from Flood Damages” and “The International Private Sewage
Disposal Code” shall be utilized.
D. Other Utilities
All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located, elevated
(where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets
The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one (1) foot below the
Regulatory Flood Elevation.
F. Storage
All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not listed in Section 1317.21, Development
Which May Endanger Human Life, shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation
or flood proofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures
All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect
upon the flow and height of flood water.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
108
H. Anchoring
1. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
2. All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components
located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to
prevent flotation.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings
1. Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain
without causing structural damage to the building.
2. Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a "marine” or
"water-resistant" variety.
3. Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are "water-resistant" and will withstand inundation.
4. Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be made of metal or other "water-resistant" material.
J. Paints and Adhesives
1. Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
"marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
2. Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a "marine" or
"water-resistant" variety.
3. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other
finishing material.
K. Electrical Components
1. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood
elevation.
2. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
L. Equipment
Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the Regulatory Flood
Elevation.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
109
M. Fuel Supply Systems
All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into
the system and discharges from the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be
made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code Coordination
The Standards and Specifications contained in 34 PA Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended
and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and
sub-sections of this ordinance, to the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this ordinance.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:
Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:
Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
1317.21 Development Which May Endanger Human Life
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the regulations
adopted by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the
Act, any new or substantially improved structure which:
1. will be used for the production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or,
2. will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or,
3. will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances;
shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are considered dangerous
to human life:
? Acetone
? Ammonia
? Benzene
? Calcium carbide
? Carbon disulfide
? Celluloid
? Chlorine
? Hydrochloric acid
? Hydrocyanic acid
? Magnesium
? Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
? Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil,
etc.)
? Phosphorus
? Potassium
? Sodium
? Sulphur and Sulphur products
? Pesticides (including insecticides,
fungicides, and rodenticides)
? Radioactive substances, insofar as such
substances are not otherwise
regulated.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
110
B. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A., above, shall
be prohibited.
C. Within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially improved structure of the
kind described in Subsection A., above, shall be prohibited within the area measured fifty (50)
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially improved
residential structure of the kind described in Article 1317.21(A), above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least one and one half (1 ½) feet above base flood elevation.
E. Where permitted within any Identified Floodplain Area, any new or substantially improved
non-residential structure of the kind described in Section 1317.21(A), above, shall be:
1. elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least one and
one half (1 ½) feet above base flood elevation, and
2. designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base
flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for
completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
1317.22 Special Requirements for Subdivisions
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least 5 acres,
whichever is the lesser, in Identified Floodplain Areas where base flood elevation data are not
available, shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base
flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or
Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of
the applicant.
1317.23 Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes
A. Within any Identified Floodplain Area manufactured homes shall be prohibited. No variance
shall be granted.
1317.24 Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles
A. Within any Identified Floodplain Area recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. No variance
shall be granted.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
111
1317.25 Prohibited Activities
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any Identified Floodplain Area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
1. Hospitals
2. Nursing homes
3. Jails or prisons
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision.
1317.26 Existing Structures In Identified Floodplain Areas
The provisions of this Ordinance do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of Section 1317.27 shall apply.
1317.27 Improvements
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any Identified Floodplain Area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any Floodway
Area/District that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing
structure to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value, shall
constitute a substantial improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 PA Code, as amended and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
1317.28 Variances - General
If compliance with any of the requirements of this Ordinance would result in an exceptional hardship
to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the City of Bethlehem Zoning Hearing Board may,
upon request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements pursuant to the provisions of
Article 1325 of this Zoning Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
112
1317.29 Variance Procedures and Conditions
Requests for variances shall be considered in accordance with the procedures contained in Article
1325 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in the BFE.
B. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirement involved, no
variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
Development Which May Endanger Human Life (Article 1317.21).
C. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
D. In granting any variance, whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards that are considered
necessary, shall be attached in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to
achieve the objectives of this Ordinance.
E. Whenever a variance is granted, the applicant shall be notified in writing that:
1. The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
2. Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
F. In reviewing any request for a variance, in addition to any other sections of this Zoning
Ordinance that apply, the following shall be considered, at a minimum:
1. That there is good and sufficient cause.
2. That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
3. That the granting of the variance will
a. neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense,
b.nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with
any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
G. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Zoning Officer. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included
in the annual report to the FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as to
have the capability of resisting the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
113
1317.30 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, all other pertinent phrases and definitions are included in Article
1302 of this ordinance, and are hereby incorporated herein by reference thereto.
A. Additional Definitions
1. Base flood - a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year (also called the "100-year flood" or one-percent (1%) annual chance flood).
2. Base flood discharge - the volume of water resulting from a Base Flood as it passes a given
location within a given time, usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
3. Base flood elevation (BFE) - the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a 1-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
4. Development - any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of
buildings or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving;
utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of
equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
5. Existing manufactured home park or subdivision – a manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
6. Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision – the preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
7. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - the official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
8. Flood Insurance Study (FIS) - the official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
9. Floodplain area - a relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete
inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject
to the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
10. Floodproofing - any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
114
11. Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot.
12. Lowest floor - the lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, and incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
13. Manufactured home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
14. Manufactured home park or subdivision – a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
15. Minor repair - the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of
its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition
or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure
affecting the exit way requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
16. New construction - structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of this ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after July 3, 1978 and before the effective date of this
ordinance is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the
start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
17. New manufactured home park or subdivision – a manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
18. Post-FIRM Structure - is a structure for which construction or substantial improvement
occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after the community’s initial Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) dated July 3, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
19. Pre-FIRM Structure - is a structure for which construction or substantial improvement
occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the community’s initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 3, 1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
115
20. Regulatory flood elevation - the base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as
determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety factor of one and one-half (1 ½)
feet.
21. Repetitive loss – flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions
during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on
average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
22. Special flood hazard area (SFHA) - means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO,
A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
23. Start of construction - includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development
and means the date the Permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
after the date of the permit and shall be completed within five (5) years after the date of
issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
24. Structure – a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
25. Substantial damage - damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50)
percent or more of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
26. Substantial improvement - any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, of which the cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1317
116
27. Uniform Construction Code (UCC) – The statewide building code adopted by The
Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new construction in all municipalities
whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and
Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted The
International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the State floodplain construction. For
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of
the IRC and the IBC.
28. Violation - means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR §60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
117
ARTICLE 1318
GENERAL REGULATIONS
This Article contains general regulations which apply to all districts, unless otherwise stated.
1318.01 District Dimensional Requirements. The dimensional requirements for each district
pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum yards, maximum height
and maximum building coverage are specified in Section 1306, subject to the further
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
1318.02 Lot Area or Yard Required. The lot area and yards required for any new building or use
shall not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply
with the requirements of this Ordinance. No required lot shall include any property, the
ownership of which has been transferred subsequent to the effective date of this
Ordinance, if such property was a part of the area required for compliance with the
dimensional requirements applicable to the lot from which such transfer was made.
(a) Exception – Where a tract of ground in single ownership is split by a residential zone and
a non-residential zone and the non-residential portion of the tract has been used to
establish maximum allowable density on the residential portion of the tract, the nonresidential
portion of the tract may be conveyed to an adjoining non-residential property
and the remaining portion of the tract shall not be considered non-conforming in any
manner regardless of whether the conveyed portion has been used to establish residential
density.
1318.03 Minimum Lot Width. Where a minimum lot width is specified, no principal building shall
be erected on any part of a lot which has a width of less than is required, except that a
lawful existing lot with a nonconforming lot width may be developed with one principal
use and its allowed accessory uses.
1318.04 Corner Lot Exceptions to Minimum Lot Areas and Yards. See Section 1318.07. Buildings
located on corner lots that are re-subdivided shall conform to the front yard requirements
of the street on which they originally face, in addition to the front yard on the street on
which they face after re-subdivision. A building on a corner lot may face directly towards
the intersection of 2 streets, but the front corners of such building shall not project into the
front yard more than 25 percent of the required depth of such front yard.
1318.05 Accessory Building Setbacks. See Section 1306.03.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
118
1318.06 Traffic Visibility Across Corners.
(a) In any district, no structure, fence (other than a fence that is more than 50 percent nonopaque),
planting (other than a trimmed canopy tree trunk), or other structure shall be
maintained between a plane 3 feet above curb level and a plane 10 feet above curb level
so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner within that part of the required
front or side yard which is within a triangle bounded by the street lot line 15 feet from the
intersection of said lot lines or extensions thereof. On any corner lot in a CB or CL
district, the sight triangle shall be reduced from 15 feet to 8 feet.
(b) At each point where a private accessway intersects a public street or road, a clear-sight
triangle of 8 feet measured from the point of intersection of the street line and the edge of
the accessway, shall be maintained, within which vegetation and other visual obstructions
shall be limited to a height of not more than 3 feet above the street grade and a plane 10
feet above curb level. When a private access point intersects an alley, then the clear sight
triangle may be reduced to 3’.
(c) Where two alleys intersect or a street intersects with an alley, a similar sight triangle shall
apply based upon the following lengths:
(1) one side of the triangle shall be measured 15 feet along the right-of-way line of any
street,
(2) one side of the triangle shall be measured 10 feet along the right-of-way line of any
alley,
(3) where two alleys intersect, the two shorter sides of the triangle shall only be 5 feet in
length,
(4) the longer side of the triangle shall connect lines drawn under “1.,” “2.” or “3.”
(d) In the case of a rounded property corner, the two shorter sides of the triangle shall be
drawn from the intersection of the property lines extended.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
119
(e) A utility pole or a pole for a permitted sign may be located within a clear sight triangle
provided it does not have a diameter greater than 20 inches. A trunk of a tree may be
located in a clear sight triangle, provided the landowner regularly trims the branches to
minimize sight obstructions below 10 feet in height. An open chain link fence or a fence
with similar through-visibility may be allowed within a sight triangle.
(f) An existing building may be replaced with a new building without needing a larger
setback to comply with this subsection.
(g) See also the City Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, which may require a
larger sight triangle or longer clear sight distances in cases regulated by such Ordinance.
1318.07 Front and Side Yards of Corner Lot. On a corner lot, the minimum side yard adjacent to a
street shall equal the required front yard of the most restrictive district within the same
side of the same block and fronting on the side street, except for a principal building in a
residential district where the width of the side yard adjacent to the street may be 15 feet.
1318.08 Spacing of Non-Residential Buildings on the Same Lot. Where 2 or more main buildings
are proposed to be built upon property in one ownership, front, side and rear yards are
required only at lot lines abutting other property. See also provisions in the definition of
“Condominium”.
1318.09 Front Yard Regulations. Where a minimum front yard setback is specified in Section
1306, an open space of at least the specified depth shall be provided between the street
line or lines and the nearest point of any building or structure except as may be permitted
in Section 1318.11 and hereafter.
1318.10 Establishment of Front Yard Setbacks. Front yard setbacks shall be measured from the
legal right-of-way lines established for streets, as shown on official mapping of the City.
1318.11 Projections Into Front Yards. Ground story bays not over half the length of the front wall
may project into any front yard up to 5 feet. Chimneys, flues, columns, sills, ornamental
features, cornices, and gutters may project not more than 2 feet. Up to one third of the
required front yard setback may be occupied by an unenclosed ground floor "open porch".
Such porch may be screened and include a roof, but shall not include a second floor.
1318.12 Fences and Allowed Features in Front Yards. Subject to Section 1318.06, the provisions
of Section 1318.09 shall not apply to front fences or walls of 4 feet or less height above
the natural grade in the required front yard nor to terraces, steps, wheelchair ramps,
uncovered porches, or other similar features not over 3 feet high above grade level. If an
existing principal building has a nonconforming front yard setback, the 4 feet maximum
height for fences and walls shall only apply to the area between the principal building and
the street. Where a corner lot is required to provide a larger side yard adjacent to a street,
the 4 feet maximum height for fences and walls shall apply to the area from the front lot
line to the front wall of the principal building only. Decorative fence posts are permitted
to be up to 6 inches higher. (Amended 9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-22)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
120
1318.13 Front Yard Reduction.
(a) When there is an existing building on each of 2 lots adjacent on either side to a lot on
which a proposed building is to be erected, where both such existing buildings have an
alignment nearer to the street than the required front depth elsewhere specified in this
Ordinance (and when both such existing buildings are within 100 feet of the proposed
building) the average of the existing front yard depths of such adjacent lots shall be the
minimum required front yard depth of the lot on which the proposed building is to be
erected.
(b) In a development consisting of 3 or more lots in single ownership, whether or not
abutting, on the same side of a street within a single block, the front yard setback
requirements for certain designated lots may be reduced by no more than 10 feet provided
that the average setback for the development lots shall comply with the district
requirement.
(c) In the CL and CB districts, see also Article 1311, Design Guidelines.
1318.14 Side Yard Requirements. Where a minimum width of side yard is specified in Section
1306, no building or structure shall be erected within the specified distance from either
side lot line, except as specifically permitted otherwise.
1318.15 Projections Into Side Yards. Bays, balconies, unenclosed porches, unenclosed decks,
chimneys, flues, and fire escapes may project into a required side yard not more than onethird
of its width and not more than 4 feet in any case.
1318.16 Fences and Allowed Features in Side Yards. Subject to Section 1318.06, the provisions of
Section 1318.14 shall not apply to fences or walls not over 6 feet high above the natural
grade nor to unroofed patios, steps, uncovered porches or decks or other similar features
not over 3 feet high above the average ground level or to wheelchair ramps. Decorative
fence posts are permitted to be up to 6 inches higher. Fences in any Industrial zoning
district may be a maximum height of 10 feet. (Amended 9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-22)
1318.17 Rear Yard Requirements; Rear Fences and Decks. No building or structure shall be built
within the minimum depth from the rear lot line specified in Section 1306, except as
specifically permitted otherwise. Subject to Section 1318.06, the minimum rear yard
depth shall not apply to fences or walls not over 6 feet high above the natural grade(with
decorative fence posts up to 6 inches higher) nor to terraces, steps, uncovered porches,
wheelchair ramps or similar features not over 3 feet high above the average grade level.
Fences in any Industrial zoning district may be a maximum height of 10 feet. (Amended
9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-22)
(a) Up to one third of the required minimum rear yard may be occupied by an unenclosed
ground floor rear porch or wood deck, with or without a roof.
(b) If a fence is placed within an easement, the City may require the construction of a gate to
allow access for the easement purposes. A fence shall not obstruct drainage in a drainage
easement. Where a fence may be allowed in an easement, the owner shall assume
responsibility to remove the fence if needed to accomplish work authorized by the
easement.
1318.18 Rear Yard Requirements for Triangular Lots. There shall be no rear yard requirements for
triangular lots.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
121
1318.19 Maximum Height of Buildings.
(a) No building shall exceed the maximum height of buildings specified in Section 1306
except as specified in Section 1318.20.
(b) See the definition of “Height of a Structure” in Section 1302.
1318.20 Height Exceptions. Height limitations specified in Section 1306 shall not apply to barns
and silos, nor to place of worship spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, radio or television
aerials, electric utility towers and poles, observation, transmission or radio towers,
flagpoles, chimneys, parapet walls which extend not more than 4 feet above the limiting
height, bulkheads, water tanks and water towers, elevator shafts, elevator and/or
machinery penthouses. Any such structures shall not have a horizontal area greater than
25 percent of the roof area of the building, except solar energy collectors have no limit.
See Section 1318.27(d) for solar collection devices.
1318.21 Coverage. For any building or group of buildings on a lot, the building and impervious
coverages shall not exceed the maximum percentages specified in Section 1306.
1318.22 General Performance Standards. All uses and activities established after the effective date
of this Ordinance, unless otherwise indicated, shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Noise. Excessive levels of sound and vibration are detrimental and harmful to the health,
comfort, living conditions, welfare and safety of citizens and injurious to their property.
Noise disturbances that constitute a nuisance are considered in Section 717 of the
Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem.
(1) Definitions – The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Section shall
have the meaning ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning. All terminology and sound measurements referred to in this
Section shall be in conformance with the applicable publications of the American
National Standards Institute, or its successor body. (I) Noise - Noise is any undesired
sound.
(i) Decibels (dB) – A unit of measurement of the sound pressure level equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (that is, 20 Micronewtons
per square meter). Sound pressure is the instantaneous difference
between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given
point as produced by sound energy.
(ii) Sound Level – The quantity in decibels obtained by the use of a sound level
meter which is an instrument that includes a microphone, amplifier, output
meter, and frequency weighing networks used for the measurement of noise and
sound levels in a specified manner.
(iii) A-Weighted Sound Level (dBA) – The frequency weighing network that shall
be used for the measurement of noises applicable to this Section is that
designated as "A" by the American National Standards Institute. The Aweighted
sound level denoted by dBA is the sound pressure level in decibels as
measured by a sound level meter using the A-weighing network.
(iv) Pure Tone – Any sound that can be heard essentially as a single pitch or a set of
single pitches. For the purposes of this Section, a pure tone shall exist if the onethird
octave bank sound pressure level for the band with the tone exceeds the
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
122
arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the 2 contiguous octave bands by 5
dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz (that is, 500 cycles per second) and above,
and 8 dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz, and by 15 dB for
center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
(2) Noise Prohibitions –
(i) A person shall not cause or permit noise levels to emanate that exceed those
specified in the following table, including Paragraphs (ii) and (iii), except as
exempted by Paragraph (iv).
Maximum Allowed Noise Level for Receiving Land Use
at a Receiving Property Boundary, Expressed as A-Weighted Decibels (“dBA”)
Land Use Daytime* Nighttime **
Industrial 75 dBA 75 dBA
Commercial 67 dBA 62 dBA
Institutional 60 dBA 55 dBA
Residential 60 dBA 55 dBA
* A-weighted Sound Level maximum allowed for the period 7:00 am to 10:00
pm.
** A-weighted Sound Level maximum allowed for the period 10:00 pm to 7:00
am.
(ii) A person shall not cause or permit the emission of a pure tone that exceeds an
A-weighted sound level 5 dBA lower than the applicable maximum given in the
above table.
(iii) A person shall not cause or permit an A-weighted sound level to emanate from
construction or demolition activities that exceeds during daytime hours 90 dBA
or during nighttime hours the maximum stated in the above table for the
applicable land use.
(iv) Exemptions – The provisions of the Section do not apply to:
(a) Devices used only for the purpose of warning, protecting, or alerting the
public, or some segment thereof, of the existence of an emergency or
emergency work.
(b) Motor vehicle on public right-of-ways, aircraft, trains, and emergency,
utility or public operations, including snow removal. See the separate City
Noise Ordinance, which regulates vehicle noise.
(c) Sounds created by City-recognized sporting, amusement, entertainment,
and other public gatherings conducted pursuant to other City permits or
Ordinances. This exception includes, but is not limited to, public athletic
contests, festivals, carnivals, fairs, parades, celebrations, and concerts.
(d) Unamplified human voices.
(b) Smoke, Dust, Fumes, Gases, Odors, Mists, Vapors and Pollens. The emission of smoke,
dust, fumes, gases, odors, mists, vapors, pollens and similar matter, or any combination
thereof, which can cause any damage to human or animal health or vegetation, or to other
forms of property, or which can cause any soiling or staining of persons or property at the
point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission is prohibited.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
123
(c) Heat and Glare. Any operation producing glare and/or heat shall be performed within an
enclosed building or in such a manner as not to be visible or to produce any effect beyond
the property line of the lot on which the operation is located.
(d) Vibrations. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions detectable beyond its lot
lines without the aid of instruments, with the exception of that vibration produced as a
result of construction activity.
(e) Electric, Diesel, Gas, or Other Power. Every use requiring power shall be so operated that
the service lines, substation or other facilities shall conform to the highest safety
requirements, and shall be so constructed and installed as to be an integral part of the
architectural features of the plant and, except for essential poles and wires, shall not
extend into any yard and shall be suitably screened from streets or any adjacent property
which would be deleteriously affected by such installations.
(f) Storage and Waste Disposal. The following general regulations shall apply to the storage
of materials and the disposal of materials:
(1) See the City Fire Protection Code.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products; and all fuel, raw
materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by an approved safety
fence.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they
may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance
which can contaminate a stream or water course or otherwise render such stream or
water course undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will
destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or water course.
(4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be
stored outdoors only if enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
1318.23 Buffer Yards. Buffer yards are required along rear and side lot lines in all primarily nonresidential
districts (such as the CM, industrial redevelopment, commercial and industrial
districts), along the district boundaries between a new or expanded non-residential use and
any residential and institutional districts that directly abuts the non-residential district or is
only separated from the non-residential district by an ordained alley or local street.
However, in a CB District, a buffer yard shall not be required where the districts are
separated by an ordained street or alley. Buffer yards are also required for specific land
uses as indicated in other sections of this Ordinance. Buffer yards shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) The buffer yard shall be measured from the property line or from the street right-of-way
line where a buffer yard is required along a street right-of-way. Unless otherwise stated, a
buffer yard shall have a minimum width of 15 feet, except 8 feet shall apply in the CB or
CL districts or where the applicant proves to the City Planning Bureau Staff that the 15
foot width is not possible. Where a buffer yard is required abutting a street or alley rightof-
way, the width of the buffer yard shall be measured from such right-of-way.
(1) Where the applicant proves to the City Planning Bureau Staff that the provision of a
buffer yard with plant screening is not possible, the City may approve the use of a
mostly solid decorative fence or architectural masonry wall, with a 2 feet wide buffer
yard.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
124
(b) The buffer yard requirements shall also apply abutting primarily residential district
boundary lines in an adjoining municipality.
(c) The buffer yard may be coterminous with required front, side, and rear yards, and in case
of conflict, the larger yard requirements shall apply.
(d) All buffer yards shall be well maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish, weeds and
tall grass in conformance with existing regulations.
(e) No structure, manufacturing or processing activity, or storage of materials shall be
permitted in the buffer yard. No vehicle parking, storage or display shall be allowed in the
buffer yard. Only necessary approximately perpendicular crossings of the buffer yard by a
driveway shall be allowed.
(f) Buffer yards shall include a dense screen planting of primarily evergreen trees and shrubs,
also including vegetative ground cover to the full length of the lot line. The buffer yard
shall be designed to serve as a barrier to visibility, airborne particles, glare and noise.
Such screen planting shall be located within the buffer yard, and shall be in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in the screen planting shall be at least 4 feet in height when
planted and be of such species and spacing that can be expected to produce, within 3
years, a complete visual screen of at least 6 feet in height.
(2) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently and any plant material which
does not live shall be replaced within one year.
(3) Native species of plantings are strongly encouraged to help reestablish native species
of birds, bees and other insects.
(4) In accordance with the provisions of Section 1318.06, a clear-sight triangle shall be
maintained at all street intersections and at all points where private accessways
intersect public streets.
(5) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of approved vehicular or
pedestrian access.
(6) Any fencing or wall shall be on the inside of the buffer yard.
(g) No screen planting shall be required along streets which form district boundary lines if
only an improved facade of any proposed building shall be visible from the adjacent
Residential District, and subsection (i) below does not apply.
(h) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, complete plans showing the arrangement of
all buffer yards and the placement, species and size of all plant materials and the
placement, size, materials, and type of all fences or walls to be placed in such buffer yard
shall be subject to approval by the City Staff. Such information shall also be provided to
the Planning Commission as part of any required site plan review. Any wall shall be of
architectural-quality masonry.
(i) A buffer yard shall also be required in the following situations:
(1) If outdoor processing or manufacturing activity or overnight parking of 2 or more
tractor-trailer trucks or outdoor storage of industrial materials are visible from a
public street.
(2) Six or more new apartment dwelling units are proposed abutting a lot containing an
existing single family detached dwelling.
(j) An applicant may utilize a landscaped earth berm in the buffer yard, provided it has a
maximum slope of 3:1 on the outside of the berm. The interior/business side of a berm
may include a retaining wall. In such case, the minimum height within 3 years of the berm
and the plantings combined shall be 6 feet.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
125
(k) A buffer strip shall also be required along a public street or lot line of a dwelling where 3
or more tractor-trailers or trailers of tractor-trailer combinations will be kept overnight on
a regular basis and will be visible from the street or dwelling.
(l) In addition, an 8 feet minimum width buffer strip along a public street shall be required
where new parking spaces for 10 or more vehicles are proposed to be adjacent to and
visible from a public street. Such buffer strip shall include plants with an anticipated
mature height of at least 4 feet and deciduous shade trees. The City may require such
buffer to be designed so that it is possible to have views at eye level into the parking area
for security reasons.
1318.24 Notice to Adjoining Municipalities. See Section 1324.07.
1318.25 Lighting Control.
(a) Exemptions. This Section 1318.25 shall not apply to: a) street lighting that is owned,
financed or maintained by the City or the State, or b) an individual porch light of less than
8 feet total height in a front yard (not including a spot light).
(b) Height of Lights. No luminaire, spotlight, wallpack or other light source shall be placed at
a height exceeding 20 feet above the average surrounding ground level. The maximum
height limit in any industrial zone may be increased to 30 feet unless the light source is
within 200’ of a residentially-zoned lot. This limitation shall not apply to: a) lights
needed for air safety, b) lights intended solely to illuminate an architectural feature of a
building or an American Flag, c) lighting of outdoor public recreation facilities, d) lights
that are part of a permitted sign, (e) or lights within an open air parking structure. See
also Section 1319.02(i).
(c) Diffused. All light sources, including signs but not including LED lighting, shall be
properly diffused as needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed bulbs
from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks, dwellings or adjacent lots.
(d) Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around the light source and
carefully directed and placed to prevent the lighting from creating a nuisance in adjacent
dwellings, and to prevent the lighting from shining into the eyes of passing motorists.
(e) Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except for nonadvertising
seasonal lights between October 25th and January 10th.
(f) Spillover. Exterior lighting on an institutional, commercial, industrial or residential
property shall not cause a spillover of light onto a principally residential lot in a
residential district that exceeds 0.1 horizontal foot-candle measured line of sight inside the
residential lot line.
(g) Gasoline Sales Canopies. Any canopy over gasoline pumps shall have light fixtures
recessed into the canopy or screened by an extension around the bottom of the canopy so
that lighting elements are not visible from another lot or street.
(h) Lighting of Horizontal Surfaces. For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces
such as parking areas, outdoor storage and outdoor sales areas, lighting fixtures shall be
aimed downward and shall include full cut-off measures as needed to properly direct the
light and to meet the maximum spillover requirements of subsection (f) and to prevent
glare onto streets.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
126
(i) Lighting of Non-Horizontal Surfaces. For lighting of predominantly non-horizontal
surfaces such building walls, lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be aimed so
as to not project light towards neighboring residences or past the object being illuminated
or skyward. Any lighting of a flag shall use a beam no wider than necessary to illuminate
the flag. Lighting of a billboard should be attached to the top of the billboard and project
downward.
(j) Upward Lighting and Lasers. Spotlights shall not be directed upwards into the sky. Laser
lights shall not be directed into the sky to attract attention to a business or activity.
1318.26 Additional Requirements.
(a) Each garbage dumpster shall be stored within a building or be surrounded by a decorative
masonry wall and/ or a weather-resistant decorative board or vinyl fence and gate.
(b) Each phase of any development shall be able to meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and be able to properly function, even if later phases of development would not be
completed.
(c) More than one permitted non-residential use or building shall be allowed on a lot,
provided there is compliance with the requirements for each use or building. A building
may include two or more allowed uses. Individual uses or buildings may be owned in a
condominium arrangement, or handled through leases or other ownership arrangements
approved under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Parking and
driveways may be held in common ownership, provided that suitable legal mechanisms
are in place to ensure long-term maintenance, which shall be subject to acceptance by the
City.
(d) Any portion of a developed lot that is not used for buildings, structures, accessory uses,
parking, loading areas, sidewalks or similar features shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, hardscape or vegetative ground cover. The use of native species of plantings are
strongly encouraged.
1318.27 Green Incentives.
(a) Areas of a balcony or the roof over a building or parking structure that are primarily
covered by attractive vegetation and accessory walkways and are accessible to and usable
by persons, and are designed to absorb significant runoff shall not count as impervious
area for the purposes of calculating impervious coverage under this Ordinance. (See the
City stormwater regulations to determine whether these areas would be considered
impervious for the purposes of the stormwater requirements.)
(b) Areas above underground parking structures that are covered by attractive vegetation and
are accessible to and usable by persons, and are designed to absorb significant runoff shall
not count as building coverage for the purposes of calculating building coverage under
this Ordinance.
(c) For each 1,000 square feet of building floor area that achieves LEED Certification or a
higher level under the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green
Building Rating System, an additional 300 square feet of gross building floor area shall be
allowed beyond the maximum building coverage requirement, up to a maximum building
coverage of 20 percent beyond the percent that would otherwise be allowed.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
127
(1) To be eligible for an incentive under this subsection (c), the applicant shall submit
information prepared by a LEED certified professional to show how the project is
intended to receive certification. Any changes affecting such certification shall be
resubmitted in writing to the Zoning Officer. A LEED certified professional shall
provide a written statement when the building is 50 percent complete to state that the
project is incorporating the elements needed for certification. If the building does not
achieve certification at the time of occupancy, then the building owner shall be
required to install such improvements until certification is achieved. In no instance
shall certification take in excess of 3 years of the issuance of the original CO. Failure
to receive certification that was needed to meet the zoning requirements shall result
in enforcement as a zoning violation.
1318.28 Tree Conservation.
(a) Where any existing healthy tree(s) that has a trunk diameter of 8 inches or greater
(measured 4.5 feet above the ground level) are removed from a site as part of or in
preparation for a development project, 1 new tree shall be planted for each such tree that
is removed. The new trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of 2.5 inches measured 6
inches above the ground level and shall meet the City species requirements that would
apply to street trees, unless other species are approved by the City Forester. If there is
mutual consent by the applicant and the City, some or all of the replacement trees may be
planted on City owned land as an in lieu of requirement. In the RR (Rural Residential)
and CM (Office Research Center) Districts, all of the above provisions shall apply, except
that 2 new trees shall be planted for each such tree that is removed.
(b) Where an existing street tree is removed from a site as part of or in preparation for a
development project, it shall be replaced with a new street tree meeting City street tree
requirements. Where the planting of a new street tree is not feasible, such as because of
conflicts with utility lines or sight triangles, the City may allow such tree to be planted at
an alternative location on the site.
(c) See also Section 1319 regarding trees.
[Section 1318.28.a was amended by Ordinance No. 2015-25 on July 8, 2015]
1318.29 Solar Energy Collection Systems.
(a) Purpose.
1) To promote the use of Solar Energy Systems (SES) for the generation of electricity
(photovoltaics), for water heating, space heating or cooling, and to obtain the
benefits of solar energy as a renewable and clean energy source which enhances the
reliability of the overall electrical power grid, reduces peak power demands, helps
diversify Pennsylvania’s energy supply portfolio, and helps reduce dependence on
fossil fuels;
2) To promote the safe, effective, and efficient use of SES installed to reduce on-site
consumption of energy, while protecting health, safety and welfare of adjacent and
surrounding land uses;
3) To provide for the land planning, installation, and construction of Solar Energy
Systems in Bethlehem subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and protect the historic character and resources of the
City.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
128
(b) Design & Installation
1) This Article applies to solar energy systems to be installed and constructed after the
effective date of this Ordinance.
2) Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall
not be required to meet these requirements.
3) Any upgrade, modification, or structural change that materially alters the size or
placement of an existing solar energy system shall comply with the provisions of
this Article.
4) The use of solar energy systems are permitted as an Accessory Use in all zoning
districts.
5) Use of Solar Energy Systems is subject to the restraints imposed by the present
development pattern and topography found inside the city limits of Bethlehem, plus
zoning and height restrictions. Where a strict provision of the zoning ordinance may
prohibit adequate Solar Access without Major Loss of Efficiency, the developer
may apply to the City of Bethlehem Zoning Hearing Board for a variance. In
addition to other relevant factors, the Zoning Hearing Board shall weigh the
following factors in its evaluation:
i. Different levels of solar access
ii. Restrictiveness of ordinance with regard to height, bulk, setback, and related
provisions.
iii. Local energy costs, topography, and aesthetics of the specific area or land
tract proposed for solar access use.
iv. Characteristics of shading due to building and trees in determination of
necessary solar access plane.
v. Identification of possible conflicts with solar access, including architectural
or historic preservation requirements, steep slopes, low and moderate income
housing restrictions, and individual landowner preferences.
6) The Solar Energy System shall comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, Act 45 of 1999, as amended and adopted by the City of Bethlehem.
7) The design of the Solar Energy System shall conform to applicable industry
standards. To the extent reasonably possible, the design shall use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the system into existing structures
and environment.
8) Low slope roof: On low slope roof structures (i.e., roof structures not exceeding 25%
slope), solar devices should be mounted with adequate set back so as to not be
visible from any public way at ground level. Where this is not possible, solar devices
should be located so as not to be visible from the front of the building or from major
approaches at ground level.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
129
9) Steep slope roof: On steep slope roof structures (i.e., roof structures exceeding 25%
slope), solar devices should not be visible from the street, unless the device is an
Architecturally Integrated Device. If the device must be visible (no other alternative
is feasible without Major Loss of Efficiency of the system), the design of the solar
system will be evaluated for approval by an authority having jurisdiction, if
applicable, including the Historic Architectural Review Board (HARB) or Historic
Conservation Commission (HCC), prior to installation. Flush mount of solar panels
on sloped roofs should be utilized where possible.
10) All installers of Solar Energy Systems shall be on the Pa. Department of
Environmental Protection’s list of registered installers for the DEP Solar Sunshine
program or shall establish to the satisfaction of the code official that they meet the
certification standards of the North American Board of Certified Energy
Practitioners (NABCEP).
11) In all cases, Solar Energy Systems shall be set back from roof edges and from the
roof ridge line a minimum of three feet to provide safe access for firefighters and
other emergency responders.
12) If solar collection devices are installed above vehicle parking, such solar structures
shall not be regulated as part of building coverage.
(c) Setbacks and Height Restrictions
1) Roof mounted Solar Energy Systems must comply with all setback requirements for
the zoning district in which it is installed.
2) Ground mounted SES must comply with accessory structure restrictions contained in
the zoning district where it is installed; all exterior electric and/or plumbing lines
must be buried below the surface of ground and placed in conduits.
3) All Solar Energy Systems shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or
glare does not project onto nearby lot or roadways. The applicant has the burden of
proving that any glare produced does not have significant adverse impact on
neighboring or adjacent uses whether through siting or mitigation.
4) Solar Collection devices may extend a maximum of 15 feet above the maximum
height limit and are a permitted by right use in all districts. Solar collection devices
powering signs may extend 10 feet above the maximum height of the sign.
5) A solar energy system shall not be used to display advertising.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1318
130
(d) Abandonment and Removal
1) Any Solar Energy System that is not operated for a continuous period of six months
shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such system shall remove the same
within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City of Bethlehem notifying the owner
of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned system within said 90 days
shall be grounds to remove the system at the owner's expense and constitute a
violation, subject to fines as outlined in this ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance
2015-16, April 7, 2015)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
131
ARTICLE 1319
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
1319.01 Required Off-Street Parking Space.
(a) In any district other than the CB District, off-street parking spaces shall be provided and
satisfactorily maintained in accordance with the following provisions for each building
which, after the effective date of this Ordinance, is erected, enlarged or altered for any of
the following purposes in any district. Although off-street parking shall not be required in
the CB District, any provided off-street parking shall conform with Article 1319:
(Amended by Ordinance 2015-17, April 7, 2015)
(1) Residences –
(i) Dwelling units other than as provided in (ii) below or a Residential Retirement
Complex – two parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
(ii) Multi-family dwellings/ apartments with two or fewer bedrooms - one and
three-quarter parking spaces for each dwelling unit. If proposed streets are not
adequate to provide for on street parking in addition to the required parking for
individual units, then the development shall provide for clustered parking spaces
at another location on the lot convenient to a majority of the units to result in a
total minimum of two spaces per dwelling unit.
(2) Adult-Oriented Establishment or Massage Parlor – One parking space for every 50
square feet of building floor area that is accessible to customers.
(3) Auto Repair Garage – Four spaces for each vehicle service bay and one space per
employee.
(4) Auto, Boat, Recreational Vehicle or Manufactured Home Sales – One space per 30
vehicles, boats or homes on display plus one space per 1.5 employees.
(5) Bed and Breakfast Inn – Two parking spaces for the dwelling and one additional
space for each unit to be rented.
(6) Bowling Alleys – Two parking spaces for each alley, plus one space per 2
employees.
(7) Bus Terminal – One parking space for every 100 square feet of waiting room space
plus one additional space for every two persons regularly employed on the premises.
(8) Convention Centers, Gymnasiums, Commercial Indoor Recreation Uses, Skating
Rinks, Stadiums, Sports Arenas, Auditoriums, Theaters, and Similar Uses – One
parking space for every 4 persons who may legally be admitted therein at one time
under the Fire Prevention regulations.
(9) Day Care Center or Adult Day Care Center – One parking space for every 12 persons
cared for, with these spaces designed for safe and convenient drop-off and pick-up,
plus one additional parking space for every two employees.
(10) Dormitories, Fraternity Houses and Sorority Houses – One parking space for every
four beds, plus one additional space for each two employees thereof, except for
students that the institution restricts from having a vehicle (such as freshmen). The
City may approve the placement of the parking at an off-site location if the
institution provides a regular shuttle service.
(11) Financial Institution (Other Than Headquarters Offices) – One space per 200 square
feet of floor area plus one space per 1.5 employees.
(12) Funeral Home – One parking space for each funeral vehicle plus spaces for any
dwelling unit plus one additional space for each two employees (other than resident
on the premises), plus one space for each 100 square feet of floor area in the largest
viewing room.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
132
(13) Gas Station – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of
the business plus four spaces for each vehicle service bay and one space for every 1.5
persons employed on the premises at maximum employment on a single shift.
(14) General Business, Commercial, and Personal Service Establishments Not
Specifically Covered Herein – One parking space for every 150 square feet of area
accessible to customers, or two parking spaces for each employee, whichever is
greater.
(15) Group Day Care Home – Parking for the dwelling unit plus one parking space for
each non-resident employee.
(16) Hospitals – One parking space for every four patient beds plus three additional
spaces for every four employees on the premises at peak times plus loading and
unloading space for hospital ambulances and similar vehicles which are not included
in the spaces required.
(17) Hotels or Motels – 0.8 parking space for each sleeping room or suite, plus one
additional space per two on-site employees, plus such additional space as required by
this parking schedule because of any supplementary parking–generating activities,
such as a tavern, conference center, restaurant and the like. Up to 50 percent of the
parking required by supplementary uses may be met by the parking spaces for the
sleeping rooms.
(18) Indoor Retail Businesses (other than a Shopping Center) – Parking or storage space
for all vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business plus four parking spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. For retail sales areas of furniture, lumber,
carpeting, bedding or floor coverings, only one space per 800 square feet of floor
area shall be required.
(19) Industrial or Manufacturing Establishment – One parking space for each 1.5
employees (based upon the maximum number employed at any one shift), plus one
parking space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area in the buildings. If the
number of employees is not known, then one space shall be provided per 1,000
square feet of building floor area.
(20) Laundromat – One parking space for every four washing machines.
(21) Libraries, Museums, Visitor Centers, Post Offices, Civic Centers and Similar
Establishments – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the
operation of such establishment plus four parking spaces for the first 1,000 square
feet of total floor area and one additional space for every additional 250 square feet
of floor area.
(22) Licensed Gaming Facilities – Parking spaces shall be required based upon the
following schedule:
(i) Twelve spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of a Licensed Gaming
Facility for the initial 40,000 square feet of Licensed Gaming Facility gross
floor area.
(ii) Six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of a Licensed Gaming
Facility for the next 60,000 square feet of Licensed Gaming Facility gross floor
area.
(iii) Three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of a Licensed Gaming
Facility for any gross floor area of Licensed Gaming Facility over the first
100,000 square feet.
(23) Medical and Dental Offices – One space per 250 square feet of building floor area.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
133
(24) Membership Club – One parking space for every 50 square feet of total floor area in
the largest room of such building, plus one additional space for every two persons
regularly employed on the premises.
(25) Nursing Homes, Personal Care Centers, and Assisted Living Facilities – One parking
space for every six beds plus one off-street parking space for every two employees
based on the greatest number of employees during any one shift.
(26) Office or Public Buildings – One parking space for each 1.5 employees. Where the
number of employees is unknown, one space per 300 square feet of building floor
area.
(27) Outdoor Retail Businesses – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in
the conduct of such business plus two parking spaces for each person employed.
(28) Place of Worship – One space per five seats in room of largest capacity. For pews
without individual seats, each 24 inches shall count as one seat.
(29) Repair Shops and Other Service Establishments – Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of the business plus two parking spaces for each
person regularly employed on the premises.
(30) Residential Retirement Complex or Housing for Persons 62 Years or Older or
Persons with Physical Disabilities – One-half parking space for each dwelling unit
and one space per 1.5 employees of the complex during a maximum shift.
(31) Restaurants, Night Clubs and Taverns – One parking space for each two employees,
plus one space for every four seats for customers. A use without seats shall include a
minimum of one space for every 4 persons of allowed building capacity under the
Fire Code.
(32) Roadside Stands, Car Washes, or other Roadside Service Establishments – One
parking space for each employee plus additional spaces or equivalent standing area
for customer-motorists in the ratio of one space for every 50 lineal feet of road
frontage.
(33) Rooming and Boarding Houses – One parking space for each sleeping room to be
occupied by roomers or boarders, plus one space for each dwelling unit on the
premises, and plus one additional space for every two persons regularly employed on
the premises.
(34) Schools – One parking space for each 1.5 employees plus off-street spaces for the
safe and convenient loading and unloading of students, plus one space for every 10
students in the 12th grade.
(35) Self-Storage Warehouses - One space for every 40 rental units, plus one space per
on-site employee.
(36) Shopping Centers – Four parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area. In an enclosed shopping mall, however, that floor area which is used
exclusively for pedestrian traffic and which is not within the area specifically
assigned to a particular store, may be excluded from the gross floor area
computation.
(37) Trade / Hobby Schools – One space per two students age 16 or older on premises
during peak times plus one per 1.5 employees.
(38) Treatment Center – One space per two residents age 16 or older plus one space per
on-site resident intended to be treated at peak times, plus one space per 1.5
employees.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
134
(39) Universities and Colleges – One parking space for every two persons employed at
peak periods at the institution, plus one space for each five non-resident students on
the premises at peak times, plus parking for on-campus housing, plus additional
space as required by this parking schedule because of any supplementary parking
generating activities at the institution. The City may approve the use of off-site
parking if the institution provides a regular shuttle service.
(40) Warehouses, Distribution and Trucking Terminals – Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the conduct of such business, plus one parking space for
each 1.5 persons regularly employed on the premises. If the number of employees is
not known, then one space shall be provided per 1,000 square feet of building floor
area.
(41) Wholesale Businesses – Parking or storage space for all vehicles used directly in the
conduct of such business, plus one parking space for each 1.5 persons employed on
the premises based on maximum seasonal employment.
1319.02 General Regulations Applying to Required Off-Street Parking Facilities.
(a) Existing Parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of adoption of this
Ordinance shall not be subject to the requirements of this Article so long as the kind or
extent of use is not changed, and provided that any parking facility now serving such
structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced below such requirements.
(b) Change in Requirements and Modifications to Parking Requirements. Whenever there is
an alteration of a structure or a change or extension of a use which increases the parking
requirements according to the standards of Section 1319.01, the total additional parking
required for the alteration, change or extension shall be provided within 120 days in
accordance with the requirements of that section.
(1) An existing commercial use in a CL district in a building that existed prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance may change to a different permitted commercial use
without providing for additional parking that may be needed for the new commercial
use, provided the building is not expanded and no new residential units are added.
(2) Within the CL district, as a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall have
the authority to modify off-street parking requirements, considering the total impact
of the new uses of the lot versus the previous uses, and considering whether a
percentage of customers are likely to arrive by public transit and/or walking. The
Board may also approve a reduction in the required parking if the applicant proves
that there is an excess of on-street parking spaces during hours when the business
will have its peak demand.
(3) If a non-residential use expands by an aggregate total maximum of 5 percent in the
applicable measurement (such as building floor area) beyond what existed at the time
of adoption of this Ordinance, then no additional parking is required. For example, if
an existing building included 3,000 square feet, and a single minor addition of 150
square feet was proposed, then additional parking would not be required. This
addition without providing new parking shall only be allowed one time per lot.
(4) Seats for up to 20 persons in seasonal unenclosed outdoor seating for a restaurant
may be added without requiring additional off-street parking.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
135
(5) As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board is authorized to approve
modifications to the off-street parking requirements for a lot if the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that such modifications are necessary
to allow appropriate adaptive reuse of an existing principal non-residential building
into a new approved use.
(6) Reduction of Parking Requirements.
(a) Purposes - To minimize the amount of land covered by paving, while making sure
adequate parking is provided. To recognize that unique circumstances may justify
a reduction in parking.
(b) As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may authorize a reduction in
the number of off-street parking spaces required to be provided for a use if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that a lesser
number of spaces would be sufficient.
(c) The applicant shall provide evidence justifying the proposed reduced number of
spaces, such as studies of similar developments during their peak hours. The
applicant shall also provide relevant data, such as number of employees, peak
expected number of customers/visitors, adjacent on-street parking and similar
data.
(d) In addition, an applicant may prove that parking needs will be reduced or that
off-site parking is feasible because the applicant agrees to make a long-term
commitment to a shuttle service for residents or employees and/or to subsidize
use of public transit for employees.
(e) Reserved Area for Additional Parking. Under this section, the Zoning Hearing
Board may require that a portion of the required parking be met through a
reservation of an area for future parking. The Board may require the reservation
for a certain number of years or an indefinite period corresponding to the years
the buildings are in use.
(i) Such reservation shall be in a form acceptable to the Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor that legally binds current and future owners of the land to keep the
reserved parking area in open space and then to provide the additional
parking if the City determines it is necessary. A deed restriction is
recommended.
(ii) If approved under this subsection “(e)”, the applicant shall present a site
plan to the Zoning Officer that shows the layout that will be used for the
additional parking if the parking is required to be provided in the future.
The site plan shall show that the additional parking is integrated with the
overall traffic access and pedestrian access for the site, and that the
additional parking will be able to meet City requirements.
(iii) The additional parking that is “reserved” under this subsection shall be
required to be kept as landscaped open area, until such time as the Zoning
Hearing Board decision may authorize the land’s release from the
restriction, or until the City may require that the land be developed as
parking.
(iv) If the Zoning Officer in the future determines that the reserved parking is
needed to meet actual demand, he/she shall provide written notice to the
property owner. The property owner shall then have one year to develop
the reserved area into off-street parking in compliance with this Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
136
(7) Seasonal Dining. This subsection shall apply if a restaurant in a commercial district
adds seasonal outdoor seating (for up to 8 months per year) to existing indoor
seating. In such case, up to 20 additional customer seats may be added without
requiring additional off-street parking for such seats. This provision shall only apply
to seating that is in use for less than 8 months a year, and which is in non-enclosed
outdoor areas.
(c) Conflict with Other Uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that interferes with its
availability for the parking need it is required to serve.
(d) Continuing Character of Obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided and
maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were designed to serve. The
number of required off-street parking spaces that are being provided shall not be reduced
unless the applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that a reduction in the number of
dwelling units, floor area, seats, employees or similar applicable measurement has also
been reduced to conform with this Article. Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the
owner or sponsor of particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities to the
employees or other persons whom the facilities are designed to serve. Such facilities shall
be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute a nuisance, or hazard, or
unreasonable impediment to traffic.
(e) Joint Use.
(1) Two or more uses may provide for required parking in a common parking lot if the
total space provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each use
individually. If a parking area includes principal non-residential use(s) that are
routinely not occupied outside of the hours of 8 AM to 6 PM and dwelling units, and
all of the spaces are shared among all of the uses, then the total number of required
off-street parking may be reduced by 25 percent. A written agreement must be
submitted to the Zoning Officer.
(2) The number of spaces required in a shared parking facility may also be reduced
below the total required by approval of the Planning and Zoning Bureau if it can be
demonstrated to such Bureau that the hours or days of peak parking needed for the
various uses are so different that a lower total will provide adequately for all uses
served by the facility.
(f) Fractional Spaces. Where the computation of required parking space results in a fractional
number, any fraction of the next higher number shall be counted as one.
(g) Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
premises with the principal use served, except as follows:
(1) Required off-street parking spaces may be on a separate lot from the use served by
the parking if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a
method of providing the spaces is guaranteed to be available during all of the years
the use is in operation. Such parking distance shall be a maximum of 200 feet of
walking distance from any dwelling units that are served and within 300 feet walking
distance from the entrance of the principal non-residential use being served. Such
distance may be increased to 500 feet of entrance for employee parking of a nonresidential
use. A written and signed lease shall be provided, if applicable. For
customer parking, a sign shall direct persons to the parking spaces. The zoning
permit shall be conditioned upon the continued availability of the parking, unless the
applicant provides evidence of suitable replacement parking.
(2) Reserved.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
137
(3) For non-residential districts, see limits on front yard parking in the Dimensional
Table in Article 1306 and for the CL and CB districts in Article 1311.
(4) In a residential district, a driveway located in a front yard shall be setback a
minimum of 2.5 feet from a lot line of an abutting dwelling, unless the City
specifically approves a shared driveway in that location. Such setback shall be
maintained in vegetation.
(5) All new driveways or accessways serving a principal business or institutional use
shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from a lot of a dwelling in a residential
district.
(6) Any new or expanded parking areas serving a principal business or institutional use
or a principal parking lot shall be separated from the curbline of a street (not
including an alley) by a minimum of 15 feet, which shall be maintained in
vegetation, except for pedestrian sidewalks and perpendicular driveway crossings,
unless a stricter requirement is established by another provision.
(h) Maintenance and Surfacing of Parking Area. For all vehicle parking areas of 3 or more
spaces, the area not landscaped and so maintained, including driveways and loading areas,
shall be graded, surfaced with a durable, all-weather pavement parking surface, and
drained to the satisfaction of the City Engineer to the extent necessary to prevent dust,
erosion, or excessive water flow across streets or adjoining property. All off-street parking
spaces shall be marked so as to indicate their location.
(1) Such parking, loading and driveway surfaces shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete,
paving block, or other materials pre-approved by the City Engineer.
(i) The City Engineer may approve parking areas with low or seasonal usage to be
maintained in stone, grass or other suitable surfaces. For example, the City
Engineer may allow such parking spaces to be grass, while major aisles are
covered by stone.
(ii) If the design and materials are found to be acceptable by the City Engineer,
portions of parking areas may be covered with a porous parking surface that is
designed to promote groundwater recharge. This might include porous asphalt
or pervious concrete placed over open graded gravel and crushed stone.
(iii) If a lot for a dwelling includes 3 or fewer outdoor off-street parking spaces, a
hard-surface may be used under the tire treads, while grass or other vegetative
surface is used between the tire treads.
(i) Lighting. Light poles are strongly encouraged to have a maximum height of 20 feet. See
Section 1318.25.
(j) Street Trees and Parking Lot Trees.
(1) Street trees meeting requirements of the City shall be required on each side of every
public and private street. A minimum average of one street tree shall be required for
each 30 feet of public or private street length, unless existing trees will be preserved
to serve the same purpose, or unless the City allows an average of one tree for every
50 feet for trees with larger canopies.
(2) In addition, a minimum average of one deciduous shade tree shall be required for
every 15 surface parking spaces. Such deciduous trees shall meet the street trees
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. No more than 20
consecutive surface parking spaces shall be located in a straight row (not including
adjacent spaces accessed from a different aisle) without being separated by a
landscaped island with a deciduous tree.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
138
(3) Required deciduous trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of 2.5 inches
measured six inches above the ground, and a minimum ten feet height above the
ground when planted. Each required large deciduous shade tree within a parking lot
shall be surrounded by a minimum 9’x18’ planting area. The City may require
curbing or other methods to protect trees from damage by vehicles. Only species of
trees that are on the City's list of approved street trees shall be used to meet a
requirement of this Ordinance for a required deciduous tree, unless otherwise
approved by the City Forester.
(k) Access to a non-residential use and its related off-street parking shall be from a street
where over 50 percent of the frontage on both sides of a street is non-residential in use,
unless no other feasible alternative exists.
(l) In the PI district, no parking of vehicles shall be permitted in front of a line 20 feet back
from the property line.
(m) In any residential district, off-street parking shall only be permitted to occupy a maximum
of 50 percent of a required front yard. In all cases, access from an alleyway must be the
first option explored.
(n) Parking for Persons With Disabilities/Handicapped Parking.
(1) Number of Spaces. See requirements under the Federal Americans with
Disabilities Act for parking for persons with disabilities. The following is a
summary of some of the relevant requirements in effect as of the enactment of
this Ordinance.
TOTAL NO. OF PARKING
SPACES ON THE LOT
REQUIRED MINIMUM NO./ PERCENT OF
ADA-ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
1 to 25 1 van-accessible
26 to 50 2, 1 of which must be van-accessible
51 to 75 3, 1 of which must be van-accessible
76 to 100 4, 1 of which must be van-accessible
101 to 150 5, 1 of which must be van-accessible
151 to 200 6, 1 of which must be van-accessible
201 to 300 7, 1 of which must be van-accessible
301 to 400 8, 1 of which must be van-accessible
401 to 500 9, 2 of which must be van-accessible
501 to 1,000 2% of total number of spaces, 1/8th of which must
be van-accessible
1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of spaces for each 100 over 1000
spaces, 1/8 of which must be van-accessible
(2) Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they would result in
the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a handicapped accessible building
entrance. Curb cuts shall be provided as needed to provide access from the
handicapped spaces.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
139
(3) Minimum Size and Slope. See requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
regulations.
(4) Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked in compliance with
the Americans with Disabilities Act. Such signs and/or markings shall be maintained
over time.
(5) Paving. Handicapped parking spaces and adjacent areas needed to access them with a
wheelchair shall be covered with a smooth surface that is usable with a wheelchair.
(o) Bicycle Parking. For proposed nonresidential and multi-unit residential land uses, bicycle
parking shall be equivalent to 5 percent of the off-street vehicle parking requirement, with
a minimum of 2 spaces in any event. Bicycle hitches, racks or lockers may be used. For
example, one inverted U rack will count as two bicycle parking spaces.
(1) Location – Racks shall be within 30 feet of building entrance(s). All bicycle parking
provided shall be on concrete, and located a minimum distance as follows from any
wall:
Bike Orientation Minimum Distance of Rack from Wall
Parallel to wall 24 inches
Perpendicular to wall 30 inches
(Covered parking is encouraged where possible.)
(2) Maintenance – The current landowner shall be responsible to ensure that the hitch,
rack or locker continues to be available and is well maintained and is replaced if damaged
or removed. If the hitch, rack or locker is within a street Right of Way, a City
encroachment permit shall be required.
1319.03 Design Standards. The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street
parking facilities with a capacity of five or more vehicles built after the effective date of
this Ordinance.
(a) The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be as follows:
(1) Parking space stalls shall include a rectangular area with a minimum width of 9 feet
and a minimum length of 18 feet. If a lot or structure includes 40 or more spaces, a
maximum of 20 percent of the spaces may include a minimum rectangular area of 8.5
by 16 feet, if such spaces are marked “compact cars only” and are distributed so that
they are not the most convenient spaces on the lot. The compact car stall width may
be 8 feet by 16 feet within a parking structure. The minimum width of non-compact
parking spaces in a parking structure may be reduced to 8.5 feet.
(2) The minimum parking stall length shall be 22 feet for parallel parking.
(3) Minimum width of driveway aisles providing access to stalls, varying with the angle
of the parking shall be:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width For One-Way Traffic
Parallel 12 feet
1 to 34 Degrees 12 feet
35 to 54 Degrees 14 feet
55 to 89 Degrees 18 feet
90 Degrees 20 feet
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
140
(4) The minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be
24 feet. Within a parking structure of two or more levels or underground parking, the
above aisle widths may each be reduced by two feet.
(b) Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the
parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicle,
except for parking for a one-family dwelling.
(c) Unless a different width is specifically approved by the Department of Public Works or is
required by PennDOT, the width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(1) A maximum of 20 feet at the curb line for one-way use only.
(2) A maximum of 35 feet at the curb line for two-way use.
(d) Where there is an intersection of two streets, an entrance or exit drive shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines as defined by this Code.
(e) In no case shall parking areas for five or more vehicles be designed to require or
encourage cars to back into a public street in order to leave the lot. Vehicles may back
into an alley. For parking areas of four or less spaces, the Planning and Zoning Bureau
may require the provision of a turnaround area so that vehicles do not back out onto a
higher speed street.
(f) Location of parking spaces. See Section 1319.02(g).
(g) All parking spaces shall be separated from the street curb line by a concrete curb, planting
strip (where appropriate) and sidewalk, all built to City specifications. Any areas between
a sidewalk and the curb shall be maintained in vegetation, except at perpendicular
driveway crossings and except for pedestrian sidewalks. See Section 1319.02(g)
concerning a vegetated area between the curb and parking if deemed necessary. Parking
areas shall be equipped with adequate barriers, such as tire bumpers, to prevent vehicles
from projecting beyond the designated parking areas and into pedestrian ways.
(h) In any parking area of five or more spaces in a Residential District or abutting a
Residential District, all spaces not within a building shall be provided with a suitable
mostly solid fence, architectural wall or evergreen planting at least four feet in height,
designed to screen noise, odors, visibility and headlight glare, and located between such
parking spaces and any lot in a Residential District that abuts directly or across a street
(i) No vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds, no tractor trailer
cab and/or truck and no trailer of a tractor-trailer combination, no bus, school bus,
or cube/box/cargo/container truck may be parked on a residential lot, except as
necessary for on-site construction or occasional deliveries. Standard pick-up trucks
and/or passenger vans are exempted from this designation or definition . (Amended
12-24-12, Ord. 2012 – 43)
1319.04 Off-Street Loading. Except within the CB district, every building or structure having over
4,000 square feet of gross floor area used for the retail sale, display, storage, manufacture,
preparation, and/or distribution of foods, merchandise, or materials or any other uses
involved in large volume receipt and distribution by vehicles of merchandise and
materials shall provide space as herein indicated for the loading and unloading of vehicles
off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a public alley, if suitable, or
if there is no alley, to a street. Off-street loading and unloading space shall be in addition
to and not considered as meeting a part of the requirements for off-street parking space.
Off-street loading space shall not be used or designed, intended or constructed to be used
in a manner to obstruct or interfere with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
141
property. Loading areas shall not intrude into a required buffer yard. The term “loading
space” shall also mean an “unloading space”. At least the following off-street loading
space requirements for specific uses shall be provided (a) Retail Business and Service
Establishments. One off-street loading space of at least 11 feet by 35 feet for
establishments containing between 4,000 and 25,000 square feet of floor area, provided
that in computing said area contiguous establishments may be considered as a single unit.
If a lot contains a structure(s) totaling more than 25,000 square feet of floor area, there
shall be at least one additional space. More than two spaces may be required by the proper
authority having jurisdiction (Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, or the City Planning
Commission) at the time of site plan review.
(b) Manufacturing Uses and Other Industrial Uses Not Listed Separately. One off-street
loading space at least 11 feet by 50 feet for the first 10,000 square feet of floor area.
Fourteen thousand or more square feet of floor area shall require two spaces. More than
two spaces may be required by the proper authority having jurisdiction (Zoning Officer,
Zoning Hearing Board, or the City Planning Commission) at the time of site plan review.
(c) Warehouses, Distribution and Wholesale Storage Facilities. One off-street loading space
at least 11 feet by 50 feet for the first 7,500 square feet of floor area. Twelve thousand or
more square feet of floor area shall require two spaces. More than two spaces shall be
required by the proper authority having jurisdiction (Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing
Board, or the City Planning Commission) at the time of site plan review.
(d) Freight Terminals and Trucking Terminals. One off-street loading space at least 11 feet by
50 feet for the first 5,000 square feet of building area. Eight thousand or more square feet
of building area shall require two spaces. More than two spaces shall be required by the
authority having jurisdiction (Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, or the City Planning
Commission) at the time of site plan review.
(e) Existing Buildings. As part of a permitted reuse of an existing building, where a
nonconformity regarding off-street loading facilities of a proposed new use would be
similar to the previous use, and there would not be a substantial increase in the need for
off-street loading facilities from the previous use to the proposed use, then the existing
amount of off-street loading facilities may be continued.
(f) Hours of Operation. For any loading dock in a Residential Zone or within 100 feet of a
Residential District boundary line the hours of dock operation, deliveries and engine
idling shall be restricted to 6 AM to 10 PM daily.
1319.05 Design and Layout of Off-Street Loading Facilities.
(a) Off-street loading facilities shall be designed to be sufficient to accommodate the largest
vehicle that routinely services the use.
(1) In no case shall a required space be less than 11 feet in width, 30 feet in length, and
14 feet in height. A required loading space shall not block customer access onto or
off of the lot and shall not intrude into a street or required buffer yard.
(2) There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley as well as adequate
maneuvering space.
(3) See driveway widths in Section 1319.03(c).
(4) All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, surfaced and drained to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer, to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of
dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across public ways or adjacent properties.
(5) Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no time constitute
a nuisance, or a hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1319
142
(6) The screening and lighting requirements of Section 1318.05 shall apply when
applicable.
(b) All required loading facilities shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) They shall be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities
were designed to serve.
(2) They shall not be reduced in total extent after their provision, except when such
reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this Article.
(3) Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or sponsor of particular uses to
assure the availability of required facilities to the delivery and pick-up vehicles that
they are designed to serve.
1319.06 Parking of Recreational Vehicles in Residential Zoning Districts
(a) The purpose of this section is to establish standards for outdoor residential uses, storage and
activities related to recreational vehicles and watercraft. These standards are intended to
protect property values by reducing visual blight, aid in emergency access and fire safety,
guard against the creation of rodent and pest harborage, and reduce the impact on the natural
environment from the leakage of motor vehicles.
(b) A recreational vehicle may be stored on a residential lot if ALL of the following are met:
(1) The vehicle is less than forty feet (40’) in length.
(2) The vehicle is in a side or rear yard behind the front façade of the
building and in compliance with the setback requirements to accessory structures in
that district.
(3) The vehicle is sight-screened from abutting properties by solid board fencing or sight
obscuring landscaping at least six (6) feet in height. Sight screening is not required
along the alley side of the storage area.
(4) The vehicle is parked on a solid surface parking pad constructed of either macadam
or concrete; and
(5) All recreational vehicles and watercraft shall be maintained in a clean, well-kept
condition. All recreational vehicles and watercraft must be kept operational and
currently licensed and inspected.
(c) A recreational vehicle may be parked on a residential lot when guests visit for up to seven
(7) days and no more than three (3) times per year. The recreational vehicle must be parked
to prohibit obstruction of other driveways or the right-of-way.
(d) A recreational vehicle may be temporarily parked in a residential district for the purpose of
loading and unloading items for a period not to exceed three (3) days.
(e) There shall be no parking of recreational vehicles or watercraft for compensation in any
Residential Zoning District. (Amended 12-24-12, Ord. 2012 – 43)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
143
ARTICLE 1320
SIGNS
1320.01 Purposes. This Article recognizes that signs perform an important function by identifying
uses, but this must be balanced with controls to promote the health, safety and general
welfare. This Article is intended to lessen hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
preserve property values; prevent unsightly and detrimental development which has a
blighting influence upon residential, business and industrial uses; prevent signs from
reaching such excessive size that they obscure one another to the detriment of all
concerned; and secure certain fundamentals of design for the City.
1320.02 Definition of Sign. Sign shall mean and include any permanent or temporary structure or
part thereof, or any device attached, painted, or represented directly or indirectly on a
structure or other surface that shall display or include any letter, word insignia, flag, or
representation used as, or which is the nature of, an advertisement, announcement, visual
communication, or direction. Flags of any governmental unit or branch or of any
charitable or religious organization, interior signs not visible from a public right-of-way or
adjoining property, and cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a building are
excluded.
1320.03 Location of Signs.
(a) On-Premises Sign. A sign which directs attention to a person, business, profession,
occupation or activity conducted on the same lot.
(b) Off-Premises Sign. A sign which directs attention to a person, business, profession,
product, home occupation or activity not conducted on the same lot.
1320.04 Types of Signs.
(a) Animated Sign. A sign with action or motion with moving images which require electrical
energy, but not including wind actuated elements, such as flags or banners. This term does
not include public service signs, such as time and temperature signs. This term shall not
include an allowed electronically changing message sign.
(b) Awning Sign. A sign that is mounted or printed on, or attached to, an awning, canopy or
marquee, provided, however, that the sign does not project above, below or beyond the
awning, canopy or marquee.
(c) Banner. A type of sign that is made of flexible material and is not internally illuminated.
(d) Billboard. A type of off-premises sign that has a sign area of more than 10 square feet.
(e) Digital Sign – An off-premise advertising sign that utilizes digital or video light emitting
diodes (LEDs) or similar electronic methods to create a changeable image display area.
(f) Directly Illuminated Sign. A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through
transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such sign, including, but
not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs.
(g) Electronically Changing Message Sign. An on-premises or off-premises sign or portion
thereof designed to accommodate frequent message changes composed of characters or
letters, and that can be changed or rearranged electronically without altering the face or
surface of such sign.
(h) Freestanding Signs. A self-supporting sign resting or supported by means of poles or
standards on the ground.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
144
(i) Flashing and Moving Sign. An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.
Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date or other public service
information shall not be considered flashing signs.
(j) Indirectly Illuminated Sign. A sign illuminated with a light so shielded that no direct rays
there from are visible elsewhere on the lot where said illumination occurs. If such
shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign.
(k) Projecting Sign. Any sign mounted to a wall or other vertical building surface other than a
wall sign. A projecting sign is generally perpendicular to a wall.
(l) Roof Sign. A sign erected upon or above the roof or parapet of a building.
(m) Sidewalk or Sandwich Board Sign. A freestanding, movable sign, not secured or attached
to the ground or any building or structure, composed of a sign panel and supporting
structure or one or more panels which form both the structure and sign face, and which is
intended to be placed in a sidewalk or pedestrian way.
(n) Wall Sign. A sign mounted to a wall or other vertical building surface.
(o) Window Sign. A temporary or permanent sign which is oriented to the public right-ofway,
is legible to persons in vehicles, and is located on the outside or inside of a window
to direct attention to an activity conducted on the same lot.
(p) See Section 1320.06 concerning allowance of other types of signs.
1320.05 Area of Signs.
(a) The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or closed, on which
they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are
incidental to the display itself.
(b) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a
surface, building, wall, awning, or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(c) In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one side shall be considered
provided both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the
double-faced sign is greater than 45 degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be
considered in calculating the sign area.
1320.06 Permit Requirements for Signs. Only signs that are specifically permitted by this
Ordinance shall be allowed. All on-premises signs over 6 square feet in area, all
projecting signs extending into the public right of way, and all off-premises signs
regardless of size shall require the issuance of a zoning permit before erection or
replacement. A permit may also be required in other circumstances under the Construction
Code. All signs must comply with all of the regulations contained herein, regardless of
whether a permit is required. No permit shall be required for a mere change of copy on a
sign. The repainting of an existing sign does not require a permit as long as there is no
change to size or location of the sign proposed and as long as the sign is for an already
permitted use.
(a) If a painted wall sign was not visible for the previous 10 years, it shall be considered
abandoned, and shall not be repainted with a new message if it becomes visible because of
a building demolition.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
145
1320.07 General Sign Regulations. The following requirements shall apply to all signs:
(a) Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have such lighting shielded so no
direct light will shine on abutting properties or in the normal line of vision of the public
using the streets or sidewalks.
(b) No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic through glare, through
blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or driveway, through confusion
with a traffic control device (by reason of color, location, shape or other characteristic), or
through any other means. No sign shall violate the corner visibility restrictions in Section
1318.06, except that a sign pole with a width of up to 18 inches may intrude into a sight
triangle.
(c) All signs except temporary signs shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good
condition and repair. See also the Electrical Code.
(d) Signs existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance which do not conform to the
requirements of the Ordinance shall be considered non-conforming signs. However, nonconforming
signs may be repainted, repaired (including lighting) or replaced provided
such repainted, repaired or replaced signs do not exceed the dimensions of the existing
sign. Copy may also be changed. Non-conforming signs, once removed for a period of 90
days, may be replaced only with signs which conform to provisions of this Ordinance.
(e) If an establishment has walls fronting on two or more streets, the total wall sign area along
each street may be computed separately. If a lot is allowed to have a freestanding sign on
two streets, the applicant may choose to combine the allowed sign areas for a single
freestanding sign.
(f) No signs (except those of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic signs
and similar regulatory notices) shall be allowed within a street right-of-way unless
specifically authorized by other ordinances and regulations of the City.
(g) No sign (except such directional devices as may be required by the Federal Aviation
Authority), shall be placed, inscribed or supported upon the roof that the sign abuts or
upon any structure which extends above the roof of any building, except that a sign may
be attached to a parapet wall that extends up to 5 feet above the roof and which is
architecturally integrated with the building.
(h) Any vehicle or trailer to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such
sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose but becomes a
primary purpose in itself shall be considered a free-standing sign and as such be subject to
the provisions regarding free-standing signs in the district in which such vehicle or trailer
is located.
(i) Off-premise signs. See Sections 1320.09 (b) and 1320.10 (b).
(j) Flashing, blinking, mechanically moving, twinkling or animated signs of any type are
prohibited. Strobe lighting shall be prohibited, except for temporary charitable events.
This provision shall not prohibit scrolling and electronically changing message signs
provided they meet subsection “(s)” below, except time and temperature signs and signs
posted by the city or a state agency may change more frequently. Aerial lasers and
spotlights aimed into the sky shall not be allowed as promotional devices.
(k) Setbacks. No on-premise freestanding sign in a Commercial, Industrial or Industrial
Redevelopment District shall extend within 25 feet of any Residential or Institutional
District boundary line. See clear sight triangle provisions in Section 1318.06. A
freestanding sign shall not project into a street or alley right-of-way, and shall be setback
a minimum of 5 feet from such right-of-way, except such setback shall be increased to 10
feet in the PI District and no sign setback shall be required in the CB or CL Districts.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
146
(l) Reserved.
(m) Temporary Signs. Temporary uses that are approved by the zoning officer shall be
permitted to erect temporary signs on the same lot as the temporary use provided that they
comply with all requirements of this ordinance and that they are removed from the lot
when the temporary use is no longer in operation or is no longer permitted on the lot.
(n) Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are
mounted, except as provided in subsection “(g)” above, and shall not project more than 18
inches from its surface.
(o) Projecting signs shall not project more than 3.5 feet from the wall or surface to which they
are mounted nor in any way shall they interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. See minimum vertical clearance requirements in the Construction Code.
(p) Banner Signs. Banner signs shall be permitted on non-residential properties in business or
industrial districts provided they comply with the following regulations:
(1) Banners shall be properly secured to a building or suspended from some part of a
building.
(2) Banners shall not exceed 64 square feet in area.
(3) A permit is required for banner signs.
(4) Banner signs are only permitted for two periods of 15-day periods during any
calendar year. The banners must promptly be removed at the end of the 15-day
period.
(q) Promotional Devices. A promotional device may include, but is not limited to, balloons,
flags with a message, streamers or other figures tethered to the ground or a building
intended for the purpose of advertising a business, event or product. Promotional devices
are only permitted on a non-residential property in a commercial or industrial district with
the following provisions:
(1) The devices are permitted for a maximum period of 7 days for a maximum of four
times per year. A period of 3 weeks shall pass between promotional periods.
(2) No promotional devices shall be higher than the roofline of the main building.
(3) The devices shall be properly secured.
(4) The devices shall comply with all other ordinance provisions, including clear sight
distance.
(5) No balloon or other inflated device shall be larger than 120 cubic feet.
(r) A permit is not required for signs that are not readable from a public right of way or an
adjoining property.
(s) Digital Signs and Electronically Changing Message Signs. The following provisions shall
apply:
(1) All messages, images, or displays on a digital sign or electronically changing
message sign shall remain unchanged for a minimum of 10 seconds, except signs
with a changeable sign area of less than 30 square feet in a commercial district may
change a minimum interval of every six seconds.
(2) The time interval used to change from one complete message, image or display to the
next complete message, image or display shall be a maximum of one second.
(3) There shall be no appearance of a visual dissolve or fading, in which any part of one
message, image or display appears simultaneously with any part of a second
message, image or display.
(4) There shall be no appearance of flashing or sudden bursts of light, and no appearance
of video motion, animation, movement or flow of the message, image or display.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
147
(5) The intensity and contrast of light levels shall remain constant throughout the sign
face.
(6) Each digital sign or electronically changing message sign shall be equipped with
automatic day/night dimming software, to reduce the illumination intensity of the
sign from one hour after sunset to one hour prior to sunrise.
(7) If an off-premises sign, or any portion thereof, is a digital sign or electronically
changing message sign, the sign shall be set back a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
other off-premises digital sign or electronically changing message sign.
1320.08 Signs Permitted in Residential and Institutional Districts. No sign shall be permitted
except as follows:
(a) On-Premises Signs.
(1) Official traffic signs and other official Federal, State, County and City governmental
signs.
(2) Signs identifying the occupant of the premises are allowed, provided that the area of
any such sign shall not exceed one square foot and not more than one such sign shall
be erected for each dwelling or establishment. If such property fronts on more than
one street, then one such sign per establishment may be erected on each street
frontage. A sign for a Bed and Breakfast Inn in a residential district shall have a
maximum sign area of 4 square feet, with one such sign allowed per street frontage.
(3) One freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot occupied by one or more allowed
principal non-residential uses provided that the sign area of such sign shall not
exceed 8 square feet. In the R-T Residential District, signs shall not exceed 6 square
feet for motor vehicle parking lots. Not more than one such sign shall be placed on
each street frontage. If a permitted non-residential building is located on an arterial
street, then the sign area may be increased to a maximum of 16 square feet. A portion
or all of the freestanding sign allowance may be used for a sandwich board sign
provided that it meets all of the requirements of Section 1320.09(a)(2)(ii). For
institutional uses, see subsection (13) below.
(4) Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of property, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed 6 square feet and not more than one such sign shall be
placed on property held in single and separate ownership unless such property fronts
on more than one street, in which case, one such sign may be erected on each street
frontage. All signs shall be removed within 7 days after an agreement of sale or
rental has been entered into. In addition to the foregoing, one open house sign shall
be permitted subject to the conditions listed under 1320.08(b)(3). Two off premises
signs shall also be permitted as stated in 1320.08(b)(3).
(5) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway, or
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
(6) Temporary signs erected in connection with the development or proposed
development of the premises by a builder, contractor, developer, financier or other
persons interested in such sale or development, provided that the aggregate area of
the signs shall not exceed 20 square feet on a tract of less than one acre and 100
square feet on a larger tract. Such signs shall be removed within 20 days after the last
structure has been initially occupied. Where a real estate developer is engaged in
selling lots only, then temporary signs advertising the sale of lots in the subdivision
shall be permitted during the initial period of the development project, which period
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
148
shall commence with the recording date of the subdivision map and shall end at the
latest when construction is complete.
(7) Temporary signs of mechanics, tradespersons or artisans may be erected and
maintained during the period such persons are performing work on the premises on
which such signs are erected, provided that such signs shall be removed upon
completion of work by such entity, and the total areas of all such signs shall not
exceed 20 square feet.
(8) Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive, or event of a civic, philanthropic,
educational, or religious organization shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the campaign, drive, or event.
(9) Signs for identification of permitted home occupation, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed 2 square feet. However, the aggregate square footage of
signs erected under 1320.08(a)(2) and this Section shall not exceed 2 square feet.
Such signs exceeding a total of one square foot in size shall have to meet the front
yard setback requirements of this Ordinance.
(10) Apartment developments may have one sign, one square foot in area, for each
dwelling unit in the development up to a maximum of 20 square feet. If the
development fronts on more than one street, there may be one such sign for each
street frontage.
(11) Wall and projecting signs for permitted principal non-conforming uses or a principal
use approved by a use variance shall meet the following and Section 1320.07:
(i) Signs attached to the main wall of a principal building shall not project more
than 3.5 feet therefrom and no portion shall be less than 7.5 feet above the basic
grade and no more than 25 feet above grade. Such signs shall not exceed 22.5
square feet.
(ii) The total area of all wall signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the
building face (including window and door area and cornices) to which they are
attached. In no case, however, shall a projecting sign exceed 8 square feet and
the total of all wall signs exceed 50 square feet.
(iii) Permanent window signs shall be considered wall signs and included in this
computation, but shall nevertheless not exceed 20 percent of the total window
area on each street.
(iv) Such signs shall conform to the setback regulations for a non-residential use in
the district.
(12) No sign in a residential district shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 P.M.
and 7:00 A.M.
(13) One freestanding sign shall be allowed per street frontage for principal institutional
uses located in a Residential District. Such sign shall have a maximum sign area of
one square foot in area for each 10 feet of lot frontage along a public street, up to a
maximum of 40 square feet per street frontage. In addition, one projecting sign shall
be allowed per lot, which shall have a maximum size of 8 square feet. A principal
institutional building in a residential district shall have a maximum wall sign area of
50 square feet, in addition to any religious symbols. All signs illuminated indirectly
from artificial sources shall be so arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected
from such artificial source into residential properties or onto public streets.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
149
(14) Signs for institutional uses in an Institutional District shall involve a maximum of 40
square feet of wall sign area per principal building side facing onto a street and a
maximum of 40 square foot freestanding sign per principal building per street
frontage. In addition, one 50 square foot freestanding sign shall be allowed at each
entryway to a college or university campus or hospital complex along a public street.
In addition, one projecting sign shall be allowed per principal building, which shall
have a maximum size of 8 square feet.
(15) Signs for allowed commercial uses in an Institutional Overlay District shall involve
wall signs with a sign area that does not exceed more than 10 percent of the building
face to which the signs are attached. In addition, one projecting sign shall be allowed
per business establishment, which shall have a maximum size of 8 square feet. In
addition, one freestanding sign may placed per street frontage to advertise multiple
commercial uses, with a maximum sign area of 40 square feet and a maximum height
of 8 feet.
(16) Any illuminated or indirectly illuminated sign that is used for advertising or
identification of a permitted non-residential use, may only be illuminated during the
hours in which such use is in operation.
(b) Off-Premises Signs.
(1) Signs directing patrons, members, or audiences to temporary exhibits, shows, or
events located in the City subject to the following requirements:
(i) No such sign shall exceed 8 square feet in area.
(ii) Signs shall be removed within one week after the date of the exhibit, show or
election if they pertain to such event.
(iii) This provision shall also allow a sign that states an opinion of a political issue.
(iv) No such sign shall be posted earlier than three weeks before the occurrence of
the event to which it relates, with the exception of political signs.
(v) No such sign shall impede the safety of traffic or pedestrians.
(vi) Such signs shall not be placed in a public street right-of-way or on City-owned
land, except for City-sponsored events or events held on City property.
(2) Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic, street name signs,
legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings, and other official signs which are
similarly authorized or erected by a duly constituted governmental body.
(3) The off-premises placement of signs directing persons to the sale, lease, or auction of
property shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
(i) The signs shall only be permitted a maximum of 3 days per week.
(ii) No sign shall exceed 6 square feet.
(iii) No sign shall be posted earlier than 8:00 A.M. on the day that it is displayed.
(iv) No sign shall impede the safety of traffic or pedestrians.
1320.09 Signs Permitted in the Commercial and Industrial Redevelopment Districts. No sign shall
be permitted except as follows:
(a) On-Premises Signs.
(1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.08(a) in compliance with the standards
prescribed therein, except as otherwise provided in this Section and in Section
1320.07.
(2) Wall and projecting signs, providing:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
150
(i) Signs attached to a main wall of a principal building shall not project more than
3.5 feet therefrom and no portion shall be less than 8 feet above the basic grade
and no more than 25 feet above grade. If not projecting more than 3 inches from
a wall of a building, the sign need not conform to the vertical clearance limit.
Any wall sign may equal the height of the building.
(ii) The total area of all combined wall and projecting signs shall not exceed 20
percent of the area of the exterior building face (including window and door
area and cornices) to which they are attached. Wall signs shall be allowed on a
rear wall that faces onto adjacent dwellings in a residential district, but shall not
exceed 6 square feet plus shall not be illuminated. In no case, however, shall the
total area of all signs on a building wall exceed 200 square feet in the CB and
CL districts.
(iii) Permanent window signs shall be considered wall signs and included in this
computation but shall nevertheless not exceed 40 percent of the total window
area on each street.
(iv) In the case of a Shopping Center District, the provisions of this Section relating
to the total area of signs permitted on a premise shall apply with respect to each
building, separate store, or similar use in percentage of exterior building face,
but the 200 square feet limit shall not apply. All signs shall conform to an
overall scheme or arrangement design which shall be subject to approval or
disapproval by the Director of the Planning Bureau or his/her designee. Sign
materials, lighting, position on the building, and size, shall all be specified in
such approval. If the Shopping Center District contains an enclosed mall area,
each entrance to the mall may be designated by a sign no wider than the
entrance, and at a height not exceeding the building height.
(v) An awning sign is permitted provided that the awning complies with the
requirements of the Building Code, the awning is at least 7.5 feet above ground
level, and the size of the sign portion of the awning does not exceed the total
area for wall and projecting signs as noted above.
(3) Freestanding Signs.
(i) Shall be limited to one, except for an establishment which fronts on two or more
streets, in which case a sign may be erected in each yard fronting on a street. If a
lot is allowed 2 freestanding signs, the applicant may combine the allowed sign
area onto a single freestanding sign.
(ii) No freestanding signs shall be located within the clear sight triangle. No portion
of any sign shall be more than 30 feet above the ground, except such signs as
described in (iv) and (v).
(iii) The area of any freestanding sign (except such signs as described in (iv) and (v)
below), shall not exceed one square foot for each two feet of lineal lot frontage
or 50 square feet, whichever is smaller. If a lot includes three or more separate
commercial establishments, an additional ten square feet of freestanding sign
area shall be allowed for each establishment greater than two. If a lot includes
franchises for retail sales of motor vehicles involving two or more distinct new
automobile manufacturers, one freestanding sign of 50 square feet each shall be
allowed for each manufacturer, up to a maximum of 4 signs.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
151
(iv) No sign shall be located beyond the rear or side wall of the main building when
the rear or side property line on which it is situated abuts a Residential or
Institutional District, except signs that convey information such as parking,
entrances and traffic flow directions. The area of one side of any such sign shall
not exceed 6 square feet. The name of the business located on the premises may
appear on such signs.
(v) No portion of a Shopping Center free-standing sign shall be more than 40 feet
above the ground. The area of any one side of such sign shall not exceed 150
square feet and only one such sign shall be allowed. The location or orientation
of such sign shall be shown on the development plan.
(vi) In the case of a Shopping Center in the CS District, the number of its
freestanding signs shall be according to the following schedule: Parking
facilities from 100 to 500 cars–one freestanding signs shall be allowed. For
every additional increment of 500 parking spaces, 1 additional freestanding sign
is permitted. At no time shall there be more than 4 freestanding signs per
Shopping Center.
(4) See also Article 1308.01.c which allows sign modifications in the IR and IR-R
districts.
(b) Off-Premise Signs.
(1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.08(b) at the standards prescribed therein except
as otherwise provided in this Section.
(2) Only such directional devices as may be required by the Federal Aviation Authority
shall be placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any structure which
extends above the roof of any building.
(3) Billboards shall be permitted as follows:
(i) All wall signs shall not exceed two square feet for each foot of length of that
portion of such wall which is devoted to such establishment or 100 square feet,
whichever is smaller. Said signs are permitted on a side or rear wall only if such
wall abuts a street, driveway, or parking area. No sign shall be more than 25 feet
above the basic grade.
(ii) Freestanding signs abutting Route 378 shall not exceed one square foot of sign
area for each 2 feet of lot frontage or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller. Not
more than one such sign shall be placed on a property in single and separate
ownership. No sign shall be more than 25 feet above the basic grade.
(iii) Freestanding signs up to 300 square feet are permitted on Airport Road.
(iv) Off premises advertising sign structures intended or designed to be viewed
from Route 22 or Interstate 78 shall not exceed a maximum area of 672 square
feet on each of two (2) sides or a maximum height of 25 feet above the grade of
I-78 or Route 22. If the interior angle within the inside of the two attached sides
of a sign is greater than 30 degrees, then the maximum sign areas shall apply to
the total of the two sides. No off-premises advertising sign shall have more than
two sides. The minimum separation distance between these signs shall be 500
feet.
(v) No off premises sign shall be located nearer than 300 feet to a Residential
District nor closer than 300 feet to any other off-premises sign.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
152
(vi) An existing off-premises sign shall only be permitted to be converted to a
digital sign if: a) all of the requirements of Section 1320.07(s) are met, and b)
the off-premises sign would be able to meet all of the current requirements that
apply to off-premises signs as if the off-premises sign would be newly placed on
the property, and c) it is located only on Routes 22, I-78 and 378.
(vii) All freestanding signs shall meet setback requirements for a principal building.
(viii)New digital/electronic billboards will only be allowed on Routes 22, I-78
and 378.
(ix) No additional off-premises signs shall be permitted on Stefko Boulevard,
Hellertown Road or Schoenersville Road.
(x) See also Section 1320.07(s).
(c) Sidewalk or Sandwich Board Signs. Sidewalk and Sandwich Board Signs are permitted in
all Commercial and Industrial Redevelopment Zoning Districts, as well as for lawful
principal commercial uses in other districts, provided that they meet the following
provisions:
(1) No more than one sign may be permitted in front of owner’s building.
(2) Sandwich board or sidewalk signs shall not exceed 2 feet in width and 4 feet in
overall height. A minimum unobstructed sidewalk width of five feet shall be
maintained.
(3) No sign shall be placed in the clear sight triangle.
(4) The sign may only be displayed during business hours; otherwise, signs must be
removed from the sidewalk area.
(5) Such signs may not have any moving parts, flags, banners, balloons, or other
attachments and may not be illuminated, directly or indirectly.
(6) Such signs shall be constructed of durable material and be appropriately weighted to
provide stability.
(7) An encroachment permit is required from the Public Works Department for each
sandwich board or sidewalk sign located in the public right of way prior to the
issuance of a sign permit. The permit must be renewed yearly
1320.10 Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts.
(a) On-Premises Signs.
(1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.09 at the standards prescribed therein except as
otherwise provided in this Section and in Section 1320.07.
(2) Signs for permitted uses provided:
(i) All wall and projecting signs shall not exceed 2 square feet for each foot of
length of the front building wall or length of that portion of such wall which is
devoted to such establishment or 375 square feet, whichever is smaller. Said
signs are permitted on a side or rear wall only if such wall abuts a street,
driveway or parking area. No sign shall be more than 25 feet above the basic
grade nor shall be closer than 100 feet to a residential area.
(ii) Freestanding signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each 2 feet
of lot frontage or 375 square feet, whichever is smaller. Not more than one such
sign shall be placed on a property unless it fronts on more than one street, in
which case one such sign may be erected on each street frontage. In addition
one freestanding sign, indicating the name of an industrial park and the
industries within may be erected along each highway on which the park fronts.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1320
153
The location and design of such signs shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
(3) No sign shall project higher than the roof line. No sign shall be located beyond the
rear or side wall of the main building when the rear or side property line upon which
it is situated abuts a Residential District.
(b) Off-Premise Signs.
(1) All signs permitted in Section 1320.09(b) at the standards prescribed therein, shall be
permitted.
(2) See also Section 1320.07(s).
(c) The following requirements shall apply in the case of the Planned Industrial District:
(1) One sign indicating the name of the industrial park and the industries therein may be
erected along each highway on which the PI District fronts. Such sign may be free
standing or attached to a wall or fence.
(2) Identification signs for individual industries shall be permanently attached to the
building and shall preferably be part of the architectural design of a building. One
sign may be placed on the front, sides, or rear of a building or on all sides, provided
the area conforms with the formula established in (a)(2)(i) above. One freestanding
sign is permitted per property unless it fronts on more than one street, in which case
one such sign may be erected on each street frontage. The sign shall not exceed the
area derived from the formula established in (a)(2)(ii) above and must remain at least
ten feet from the property line. The sign may not exceed 25 feet in height.
(3) A temporary sign not to exceed 150 square feet may be erected during construction
within the rear half of required yards facing upon streets. The purpose of such a sign
is to identify the industry which will occupy the lot and the organizations or persons
concerned with its construction. A temporary use permit shall be obtained from the
office of the Bureau of Inspections. Temporary signs shall be removed within 30
days following completion of construction.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
154
ARTICLE 1321
LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC RESOURCES
1321.01 Purpose
(a) The City has regulated certain portions of the City by way of designating
them Historic Districts. However, the City recognizes that buildings outside
the Historic Districts may be classified as Landmarks or historic resources
and are important to preserve, as provided for in the Municipalities Planning
Code. It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to promote, protect,
enhance, and preserve historic resources for the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation,
protection and regulation of buildings and areas of historic interest or
importance within the City located outside the City Historic Districts; to
safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving and regulating landmarks and
property of historical interest which reflect elements of its cultural, social,
economic, political, and architectural history; to preserve and enhance the
environmental quality of neighborhoods; to foster appropriate economic
development; to strengthen the City's economy by the stimulation of tourism;
to establish and improve property values; to foster civic pride in the beauty
and accomplishments of the City's past; and to preserve and protect the
cultural, historical and architectural assets of the City which have been
determined to be of local, state or national significance.
1321.02 Definitions
(a) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this Ordinance to have the meanings herein indicated:
(b) For the purpose of this Ordinance, all words used in the present tense include
the future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number,
and all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the
natural construction of the word clearly indicates otherwise. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders, and the feminine gender
includes the masculine and neuter genders. The word "shall" is mandatory.
The word "used" includes "designated, intended, built or arranged to be
used." Words not defined below shall have the meanings given in Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary
(1) Alteration - Any visual or physical change to a building, including the
repair, replacement, or addition of any exterior structural, decorative
or accessory element or feature, but excluding demolition, new
construction, reconstruction or removal of any character-defining
architectural elements of any building or part thereof.
(2) Appurtenance - A subordinate component or structural feature, such
as a porch, attached and affixed with the intent of permanence to a
principal structure.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
155
(3) Completed Application - An application for demolition of a historic
landmark that conforms to submittal requirements for review under
the provisions of this Section 1321.01.
(4) Demolition - The dismantling, tearing down or razing of all or part of
any building or structure, including the permanent removal of
character-defining architectural elements, such as porches and
porticos.
(5) Demolition by Neglect – The absence of routine maintenance and
repair which can lead to a building or structure’s structural weakness,
decay and deterioration resulting in its demolition.
(6) Historic Conservation Commission - The official review board, which
is charged with the responsibility to recommend to City Council,
following deliberations at public meetings, the approval, approval
with conditions or denial of demolition of historic landmarks under
the provisions of this ordinance.
(7) Historic Officer - A municipal employee or individual retained by the
City and designated as the individual responsible for advising the
Historic Conservation Commission and applicants/property owners
regarding activities regulated by this section.
(8) Landmark – An individual site, element or building that demonstrates
historical, architectural, cultural, archaeological, educational or
aesthetic merit.
(9) Maintenance - Work that does not alter the exterior fabric or features
of a building or structure and has no material effect on the historic,
archaeological, or architectural or cultural significance to a building
or structure.
(10) Reconstruction - The act or process of reproducing by new
construction the exact form and detail of a vanished building,
structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific
period of time but not necessarily of original material.
(11) Regulated Activity - Any activity requiring review and approval by
the City of Bethlehem under the provisions of this ordinance.
(12) Repair - The process of rehabilitation which warrants additional work
beyond maintenance. Repair includes, but is not limited to, patching,
piecing in, splicing, consolidating or otherwise reinforcing materials.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
156
(13) Replacement - To install new materials or components in place of
existing materials or components, such as removing existing windows
or doors and installing new windows or doors, regardless of whether
the same material and design or a different material or design.
(14) Restoration - The process of accurately recovering the form and
details of a property as it appeared at a specific period of time by
means of removal of later work and the replacement of work missing
from the period.
1321.03 Landmarks and Historic Resources
(a) At its July 19, 2011 meeting the City Council adopted the “Preservation Plan for
the City of Bethlehem” (Preservation Plan). The Preservation Plan identifies in
its Appendix B a Tier One List of Historic Resources. All properties listed in
Tier One Appendix B of the Preservation Plan are considered Landmarks as
defined in this ordinance and must comply with all aspects of the provisions in
this Section 1321, Landmarks and Historic Resources. All such properties are
also listed here in Table 1. The structures in Tier Four are located on the former
Bethlehem Steel Company property. The historic properties on the former
Bethlehem Steel site were assessed previously for structures to be saved,
adaptively restored, and/or demolished. A copy of this plan that was agreed to
by the City of Bethlehem shall be attached to this Ordinance. This Ordinance or
the designation of these properties do not preclude the owners of these properties
from applying for acceptance of these structures, individually or as a whole, to
the National Register of Historic Places, or for other historic honors or
designations.
(b) Criteria for designation of a Landmark. A building, complex of buildings,
structure or site may be designated a Landmark.
To guide in the assessment of significance, the following local criteria for listing
are applied. These criteria apply to districts, sites, buildings, structures and
objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and associations and:
? that are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history; or
? that are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
? that embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or represent the work of a master, or possess high artistic
values, or represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
? that have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in history
or prehistory.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
157
These are modeled after the criteria for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places.
Evaluation of Integrity
In addition to historic significance, the historic integrity of each resource is
assessed. The National Park Service defines historic integrity as “the
authenticity of a property’s historic identity, evidenced by the survival of
physical characteristics that existed during the property’s prehistoric or historic
period”. Integrity is assessed based on seven qualities: location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, feeling, and aspects of construction dating from the
period when it attained significance.
Appendix A of the Historic Preservation Plan also discusses several themes of
historic contexts which can be used to further guide discussion evaluating
integrity and significance of a site.
(c) Designation of landmarks and historic resources. It is understood that over time
there will be additional resources that may qualify as Landmarks. The following
process shall be followed prior to the inclusion of any additional Landmarks to
the Tier One list or the Landmarks and Historic Resources Map.
(1) A property owner, business owner, resident or neighborhood group shall
submit a complete “Historic Resource Survey Form” to the Planning and
Zoning Bureau. An incomplete Form will not be accepted.
(2) The Historic Officer, in coordination with the Planning and Zoning Bureau,
will review the application and the feasibility of the proposed site for
designation as a Landmark as defined in this section 1321. All complete
Survey Forms will be reviewed against the “Evaluating Bethlehem’s Historic
Resources” and “Historic Contexts” sections located in Appendix A of the
Preservation Plan.
(3) A formal recommendation is prepared and submitted to the Historic
Conservation Commission (HCC) for review and consideration at their next
available meeting.
(4) Concurrently, the HCC recommendation is submitted to the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission (PHMC ) as a courtesy for their review
and consideration of the proposal, so that they have the opportunity to
comment if they choose.
(5) After receipt of the recommendations of the Historic Commission and
PHMC, City Council shall, after notice to all affected property owners and
the opportunity for all affected property owners to be present at a hearing to
designate any building or structure as a landmark or historic resource,
consider the designation of landmarks and shall define, in accordance with
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
158
the criteria set forth in the Preservation Plan, the boundaries of such landmarks or
historic resources.
(6) All landmarks shall be placed on a Historic Landmarks and Resources Map.
The Historic Landmarks and Resources Map shall be located in the Planning
and Zoning Office and made available for public inspection.
1321.04 Historic Conservation Commission – Membership
The Historic Conservation Commission regulating this ordinance shall be the same body which
regulates Section 1714.01 et seq. entitled Historic Conservation District South Bethlehem
and Mount Airy.
1321.05 Powers and Duties of the Historic Conservation Commission
(a) The Historic Conservation Commission shall have the following advisory
responsibilities:
(1) review applications for regulated activities listed in Section 1321 of this Ordinance;
(2) consider the financial feasibility of its recommendations based on cost
estimates and other financial documentation provided by the applicant
when necessary;
(3) Submit written recommendations to City Council regarding the
advisability of issuing any demolition permit for a historic landmark
by the Building Official.
(4) Review and prepare recommendations or additions of Landmarks to
the official Historic Landmarks and Resources Map as submitted by
the Planning and Zoning Bureau.
(b) Recommendations Regarding Demolition Permits for Historic Landmarks -
The Commission shall base its recommendations of approval, conditional
approval, or denial to City Council on the following:
(1) the integrity of exterior architectural features which can be seen from
a public street or way, including the general design, arrangement,
texture, and materials of the building or structure and the relation of
such factors to similar features of surrounding buildings and
structures of the period of significance.
(2) the effect which the proposed change will have upon the general
historic and architectural nature of the Landmark;
(3) the written determination of appropriateness by the Historic Officer;
and
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
159
(4) the applicant's justification for the proposed activity, including
financial feasibility and cost estimates. Recommendations to Council
may include conditions of approval that modify an applicant's initial
application.
(c) Recommendations Against Issuance of Demolition Permits for Historic
Landmarks - If the Commission decides to recommend against the granting
of a demolition permit for a historic landmark, it shall indicate to the
applicant those changes, if any, which would result in a positive
recommendation. The Commission shall withhold its report to Council if the
applicant agrees to return to the Commission at a future regularly scheduled
meeting with revised plans for its consideration.
(d) Compensation - Commission members shall serve without compensation.
(e) Meetings - The Historic Conservation Commission shall meet at scheduled
public meetings, and if determined necessary, at special meetings, advertised
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sunshine Law.
1321.06 Powers and Duties of City Council
(a) The City Council shall certify to the appropriateness of the proposed
demolition of any building, in whole or in part, listed on the Landmark and
Historic Resources Map.
(b) The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Historic
Conservation Commission and PHMC, as applicable, for all applications for
the demolition of any building, in whole or in part, listed on the Landmark
and Historic Resources Map.
(c) The City Council shall vote to approve, to approve with conditions, or to
deny any application for the demolition of any building, in whole or in part,
listed on the Landmark and Historic Resources Map.
(d) The City Council, in determining whether or not to certify to the
appropriateness of the demolition of any building, in whole or in part, shall
consider the effect which the proposed change will have upon the general
historic and architectural nature of surrounding area and the City as a whole.
(e) Upon approval of the proposed demolition, the City Council shall issue a
resolution authorizing the issuance of a demolition permit for the approved
activity to the Building Official.
(f) Disapproval by City Council shall be in writing, stating reasons therefore,
and a copy of the disapproval shall be given to the applicant, the Building
Official, the Historic Officer, PHMC and the Historic Conservation
Commission.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
160
(g) The City Council shall consider recommendations of additions of landmarks
to the official Landmark and Historic Resources Map as forwarded by the
Historic Conservation Commission.
1321.07 Demolition Applications
(a) Any demolition as defined in Section 1321.02(b)(5) visible from the public
way within any site listed on the Landmark and Historic Resources Map
requiring the issuance of a demolition permit by the Building Official in
accordance with the City Building Code, shall require approval by City
Council as described in this Section 1321, except that demolition of
accessory structures with footprints less than 100 square feet shall be exempt
from the provisions of this Ordinance. As described in the definition section
of this ordinance, the permanent removal of character-defining architectural
elements, including, but not limited to, porches and porticos are also defined
as demolition and require review as described in this section.
(b) Applications for demolition permits shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) photographs of the building, structure, or part thereof proposed for
demolition;
(2) photographic evidence and written description of the deteriorated
condition of the building or structure;
(3) reason(s) for the demolition;
(4) explanation why rehabilitation, reuse, plan alteration, or stabilization
with the intent to market and sell the property is not feasible or
desirable;
(5) proposed future use of the lot or part thereof occupied by the building
or structure proposed for demolition and timeline for implementation
of proposed future use; and
(6) statement on disposition of architectural features/ building materials.
(c) The demolition of any Landmark listed on the official Landmark or Historic
Resources Map shall be considered a last resort, only after the applicant can
either:
(1) Demonstrate that no other viable alternatives for reuse of the building
exist. Documentation shall be detailed and comprehensive and
completed by a professional in the field of real estate or development.
This demonstration shall include:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
161
(I) Detailed analysis of the building's adaptive re-use feasibility,
(II) Tangible evidence that no feasible re-use has been found
within an 18-month period, and
(III) Tangible evidence that no sales or rentals have been possible
during an 18-month period of significant marketing.
(Amended 9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-21)
(2) Demonstrate that the there is unreasonable economic hardship.
(I) When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is made in
reference to demolition due to the effect of this Ordinance, the
owner of record must present evidence sufficient to prove that
as a result of the Commission's action, he/she is unable to
obtain a reasonable return or a reasonable beneficial use from
the property and that unreasonable economic hardship is not
self-imposed. The owner of record shall submit by affidavit
to the Commission some or all of the information below, at the
discretion of the Commission, which shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(i) Form of ownership or operation of the property,
whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or nonprofit
corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
(ii) Date property was acquired by current owner.
(iii) Name and address of previous owner.
(iv) Purchase price.
(v) Current equity in the property.
(vi) All appraisals and/or market value analyses obtained
within the previous two years by the owner or
applicant in connection with purchase, offering for
sale, financing or ownership of the property, or for
other purposes. If none were previously prepared, a
current appraisal or market value analysis shall be
required.
(vii) The Commission may require that an applicant furnish
additional information relevant to its determination of
unreasonable economic hardship.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
162
(viii) The Commission may require and consider studies and
economic analyses relating to the property in question.
(ix) Should the Commission determine that the owner's
present return is not reasonable, it must consider
whether there are other uses currently allowed that
would provide a reasonable return and whether such a
return could be obtained through investment in the
property for rehabilitation purposes. The Commission
may choose to recommend to the City Council and
City Administration that special economic incentives
be developed to assist the owner in maintaining the
property and obtaining a suitable economic return or
achieving a reasonable beneficial use.
(x) Should the applicant prove to the satisfaction of the
Commission that he/she will suffer an unreasonable
economic hardship if a demolition permit is not
approved, and should the Commission be unable to
develop with the City Council or Administration a
solution which can relieve the owner's economic
hardship, the Commission may recommend approval
of a demolition permit.
(d) No building shall be demolished until a land development review of any
proposed new buildings or other use for the lot has been conducted and
approved by the Planning Commission.
(e) In cases where applications for proposed demolition occur, the Historic
Commission may recommend to the Council that the proposed demolition be
postponed for a period not to exceed nine months. The moving of a building
shall be encouraged as an alternative to demolition if there is no other way to
preserve the building. Any matter of immediate threat to health and safety
shall override any postponement of demolition.
(f) Demolition by Neglect - All buildings and structures listed as a Landmark in
the City of Bethlehem shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound
and reasonably protected against decay and deterioration. All buildings and
structures shall be maintained to meet at least the minimum requirements of
the most recently adopted edition of the Property Maintenance Code. Any
condition existing at a Landmark building or structure that does not meet the
minimum requirement of the Property Maintenance Code shall be considered
a violation of both the Property Maintenance Code and this Landmarks and
Historic Resources ordinance. Examples of such deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports,
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members,
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
163
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys,
(4) Deterioration of crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar,
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or foundations,
including broken windows or doors,
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that a demolition is necessary for the
public safety.
1321.08 Application Review Procedure
(a) The applicant shall submit a completed application for a permit for any
demolition, in whole or in part, for any site listed on the Landmark and
Historic Resources Map to the Building Official.
(b) Following the submission, the Historic Officer shall review each application,
field inspect the property, consult with the applicant, if necessary, and
prepare a written recommendation to the Historic Conservation Commission
and applicant.
(c) At the time of application, the owner of record or his/her representative shall
be advised of the time and place of the Commission meeting when his/her
application will be considered and shall be advised that his/her or said
representative's attendance at the meeting is required.
(d) The Historic Conservation Commission shall render a decision and
recommendation on any application no later than 60 days after the filing of a
complete application, unless an extension of time is granted.
(e) Upon the Commission's rendering a decision, the Historic Officer shall
submit the Commission's recommendation to the Council in time for action at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(f) If the City Council approves the application, with any conditions
recommended by the Commission, it shall issue a resolution authorizing the
Building Official to issue a demolition permit for the work covered pursuant
to those conditions.
(g) If City Council disapproves, written reason(s) shall be given to the Building
Official, the applicant and the Historic Officer.
(h) Upon receipt of a written disapproval of the City Council, the Building
Official shall disapprove the application for a demolition permit and so
advise the applicant. The applicant may appeal this disapproval to the County
Court of Common Pleas within the time specified by law.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
164
(i) In either case of approval or disapproval, the City Council shall notify the
applicant of its decision within thirty (30) days of its meeting at which the
application was considered.
1321.09 Notice of Violation.
The Building Official shall serve notice of violation on the property owner of record
for any demolition, in whole or in part, demolition by neglect or for work done
contrary to the work authorized by any building permit issued pursuant to this
Section 1321.
1321.10 Enforcement
The Building Official or his designated representative shall have the power to
institute any proceedings at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this
Ordinance. If an existing building or structure has been demolished in violation of
the provisions of this Ordinance, no City of Bethlehem permit shall be issued for five
years from the date of notice of violation.
1321.99 Penalty
Any person, property owner, occupant, firm or contractor violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction therefore, be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500), for each offense thereafter, together with costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not more than
ninety days. Each day of violation as to any section of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Entire Article 1321 Added April 17, 2013 Ord. 2013-12)
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1321
165
Table 1
Identified Historic Resources (Final Reading - 4/16/2013)
Sufficiently Documented
Each of the resources listed in this cluster meet local criteria for individual landmark and/or historic
district protection. There is also sufficient documentation to support the designation of each
resource.
Name Location
1. Bethlehem Silk Mill* (1) 238 W Goepp Street
2. Odd Fellows Building (Farr’s Building)* 2 W Broad Street
3. Union Bank & Trust Building 52 W Broad Street
4. Siegfried Pharmacy (Ambre Studio) 310 W Broad Street
5. Burnside Plantation* Schoenersville Rd at Monocacy Creek
6. Floyd Simons Armory* (1) 301 Prospect Avenue
7. Bethlehem Foundry & Machine Co 225 W 2nd Street
(Weldship)* (1)
8. Bethlehem Steel Plant #2 (Johnson 11 West 2nd Street
Machine Shop) *
9. Illick’s Mill/Monocacy Park* 100 Illick’s Mill Road
10. Liberty High School* (1) (3) 1115 Linden Street
11. Saucon Park (scenic)* Fire Lane
12. Holy Ghost Catholic Church (2) 417 Carlton Avenue
13. Fritz Memorial United Methodist Church (2) 468 Montclair Avenue
14. Monoquacy Church, Altonah Church (2) 902 Macada Road
15. St. Peter’s Lutheran Church (2) 472 Vine Street
16. Packer Memorial Church* (2) 18 University Drive
17. St. Joseph Roman Catholic Slovenian Church (2) 413 East 5th Street
18. Saints Cyril & Methodius Church (2) 617 Pierce Street
19. St. Stanislaus Polish Church (2) 419-429 Hayes Street
20. St. John Capistrano Church (2) 910 E 4th Street
21. Christ Lutheran Church (2) Easton Road, RD #5
22. St. Nicholas Russian Orthodox Church (2) E 6th Street
23. Elmwood Park Historic District*
24. Pembroke Village Historic District*
* Eligible or listed on the National Register of Historic Places
(1) The ordinance only applies to the main building on the site. Accessory buildings or later additions are not
included in this ordinance.
(2) The ordinance applies only to the main church building. Accessory buildings, rectories, or church school
buildings are not included.
(3) The ordinance only applies to the Liberty High School Original Commons Building constructed in 1922.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
166
ARTICLE 1322
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES
1322.01 Purposes
This Article lists additional requirements for certain uses that are either permitted by right or special
exception uses.
1322.02 Procedure for Uses Required to Undergo Planning Commission Site Plan Review
(a) Applicability.
(1) A Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Bureau for review by City
Staff. The plan may be forwarded to the City Planning Commission where the
matter involves one or more of the following:
(i) Another section of this Ordinance requires a City Planning Commission site
plan review.
(ii) The project will involve a special exception application or use variance for a
new principal non-residential or multi-family building.
(iii) The project will involve the addition of 10 or more off-street parking spaces.
(iv) The project will involve 10,000 square feet or greater of new principal nonresidential
building space.
(v) Other projects that the Planning Bureau Staff determine may have significant
impacts upon an adjacent neighborhood.
(2) Such site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer at the same time as an
application is made to the Zoning Hearing Board for such matter. Whenever
feasible, such review should occur prior to a Zoning Hearing Board hearing on such
matter.
(3) The City Planning Commission may then forward its review to the Zoning Officer,
including comments for use in preparing any Zoning Hearing Board notice. The
Planning Commission may recommend conditions for approval that should be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board and/or may recommend disapproval. This
provision is set forth because of the considerable impacts that these land uses may
have upon the community. The plan review is intended to emphasize layout, traffic
and neighborhood compatibility issues, as opposed to the engineering details
required under any later subdivision or land development plan process. This process
enables both the City and applicant to uncover any matters which may impact
feasibility.
(b) The applicant shall submit an accurate site plan showing existing and proposed
development for review by the City Staff and the City Planning Commission. This
review process should occur prior to formal review of a subdivision and land development
plan.
(c) Procedure.
(1) Site plans are not required at this stage to be a fully engineered land development
plan. Site Plans shall include the following information:
(i) A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
167
(ii) A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet showing
the location, dimensions, and height of proposed buildings, structures, or uses
and any existing buildings in relation to property and street lines. If the
application relates to property which is scheduled to be developed in successive
stages, such plans shall show the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
(iii) Proposed parking areas, aisles and vehicle access points onto streets.
(d) Plan Review Criteria. The City Planning Commission shall use the following criteria
when reviewing all sketch-type plans:
(1) Preservation of Natural Features. Insofar as practical, natural features on the site
shall be preserved. See Articles 1316, 1317 and other natural feature provisions.
(2) Building Arrangement. Elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and
efficiently organized in relation to existing desirable trees, topography, views within
and beyond the site, the size and shape of the site, the character of adjoining property
and the size of the buildings.
(3) Access, Parking and Circulation. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, special attention shall be given to location and number of access points to
public streets, width of interior drives and access points, on-site circulation,
separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and arrangement and location of
parking areas. The need for adequate signalization, channelization, and other traffic
control measures shall be given consideration.
(4) Utilities. Electric and telephone lines shall be underground where practical. Any
utility installations remaining above ground shall be located so as to have a
harmonious relation to neighboring properties and the site.
(5) Special Features. Setbacks, buffer yard and other screening methods shall be
carefully considered to minimize the visual effect of exposed storage area, exposed
machinery installations, service areas, truck loading area, utility buildings and
structures, and similar accessory areas and structures.
1322.03 Additional Requirements for Certain Uses.
The following uses shall meet the following additional requirements, in addition to all other
applicable requirements. Where this Article and another provision of this Ordinance apply to the
exact same matter, the provision that is most restrictive upon development or use shall apply. See
also the Site Plan Review Criteria in Section 1322.02.
(a) Adult Day Care Center.
(1) Shall be fully licensed by the State, if required by the State.
(2) Shall include constant supervision during all hours of operation.
(3) Shall not meet the definition of a "treatment facility".
(b) Adult Oriented Establishments and Massage Parlors.
(1) Purposes - To serve the intent and respond to the findings provided in Title 68, Part
II, Subpart E, Chapter 55 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended,
which are hereby included by reference. To serve the overall objectives of this
Ordinance, and the following purposes:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
168
(i) To recognize the adverse secondary impacts of Adult Oriented Establishments
that affect health, safety and general welfare concerns of the City. These
secondary impacts have been documented in research conducted across the
nation. These secondary impacts typically include, but are not limited to:
increases in criminal activity, increases in activities that increase the risk of
transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, increases in activities that
increase the risk of transmission of other communicable diseases, increases in
blight, decreases in the stability of residential neighborhoods, and decreases in
property values for surrounding homes, and decreases in the marketability of
nearby commercial business space. The research conducted across the nation
concludes that Adult Oriented Establishments typically involve insufficient selfregulation
to control these secondary effects.
(ii) To limit Adult Oriented Establishments to locations where these secondary
impacts can be minimized, particularly as they affect residential neighborhoods
and commercial revitalization.
(iii) To not attempt to suppress any activities protected by the "free speech"
protections of the State and U.S. Constitutions, but instead to control secondary
effects.
(2) The building housing an Adult Oriented Establishment or Massage Parlor shall not
be located within 1,000 lineal feet of another Adult Oriented Establishment or
Massage Parlor.
(3) The lot line of a lot occupied by an Adult Oriented Establishment or Massage Parlor
shall be located a minimum of the following distances:
(i) 1,000 feet from a residential zoning district or the lot line of an Elementary or
Secondary School,
(ii) 500 feet from the lot line of a lot occupied by any of the following uses: Church,
Synagogue, Mosque or Similar Place of Regularly Scheduled Religious
Worship; Library, Child Day Care Center or Nursery School; Public Park or
Playground; or Existing Dwelling Unit.
(iii) The setbacks for an Adult Oriented Establishment shall also apply from
dwellings, uses and residential districts located in an adjacent municipality.
(4) No Adult Oriented Establishment shall be located within 5,000 lineal feet from the
lot line of any Licensed Gaming Facility or the lot line of any location where a
Licensed Gaming Facility is under official State consideration for a license under the
Pennsylvania Race Horse Development and Gaming Act.
(5) A 50 feet buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning district, along the side
and rear lot lines. If such buffer area does not include substantial mature trees that
will be preserved, it shall include continuous screening by evergreen trees with an
initial height of 5 feet.
(6) No pornographic material, displays, signs or words shall be placed in view of persons
who are not inside of the establishment. Definite precautions shall be made to
prohibit minors from entering the premises.
(7) No Adult Oriented Establishment shall be used for any purpose that violates any
Federal, State or municipal law.
(8) The Adult Oriented Establishment shall not include the sale or display of "obscene"
materials, as defined by Pennsylvania criminal law, as may be amended by
applicable Court decisions.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
169
(9) An Adult Oriented Establishment shall be prohibited in all Districts except as a
special exception use in the HI District. An Adult Oriented Establishment is a
distinct use, and shall not be allowed under any other use, such as a retail store or
club.
(10) A minimum lot area of 1 acre is required.
(11) For public health reasons, private booths of any kind are prohibited. This specifically
includes, but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude dancers.
(12) No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts nor any physical or sexual
contact between employees and entertainers or between employees or entertainers
and customers. At an Adult Oriented Establishment involving "live entertainment",
employees or entertainers shall maintain a minimum distance of 3 feet from
customers. This shall include, but not be limited to, a prohibition on "lap dancing".
(13) Only "lawful" massages as defined by State court decisions shall be performed in a
Massage Parlor.
(14) Any application for an Adult Oriented Entertainment use shall state the names and
business addresses of: a) all individuals intended to have more than a 5 percent
ownership in such use or in a corporation owning such use and b) an on-site manager
responsible to ensure compliance with this Ordinance on a daily basis. A telephone
number shall be provided where the on-site manager can be reached during City
business hours. Such information shall be updated at the beginning of each year in
writing to the Zoning Officer.
(15) The use shall not operate between the hours of 1 a.m. and 7 a.m.
(16) As specific conditions of approval under this Ordinance, the applicant shall prove
compliance, where applicable, with the following State laws, as amended: the
Pennsylvania Liquor Code, Act 219 of 1990 (which pertains to sale or consumption
of alcohol between 2 a.m. and 8 a.m.), Act 207 of 1990 (which pertains to obscenity)
and Act 120 of 1996 (which pertains to Adult-Oriented Establishments and which
limits enclosed viewing booths among other matters), as amended.
(17) An Adult Oriented Establishment shall not be on the same lot as a use that sells
alcoholic beverages.
(18) All Adult Oriented Establishments shall require a Zoning Permit and a Certificate of
Occupancy from the City before being open for business.
(c) After Hours Club. This use is effectively prohibited by State Act 219 of 1990, as amended
(Section 7327 of Title 18 of the Pennsylvania Statutes). In the event that the use would be
determined to be allowed, a 200 feet setback shall apply from the building and any
parking areas from any residential zoning district. The applicant shall prove that adequate
on-site security will be in place. See also the BYOB regulations.
(d) Airport. The applicant shall prove that applicable reviews and approvals by appropriate
Federal and State agencies will be met.
(e) Auto, Boat or Mobile/ Manufactured Home Sales.
(1) No vehicle, boat or home on display shall occupy any part of the street right-of-way
or required customer parking area.
(2) Any mobile/manufactured homes on a sales site shall meet the required principal
building setbacks.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
170
(f) Auto Repair Garage or Auto Body Shop.
(1) All paint work shall be performed within a building, with a fume collection and
ventilation system that directs fumes away from any adjacent dwellings. Outdoor
major repairs (such as body work and grinding) and outdoor welding shall not occur
within 200 feet of a lot line of a principal dwelling.
(2) Outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall not be within any required buffer yard
or street right-of-way.
(3) Any "junk vehicle" shall not be stored for more than 30 days within view of a public
street or a dwelling, unless it is actively under repair.
(4) Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting dwelling (not including
a dwelling separated from the garage by a street) if another reasonable alternative
exits.
(5) A new use shall have sufficient off-street parking for customer vehicles.
(g) Bed and Breakfast Inn.
(1) No more than 5 rooms may be offered for rent in a residential district.
(2) The bed and breakfast must be in an existing structure and not a new structure or
outbuilding.
(3) In a residential district, the only meal to be served is breakfast and to lodgers of the
bed and breakfast exclusively.
(4) Signs shall conform to Section 1320.08(a)(2), in a residential district.
(5) No exterior structural alteration of the building shall be made except as may be
necessary for purposes of sanitation, handicapped accessibility, historic rehabilitation
or safety.
(6) The bed and breakfast must meet all City requirements for health, fire, and building
safety.
(7) The bed and breakfast must be in operation a minimum of 6 months per year.
(8) The maximum uninterrupted length of stay shall be fourteen (14) days.
(h) Boarding House (includes Rooming House).
(1) Minimum lot area- 15,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum side yard building setback - 15 feet each side
(3) Maximum density- 3,000 square feet of lot area per rental unit.
(4) See occupancy limits in the Property Maintenance Code.
(5) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of 5 consecutive days.
(i) B.Y.O.B. Club.
(1) The provisions of Article 736 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
shall apply, including but not limited to, limits on hours of operation and minimum
setbacks from residential districts and certain uses.
(2) A B.Y.O.B. Club that is open after 2 AM is also effectively prohibited by State Act
219 of 1990, as amended (Section 7327 of Title 18 of the Pennsylvania Statutes).
(3) A B.Y.O.B. Club shall only be allowed in a zoning district where such use is
specifically listed in this Zoning Ordinance as being allowed.
(j) Car Wash.
(1) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be clearly marked.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
171
(2) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and convenient disposal of refuse.
The applicant shall provide evidence that adequate measures will be in place to
prevent pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or waterways. Any
chemicals or polluted runoff that may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored
within an area that will completely contain any leaks, spills or polluted runoff.
(3) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto sidewalks or streets in such a
manner as could cause ice hazards.
(4) Any car wash that is located within 250 feet of an existing dwelling shall not operate
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(k) Cemetery.
(1) Minimum lot area - five (5) acres. Any building or area used for storage of
equipment shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any lot in a residential
district.
(2) A plan shall be submitted which, in general, shall conform to all the requirements of
a subdivision plan, except that individual lots need not be shown. No plan shall be
acceptable which does not provide for the continuation of existing streets or of streets
already projected or shown on a part of a comprehensive plan for all or a portion of
the City, unless a study by the City Planning Commission shows that certain streets
may be modified or eliminated. Land for required streets shall be dedicated by such
plan.
(3) No grave sites shall be placed within 20 feet of any lot line or within 20 feet of a
street right-of-way or an interior driveway through the cemetery.
(4) The applicant shall submit draft legal provisions for review by the City Solicitor to
show that an acceptable system will be in place to assure the long-term maintenance
of the cemetery.
(l) Check Cashing Business.
(1) The building area occupied by a Check Cashing Business shall not be located within:
(i) 1,000 feet from the closest building area occupied by another Check Cashing
Business or
(ii) 5,000 feet from the lot line of a Licensed Gaming Facility.
(m) Commercial Communications Tower or Antennae.
(1) Purposes - The purpose of these regulations is to minimize the number of new
commercial communication towers through encouraging co-location of commercial
communication antennas, to ensure that new towers will be safe and be placed in
suitable locations, and to help ensure that municipal land use regulations are in
compliance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
(2) Definitions
(i) Cellular Telephone - A system providing portable telephone service to specific
subscribers. A cellular telephone may also be referred to as a wireless telephone.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
172
(ii) Commercial Communications Antenna - Any device used for the transmission
or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pacer, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including without
limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas, and directional or panel antennas,
owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This definition
shall not include private residence mounted satellite dishes or television
antennas or amateur radio equipment including without limitation ham or citizen
band radio antennas.
(iii) Commercial Communications Tower - A structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
commercial communication antennas.
(iv) Fall Zone - The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a
commercial communications tower. The fall zone is the area within which there
is a potential hazard from falling debris or the collapsing of the commercial
communications tower. The fall zone shall be determined by the applicant's
engineer and subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
(v) Height of Tower - The overall height of the tower from the base of the tower to
the highest point of the tower, including, but not limited to, antennas,
transmitters, satellite dishes or any other structures affixed to or otherwise
placed on the tower. If the base of the tower is not on ground level, the height of
the tower shall include the base of the building or structure to which the tower is
attached.
(vi) Public Utility Transmission Tower - A structure, owned and operated by a
public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity transmission
lines.
(3) District Requirements
(i) Commercial communication towers shall not be permitted in any residential
zoning district.
(ii) Commercial communication towers shall not be permitted within 100 feet of
any residential zoning district.
(iii) After review and approval of a site plan by the City Planning Commission,
commercial communication towers may be permitted in any commercial,
institutional or industrial district.
(iv) After approval by the Chief Building Inspector commercial communication
antennas shall be permitted by right in any zoning district if placed on an
existing commercial communications tower, public utility transmission tower or
any other structure at least 60 feet high.
(v) Commercial communication antennas that are located within an existing
structure shall be excluded from the heights requirements of paragraph (4)
above.
(4) Special Requirements.
(i) Site Plan - A site plan for any proposed commercial communications tower shall
be prepared by the applicant and submitted to the City Planning Commission for
review in accordance with all applicable zoning and subdivision and
development ordinance regulations.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
173
(ii) Setback - A commercial communications tower shall be set back from all
property lines the most restrictive of the following: a minimum distance equal to
1/2 (one-half) its height or a distance equal to the commercial communications
tower fall zone.
(iii) Fence - The base of a commercial communications tower shall be surrounded by
a secure fence with a minimum height of 8 feet.
(iv) Landscaping - Evergreen plantings shall be required to screen the fence
surrounding the tower and any other ground level features such as a building or
parking area. The evergreen screen shall be a minimum of 6 feet high at
planting with an expectation to grow to a minimum of 15 feet high at maturity.
At the discretion of the City Planning Commission, the landscaping requirement
may be altered or waived in an Industrial District.
(v) Parking - A minimum of 2 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a
commercial communications tower.
(vi) Wind Resistance - For any commercial communications tower or antenna higher
than 50 feet, the applicant shall provide, at the time of applying for a building
permit, certification from a registered professional engineer as to the overall
structural integrity of the tower and that the tower or antenna meets the wind
resistance requirements stated in the latest version of the Uniform Construction
Codes.
(vii) Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
(a) The applicant shall provide documentation of FAA approval for
commercial communication towers or antennas exceeding two (2) hundred
feet in height. Commercial communication towers or antennas less than
200 feet in height shall meet the requirements of 14 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 77.13(a), as amended (copy attached).
(b) No commercial communications tower or antenna shall be artificially
lighted except when required and approved by the FAA.
(viii) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (Aviation)
(a) The applicant shall provide documentation of PennDOT Bureau of
Aviation approval for commercial communication towers or antennas in
accordance with P.L. 837, No. 164 and Title 67 PA Code Chapter 479,
Section 479.4.
(b) No commercial communications tower or antenna shall be artificially
lighted except when required and approved by PennDOT Bureau of
Aviation.
(ix) Airport Coordination - The applicant for a proposed commercial
communications tower or antenna, located within a 5 mile radius of an existing
or planned airport, will notify the airport manager in writing of its intent to
place such structures. If, in the judgment of the airport manager, the proposed
structure should be marked and/or lighted, the applicant will comply with the
finding of the airport manager. Such findings will supersede findings issued by
the FAA or PennDOT that do not require marking or lighting. Any marking or
lighting required by the airport manager shall be consistent with FAA advisory
circulars in effect at the time.
(x) Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
(a) The commercial communications company shall provide documentation
that it is licensed by the FCC.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
174
(b) Whenever applicable, the applicant shall provide documentation that the
FCC has approved the proposed commercial communications tower or
antenna.
(c) Whenever applicable, the applicant shall provide documentation that the
proposed commercial communications tower or antenna complies with all
applicable standards established by the FCC governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
(xi) Documentation of Need - The commercial communications company shall
demonstrate, using technological evidence, that in order to satisfy its functional
requirements, the tower and/or antenna must go where it is proposed. Also, if a
tower is proposed, that there are no existing structures within 1/4 mile of the site
on which to place the antenna.
(xii) Removal of Commercial Communication Towers and Antennas - If a
commercial communications tower and/or antenna remains unused for a period
of 12 consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove the
tower and/or antenna within 6 months of notice to do so by the City. In addition,
all portions of the base that are at or above the existing grade shall be
demolished and removed from the site. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
by the City, the applicant shall post security in a form acceptable to the City
Solicitor favoring the City in an amount to cover the costs of tower and/or
antenna removal and site clean-up. The security shall be utilized by the City in
the event that the owner or operator of the facility fails to remove the tower
and/or antenna within 6 months of notification by the City.
(n) Community Recreation Center. A 10 feet minimum width buffer yard, in accordance with
the provisions of Section 1318.23, shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines
adjacent to any lot in a residential district. This provision shall not apply to a community
center that serves a single residential development.
(o) Conversion of any single family dwelling to additional numbers of dwelling units.
(1) One dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 700 square feet of habitable floor area
and all additional dwelling units shall have minimum habitable floor areas according
to the following standards:
Type of Unit Square feet
One-bedroom 500
Two-bedroom 700
Three-bedroom 900
(2) Each dwelling unit, after conversion, shall contain within the unit complete kitchen,
toilet and bathing facilities.
(3) This use shall not be permitted unless the property owner provides the entire building
for inspection by City Codes Enforcement officials to inspect the entire building for
compliance with City codes, prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
(4) The yard, building area, and other applicable requirements for the district shall not be
reduced. The same minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be met as if the building
would be newly constructed with the proposed number of dwelling units.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
175
(5) No exterior structural alteration of the building shall be made, except as may be
necessary for purposes of sanitation, safety or historic rehabilitation.
(6) Such conversion shall be authorized only for a large pre-existing detached or semidetached
building. If the building is currently a one family dwelling, it shall not be
converted to two or more dwelling units unless the building included more than
3,000 square feet of habitable floor area prior to the enactment of this Ordinance.
(7) Plans showing the proposed rearrangement of the interior of the building and
provisions for off-street parking space, including the proposed entrance and exit to
such parking spaces, shall be provided.
(8) All parking requirements shall be met for the total number of dwelling units.
(9) In accordance with Article 1347.10 of the City of Bethlehem Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, as amended, every newly created residential unit shall pay
a recreation fee in accordance with the City of Bethlehem fee schedule. (Amended 9-
17-13 by Ordinance 2013-22)
(p) Crematorium. A crematorium as a principal use shall be setback a minimum of 200 feet
from all lot lines of existing dwellings and all undeveloped residentially zoned lots.
(q) Day Care Center (Child).
(1) As accessory uses, a separate set of standards apply under "Day Care: Family Day
Care Home or Group Day Care Home."
(2) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal regulations, including
having an appropriate State Department of Public Welfare (or its successor agency)
registration certificate or license as applicable.
(3) A day care center shall have a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet and a minimum
setback of 10 feet from an abutting single family dwelling.
(4) The use shall include secure fencing around any outdoor play area.
(5) Outdoor play areas of a day care center involving the care of 25 or more children at
any one time shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the exterior walls of an
abutting existing dwelling.
(6) A principal "Place of Worship" may also include a day care center as an adjunct use.
(7) In the C-B District, a safe and convenient off-street drop off and pick up area shall be
provided on the same lot as the day care center or on an abutting property.
(r) Day Care, Child: Group or Family Day Care Home.
(1) These uses shall only be permitted as accessory uses to a dwelling unit.
(2) See the definitions concerning the number of children who can be cared for in
different zoning districts in a Family Day Care Home or a Group Day Care Home.
(3) The number of children shall apply in addition to children who are "related" to the
primary caregiver. A Group Day Care Home involving 7 to 12 children at one time
must be conducted within a single family detached dwelling located on a property
with a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet. A Family Day Care Home involving 4
to 6 children cared for at one time shall only be allowed within a single family
dwelling.
(4) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no change to the exterior of
the dwelling unit to accommodate the use, other that cosmetic and safety
improvements or historic rehabilitation.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
176
(5) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of the dwelling.
(6) If 7 or more children are cared for, then a minimum of 200 square feet of fenced in
exterior play area shall be available or be within 400 feet of an outdoor play area that
is available for use by the day care facility.
(7) Child Day Care is also allowed within a Place of Worship.
(8) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal regulations, including
having an appropriate State Department of Public Welfare (or its successor agency)
registration certificate or license if required by such agency.
(9) The use shall include a secure fence around any outdoor areas that are routinely used
for outdoor play.
(10) Where permitted as a special exception, Group Day Care Homes shall be required to
install a solid fence or buffer strip, if deemed necessary by the Zoning Hearing
Board, to prevent the use from being detrimental to surrounding property.
(11) The applicant shall describe methods that will be used to contain and dispose of used
diapers in a sanitary manner that will not create nuisances for neighbors.
(12) The use shall provide for a convenient and safe pick-up and drop-off area for
children.
(s) Drive-through Facilities in conjunction with an allowed commercial use.
(1) The proposed traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards on
adjacent streets.
(2) On-lot traffic circulation and parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(3) A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an adequate number of waiting
vehicles while avoiding conflicts with traffic onto, around and off of the site. Any
drive-through facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts with pedestrian
traffic.
(4) A drive-through window shall not be placed on a wall of building that faces onto a
public street. To the maximum extent feasible, drive-through windows shall be
placed to the rear of the building, with a location to the side of the building being
used if the rear is not feasible. The design of the drive-through shall be subject to site
plan review by the City Planning Commission.
(5) Any ordering area for a drive-through facility for a restaurant shall be setback a
minimum of 100 feet from any existing principal dwelling, unless a stricter
requirement is established by another provision of this Ordinance. The applicant for a
drive-through facility shall control the volume of any loudspeaker and/or use
setbacks or acoustic barriers so that the loudspeaker cannot be heard from a dwelling.
(6) Restaurants with drive-through service are prohibited in the CB and CL districts.
(7) To the maximum extent feasible, vehicle access for drive-through facilities shall
enter or exit using an alley or a low-traffic street.
(t) Forestry.
(1) A soil and erosion conservation plan shall be prepared and submitted if the forestry
involves removal of the majority of the trees on an area of greater than one acre.
(2) Unless a stricter provision applies under subsection (3), if forestry involves more
than one acre, a maximum of 50 percent of the total tree canopy cover shall be
removed from areas within any 3 year period, except for tree removal that is
necessary as part of a City-approved development.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
177
(3) Any forestry that is proposed within 100 feet from the center of a perennial creek or
on slopes of greater than 25 percent shall be limited to removal of a maximum of 25
percent of the total tree canopy within any 3 year period. See steep slope regulations
in Article 1308.
(u) Funeral Home.
(1) Signs shall be limited to one identification sign for each street frontage, provided that
the area on either side of such sign shall not exceed 6 square feet in a residential
district.
(2) A parking lot shall not be located between the principal building and the front of the
lot.
(3) Any crematorium as an accessory use shall also meet the regulations for such use in
this Section.
(v) Gas Station.
(1) Any "junk vehicle" shall not be stored more than 30 days within view of a public
street or a dwelling, unless it is actively under repair.
(2) The use may include a "convenience store" if the requirements for such use are also
met.
(3) A canopy shall be permitted over the gasoline pumps with a minimum front yard
setback of 20 feet from each street or alley right-of-way line. Such canopy may be
attached to the principal building. An allowed wall sign may be placed on a portion
of the canopy that is behind the minimum front yard setback line.
(4) Fuel dispensers shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from the existing street rightof-
way line and from any lot line of a lot occupied by a residential use.
(5) The canopy over gasoline pumps shall have a maximum height from the ground to
the top of the canopy of 20 feet, except for portions of the canopy that are sloped to
direct light away from streets and dwellings.
(6) Lights attached to the bottom of the canopy shall be recessed, angled or screened so
that the luminaire itself is not visible from beyond the lot lines.
(w) Greenhouse, Commercial.
(1) All products for sale shall be kept enclosed within a building except plants.
(2) Minimum lot size - 2 acres within a residential district.
(3) All front, side, and rear yard minimum setbacks shall be double those of the district
for single family detached dwellings within a residential district.
(4) The sale of trees or shrubs for replanting or Christmas trees is not regulated by this
Ordinance provided the trees or shrubs were primarily grown on the premises.
(5) This use shall not be allowed in a residential district, except in the RR district
adjacent to an arterial street.
(x) Group Home (not including a Temporary Shelter or Treatment Center).
(1) The site shall be convenient to those support facilities that are essential to the
functioning of the specific facility. These may include mass transportation, medical,
educational, recreational, job training, social service, and/or other facilities being
necessary for the particular use.
(2) Each site shall be:
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
178
(i) Approved for all applicable Federal, State, County and City licenses and
permits.
(ii) Operated so that all medical counseling or other services shall be provided for
the sole benefit of those persons residing in the facility.
(iii) Subject to providing a minimum one off-street parking space per employee for
the maximum number of employees on any one shift, plus the parking required
for the dwelling unit, plus additional parking as may be required by the Zoning
Hearing Board if the application comes before such Board.
(3) A Group Home shall include the housing of a maximum of 5 unrelated persons,
except:
(i) if a more restrictive requirement is established by the Property Maintenance
Code or another City Code;
(ii) the number of bona fide paid professional staff shall not count towards such
maximum; and
(iii) as may be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board under Section 1325.07(d).
See the definition of “Treatment Center.”
(4) The facility shall have adequate trained staff supervision for the number and type of
residents. If the staffing of the facility has been approved by a State or County
human service agency, then this requirement shall have been deemed to be met.
(5) The Group Home shall register in writing its location, general type of treatment/care,
maximum number of residents and sponsoring agency with the Zoning Officer.
(6) Any staff meetings shall be limited to a maximum of 4 persons at one time.
(7) If a Group Home is in a residential district, an appearance shall be maintained that is
closely similar to nearby dwellings, and no sign shall identify the use.
(8) The persons living on-site shall function as a common household unit.
(y) Heliport.
(1) The applicant shall prove that the heliport has been located and designed to minimize
noise nuisances to other properties.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on the frequency of use, fueling
facilities, setbacks and hours of operation to minimize nuisances and hazards to other
properties. This provision shall not apply to any heliport used for medical and
emergency transport.
(z) Home Occupation (includes but is not limited to Home Offices) and Live Work Units.
The following provisions shall apply to a home occupation, provided that these provisions
are modified by subsection (20) below for a Live Work Unit.
(1) Such use shall be in the main building and/or one accessory building on the lot and
the total floor area of the use shall not exceed an area greater than 25 percent of the
habitable floor area of the main building.
(2) One accessory building may be used in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(3) The residential character of the building and lot shall be preserved.
(4) No more than one person who does not reside within the dwelling may be employed
on the premises, or use the property as a meeting place for the purpose of traveling to
a work site.
(5) Signage on the property shall be regulated in accordance with Sections 1320.08(a)(9)
and (12).
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
179
(6) If the use will include a non-resident employee, then an additional off-street parking
space shall be provided, in addition to the parking for the dwelling. If the use will
involve customers regularly visiting the property, then another additional off-street
parking space shall be provided.
(7) The nature of the services rendered shall be of that type which are primarily and
customarily provided to clients on an individual basis and by appointment only, or
off-site. The home occupation shall not advertise regular business hours, and shall
not encourage unscheduled customer visits.
(8) No retail sales shall be allowed on the property.
(9) Only minimum storage of supplies shall be allowed. No outside storage of supplies
shall be allowed on the property. There shall be no parking of equipment or storage
trailers, construction or landscaping equipment, cement mixers or other similar
equipment on the property.
(10) The use shall not include a biological or other medical testing laboratory.
(11) The use shall not require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
(12) No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that produces noise, noxious odor,
vibration, glare, electrical or electronic interference detectable on another property.
The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous, flammable or explosive
substances, other than types and amounts typically found on a residential property.
The use shall not involve the storage or use of "toxic" or "highly hazardous"
substances.
(13) A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner that is perceptible to other
residents between the hours of 9 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
(14) Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum of 3 students at a time.
(15) A barber, beauty shop or manicurist shall not include any non-resident employee(s).
(16) The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist shall not be permitted as
a home occupation. A funeral home shall not be allowed as a home occupation.
(17) The Zoning Hearing Board shall deny a Major Home Occupation application, or
limit its intensity through conditions, if the Board determines the use would be too
intense for the proposed location. In making such determination, the Board may
review such things as the likely amounts of traffic, the types of deliveries needed, the
types of operations involved and related nuisances, the amount of off-street and onstreet
parking that is available, the density of the neighborhood, whether the use
would be adjacent to another dwelling, and setbacks from other dwellings.
(18) The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of custom crafts and sewing. The
use shall not involve commercial repair of motor vehicles.
(19) In addition to the requirements listed above, the following additional requirements
shall apply to a "Minor Home Occupation:"
(i) The use shall not routinely involve routine daily visits to the home occupation
by customers.
(ii) The use shall only involve the following activities:
(a) work routinely conducted within an office,
(b) custom sewing and fabric and basket crafts,
(c) cooking and baking for off-site sales and use, (Note: Health Department
review may be required).
(d) creation of visual arts (such as painting or wood carving),
(e) repairs to and assembly of computers and computer peripherals, and
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
180
(f) a construction tradesperson, provided that no non-resident employees
routinely operate from the lot.
(20) Live Work Units. A Live Work Unit shall be allowed wherever a dwelling unit is
allowed in the CB, CL and IR-R districts. A Live Work Unit shall meet all of the
same regulations as a Home Occupation, except that the following standards are
modified:
(i) The use shall meet the definition of a “Live Work Unit” in Article 1302.
(ii) A Live Work Unit shall be allowed to have an area equal to 50 percent of the
habitable floor area of the dwelling unit used for the home occupation.
(iii) A Live Work Unit may have a 4 square foot wall sign, which shall not be
illuminated and which shall have a maximum height of 6 feet if it is
freestanding.
(iv) A Live Work Unit may involve occasional on-site retail sales of art that was
primarily produced on the premises.
(v) A Live Work Unit may include occasional exhibitions of the art provided that
requirements of the Construction Codes are met regarding the numbers of
persons who may be accommodated in the Unit.
(vi) A ceramic kiln shall be electrically powered, as opposed to directly burning its
own supply of fuel.
(vii) A maximum of 2 persons who do not reside within the dwelling may be
employed on the premises.
(aa) Hospital or Surgery Center or Related Testing and Treatment Facilities.
(1) Minimum lot area - 2 acres.
(2) Buildings and parking structures shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any lot
in a residential district that is occupied by a dwelling and is not owned by the
hospital.
(bb) Hotel or Motel. Tractor-trailer truck parking shall kept be a minimum of 50 feet from any
lot of a principal dwelling.
(cc) Junkyard. (includes automobile salvage yard).
(1) Storage of garbage or biodegradable material is prohibited, other than what is
customarily generated on-site and routinely awaiting pick-up.
(2) Outdoor storage of junk shall be at least: a) 100 feet from the lot of any dwelling, b)
40 feet from any other lot line and the right-of-way of any public street, c) 100 feet
from the centerline of any waterway, and d) 5 feet away from a drainage swale.
(3) The site shall contain a minimum of 2 exterior points of access, each of which is not
less than 20 feet in width. One of these accesses may be limited to emergency
vehicles. Cleared driveways with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided
throughout the entire use to allow access by emergency vehicles. Adequate off-street
parking areas shall be provided for customers.
(4) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at approved driveway
entrances) by a 40 foot wide buffer yard which complies with Section 1318.23,
unless such storage is not visible from an exterior lot line or street. The initial height
of the evergreen planting shall be 6 feet. Secure fencing with a minimum height of 8
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
181
feet shall be provided and well-maintained around all outdoor storage areas. Such fencing
shall be provided inside of the evergreen screening.
(5) Burning or incineration is prohibited.
(6) All gasoline, antifreeze and oil shall be drained from all vehicles and properly
disposed of. All batteries shall be removed from vehicles and properly stored in a
suitable area on an impervious and properly drained surface.
(dd) Kennel.
(1) All structures in which animals are housed (other than buildings that are completely
soundproofed and air conditioned) and all runs outside of buildings shall be located
at least 150 feet from lot lines of each existing dwelling. This 150 feet setback shall
be increased to 200 feet if more than 20 dogs are kept overnight on the lot, and be
increased to 250 feet if more than 50 dogs are kept overnight on the lot.
(2) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated within the
buildings cannot routinely be heard within any principal building on another lot.
(3) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 9 p.m. to 8 a.m. that are
within 250 feet of an existing dwelling.
(4) See also State Kennel regulations.
(ee) Licensed Gaming Facility. (These provisions shall also apply to surface parking areas that
serve such use)
(1) The applicant shall seek input from the local public bus service provider regarding
bus stops. Any transit shelter shall be placed such that it does not impede the normal
pedestrian functions of the sidewalk.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to public streets and from any adjacent arterial
street to a pedestrian entrance of the use. At least one ADA-accessible pedestrian
path shall be provided from a main pedestrian entrance through the main on-site
parking area. This pedestrian path shall be demarcated by pavement markings or
differing colors or materials and be separated from adjacent parking spaces by
curbing, curb stops or similar barriers.
(i) Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided in front of and along all public
pedestrian entrances to business buildings and all bus unloading locations.
Pedestrian routes and customer and employee parking areas shall be sufficiently
illuminated for safety and security. Pedestrian routes and sidewalks shall be a
minimum of 5 feet in width. Crosswalks shall be well-marked and be ADAaccessible.
(3) A landscaping plan shall be designed by a registered landscape architect.
(4) A minimum of 5 percent of the land area of off-street surface parking areas shall be
within interior islands landscaped with trees, shrubs and vegetative ground cover.
(5) The exterior design of the principal building as viewed from an adjacent arterial
street shall be of distinctive design. Exterior finished building materials visible from
an adjacent arterial street shall be of an enduring quality, such as glass, transparent
materials, brick, architectural masonry, architectural metal and materials of similar
quality.
(i) Prior to receiving final subdivision or land development approval, the applicant
shall submit a set of preliminary proposed architectural sketches and conceptual
sign designs (both wall and freestanding) to the City Planning Commission for
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
182
review and comment. Such drawings or sketches shall be prepared with the
involvement of a Registered Architect.
(ii) Architectural elements shall be used to reduce the visibility of roof mounted
mechanical equipment from adjacent public streets.
(6) A minimum of 10 percent of the total lot area shall be maintained in trees, shrubs,
vegetative ground cover and/or a landscaped pedestrian plaza with decorative paving
patterns, benches and/or preserved historic features. This 10 percent area may be
calculated based upon an entire tract, as opposed to each lot within a development
tract. Buffer yards may count towards this requirement.
(7) A row of trees, which may be staggered to allow room for future growth, shall be
placed between any on-street parking area and any adjacent perennial river.
(8) A minimum 10 feet wide landscaped planting area shall be located abutting any
public street. This planting area shall not be required where there is a change of
grade of more than 5 vertical feet immediately adjacent to the sidewalk. This
planting area may include a combination of land inside and outside of the right-ofway,
and areas between the curb and the sidewalk may count towards this width.
This planting area shall include shrubbery and other landscaping that is designed and
located to avoid conflicts with safe sight distances at intersections.
(9) All waste storage areas and tractor-trailer loading docks that are not within a building
shall not be located along a facade facing an adjacent arterial street.
(10) Utility service lines that serve the use shall be underground.
(11) The City encourages the use of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
concepts to help reduce the potential for criminal activity on site. In this regard, any
shrubbery within parking areas is encouraged to involve species with a mature height
of less than 3 feet, or regular trimming, to avoid obstruction of views of motorists
and pedestrians and to allow clear views for crime prevention. Fences, walls or
landscaping should be provided to prevent and /or discourage public access to or
from dark and/or unmonitored areas.
(12) With respect to any Lot which includes a Licensed Gaming Facility, the requirements
set forth for Shopping Centers in Section 1322 shall not apply.
(13) No licensed gaming facility shall be located within 2 miles of the property line of an
existing licensed gaming facility.
(ff) Massage Parlors. See Adult Oriented Facilities and Massage Parlors in this Section.
(gg) Meal Center.
(1) The use shall front on a collector, minor arterial or principal arterial street as indicated
on the City’s classified street map.
(2) No meal center shall be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of an emergency
shelter, substance abuse treatment facility, community corrections facility, or meal
center as measured from property lines.
(3) The meal center use shall not be operated so as to dominate the immediate vicinity or
to interfere with the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with
the applicable district regulations. In determining whether the proposed use will
dominate the immediate neighborhood, consideration shall be given to:
(a) The surrounding residential districts;
(b) The location, nature and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences
on site;
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
183
(c) The nature and extent of landscaping and screening on the site;
(d) The number of visitor trips anticipated each day to the site for services
and meals for clients; and
(e) The number of meals that will be served at the meal center.
(4) At least one off-street parking space is required for every six (6) seats at an
authorized meal center. On-street parking adjacent to the lot containing the center
may be included in the calculations.
(5) There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials, or outdoor operations.
1322.03.hh Medical Marijuana.
(a) Purpose. To establish a process and standards for the establishment, construction, and
operations of various medical marijuana facilities in strict conformity with the Pennsylvania
“Medical Marijuana Act” (Act of Apr. 17, 2016, P.L. 84, No. 16, a/k/a Act 2016-16, 35 P.S. §
10231.101 et seq, as amended) to allow for the integration of an allowed industry while providing
for the protection of the public’s health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
(b) Medical Marijuana Academic Clinical Research Centers
1. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in Article 1319 and
1319.01.a.26, Office or Public Building Off-Street Parking Regulations.
2. An academic clinical research center may only grow medical marijuana for the purpose
of on-site clinical research and not for gifting, donating or sale, provided such activity
occurs indoors within an enclosed secure building which includes electronic locking
systems, electronic surveillance and other features required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health as required by Act 16, as amended and not within a trailer, cargo
container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor
vehicle.
3. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into the environment
from any medical marijuana academic clinical research center and the facility shall
comply with Article 1318.22, General Performance Standards
4. A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana academic clinical research
center adjoins a residential use or district in accordance with Article 1318.23.
5. The Applicant shall submit documentation showing compliance with Act 16, as
amended, and all related regulations, including but not limited to licensure, upon
demand of the Zoning Officer.
6. Failure to comply with the requirements of Act 16, as amended, and all related
regulations shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor
1. A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical marijuana indoors
within an enclosed, secure building which includes electronic locking systems,
electronic surveillance and other features required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Health as required by Act 16, as amended and not within a trailer, cargo container,
mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
184
2. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into the environment
from any facility where medical marijuana growing, processing or testing occurs and
the facility shall comply with Article 1318.22, General Performance Standards.
3. Grower/processors may not operate on the same site as a facility used for dispensing
medical marijuana.
4. Any medical marijuana grower/processor facility lawfully operating shall not be
rendered in violation of these provisions by the subsequent location of a public, private
or parochial school, a charter school or a day-care center, provided the
grower/processor use shall not have been, or thereafter become, abandoned in the
manner provided by Section 1323.06.
5. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in Article 1319 and
1319.01.a.19, Industrial or Manufacturing Establishment Off-Street Parking
Regulations.
6. A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana grower/processor adjoins a
residential use or district in accordance with Article 1318.23.
7. Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading
dock arrangement is designed it should be from within a secure environment and in
accordance with Article 1319.05.
8. The Applicant shall submit documentation showing compliance with Act 16, as
amended, and all related regulations, including but not limited to licensure, upon
demand of the Zoning Officer.
9. Failure to comply with the requirements of Act 16, as amended, and all related
regulations shall constitute a violation of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(d) Medical Marijuana Dispensary (Entire Section added 7/5/17, Ord. 2017-24)
1. A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical marijuana indoors within
an enclosed, secure building which includes electronic locking systems, electronic
surveillance and other features required by the Pennsylvania Department of Health as
required by Act 16, as amended and not within a trailer, cargo container, mobile or
modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
2. A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a facility used for
growing and processing medical marijuana.
3. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or waste into the environment
from any facility where medical marijuana growing, processing or testing occurs and
the facility shall comply with Article 1318.22, General Performance Standards.
4. A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
a. Not have a drive-through service;
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
185
b. Not have outdoor seating areas;
c. Not have outdoor vending machines;
d. Prohibit the application and consumption of medical marijuana on the premises;
and
e. Not offer direct or home delivery service.
5. A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property
line of a public, private or parochial school, a charter school or a day-care center,
unless an adjustment or waiver of such prohibition shall have been approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health and satisfactory proof thereof shall have been
provided to the Zoning Officer. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from
the closest property line in which the business is conducted or proposed to be
conducted, to the closest property line of the protected use, regardless of the
municipality in which it is located.
6. Any medical marijuana dispensary facility lawfully operating shall not be rendered in
violation of these provisions by the subsequent location of a public, private or
parochial school, a charter school or a day-care center, provided the dispensary use
shall not have been, or thereafter become, abandoned in the manner provided by
Section 1323.06.
7. Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in Article 1319 and
1319.01.a.18, Indoor Retail Business Off-Street Parking Regulations.
8. A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana dispensary adjoins a
residential use or district in accordance with Article 1318.23.
9. Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are preferred. If an external loading
dock arrangement is designed it should be from within a secure environment, in
accordance with Article 1319.05.
10. The Applicant shall submit documentation showing compliance with Act 16, as
amended, and all related regulations, including but not limited to licensure, upon
demand of the Zoning Officer.
11. Failure to comply with the requirements of Act 16, as amended, and all related
regulations shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
(ii) Mineral Extraction.
(1) A detailed land reclamation and reuse plan of the area to be excavated shall be
submitted with the zoning application for any new or expanded mineral extraction
use.
(2) After areas are used for mineral extraction, those areas shall be reclaimed in phases
to a non-hazardous and environmentally sound state permitting some productive or
beneficial future use.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
186
(3) A 50 feet wide yard covered by natural vegetative ground cover (except at approved
driveway crossings) shall be required along all exterior lot lines that are within 200
feet of an area of excavation. Zoning Hearing Board may require this yard to include
an earth berm with a minimum average height of 6 feet and an average of 1 shade
tree for each 40 feet of distance along the lot lines. Such shade trees shall be planted
outside of any berm and any fence. New trees shall not be required where preserved
trees will serve the same purpose.
(4) The following minimum setbacks shall apply for the excavated area of a mineral
extraction use from property that is not owned by the owner or operator of the
mineral extraction use:
(i) 100 feet from the existing right-of-way of public streets and from all exterior lot
lines of the property,
(ii) 150 feet from a non-residential principal building, unless released by the owner
thereof,
(iii) 300 feet from the lot line of a dwelling,
(5) The excavated area of a mineral extraction use shall be setback 100 feet from the
average waterline of a perennial stream or the edge of a natural wetland of more than
2 acres.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board may require secure fencing in locations where needed to
protect public safety. Also, warning signs shall be placed around the outer edge of
the use.
(7) The Zoning Hearing Board may reasonably limit the hours of operation of the use
and of related trucking and blasting operations to protect the character of adjacent
residential areas.
(jj) Mobile/Manufactured Home.
(1) Any mobile/manufactured home placed on any lot after the adoption of this
Ordinance shall be constructed in accordance with 1976 or later Safety and
Construction Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(2) See installation requirements in the Uniform Construction Codes.
(3) The space between the bottom of the home and the ground and/or home pad shall be
enclosed using a durable fire-resistant material. This enclosure shall have the
appearance of a foundation of a site-built home, such as material with a concretetype
or stucco facing, except that metal skirting shall be allowed for a dwelling
within a Manufactured/Mobile Home Park.
(4) If the home is on an individual lot, the front door of the dwelling shall face onto a
street.
(kk) Mobile/Manufactured Home Park.
(1) The minimum tract area shall be 30,000 square feet, which shall be under single
ownership.
(2) The maximum average density of the tract shall be 5 dwelling units per acre. To
calculate this density: a) land in common open space or proposed streets within the
park may be included, but b) land within the 100 year floodplain, wetlands and
slopes over 25 percent shall not be included.
(3) Each mobile/manufactured home park shall include a 35 foot wide landscaped area
including substantial attractive evergreen and deciduous trees around the perimeter
of the site, except where such landscaping would obstruct safe sight distances for
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
187
traffic. A planting plan for such area shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Forester’s Office. The same area of land may count towards both the landscaped
area and the building setback requirements.
(4) A dwelling, including any attached accessory building, shall be setback a minimum
of 25 feet from another dwelling within the mobile home park, except that
unenclosed porches, awnings and decks may be 15 feet from the walls of another
dwelling.
(5) The minimum separation between homes and edge of interior street cartway or
parking court cartway shall be 25 feet.
(6) The minimum principal and accessory building setbacks from exterior/boundary lot
lines and rights-of-way of pre-existing public streets shall be 50 feet.
(7) Each home shall comply with the requirements for "Mobile/Manufactured Homes"
stated in the preceding sub-section.
(8) A detached accessory structure or garage shall be separated a minimum of 15 feet
from any dwelling units which the accessory structure is not accessory to.
(ll) Multi-Family Dwellings (Also known as “Apartments”).
(1) Location of Buildings. The distance between multifamily dwellings on the same lot
shall be not less than 25 feet. All buildings shall be so located in relation one to
another that the angle of horizontal from the sill of the lowest window in the
habitable area in one building to the highest point of another building, excluding
towers, chimneys and similar fixtures, does not exceed 45 degrees. Where possible,
the layout of dwellings shall be such that the front of one structure does not face the
rear of another.
(2) The proposed development shall be served by a public sanitary sewer system.
(3) The proposed use shall be designed as a single architectural project with approved
landscaping as determined by the City Forester's Office and shall not materially
detract from the character of the neighborhood.
(4) Except within the IR-R district, no building shall exceed 180 feet in length, measured
at ground level or any floor level, whether on one frontage, or on the combined
frontages of the main frontage and that of any wings of the same building.
(5) Parking.
(i) Except within the IR-R district, all parking spaces and access drives shall be at
least 15 feet from any multi-family dwelling on the lot. This shall not apply to
an interior garage and/or a driveway intended to be used as a parking space for
one particular dwelling unit.
(ii) Except within the IR-R district, no one area for off-street parking of motor
vehicles shall exceed 40 cars in capacity. Separate parking areas on a parcel
shall be physically separated from one another by a 6 foot wide planting strip.
(6) Except within the IR-R district, in multifamily dwellings of 2.5 stories or less in
height, maximum building size shall be restricted to not more than 16 dwelling units
in one continuous structure and no portion of the building below the first story or
above the second story shall be used for dwelling purposes.
(7) Except within the IR-R district, in multifamily dwellings of over 2.5 stories in height,
the following additional minimum requirements shall be met:
(i) Front Yard - No building shall be closer to any street line than twice the depth
of the required front yard for the respective residential district in which such
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
188
buildings is located, and such front yard shall be increased by not less than one
foot for each one foot in height of the building over 35 feet.
(ii) Side and Rear Yards - In all districts, for each one foot in height of the building
over 35 feet, side and rear yards shall be increased by not less than ½ foot.
(iii) The distance at the closest point in all districts between any 2 buildings of a
group of elevator-type multiple dwellings, shall not be less than 35 feet and for
each 2 feet such height is increased beyond a height of 35 feet the distance
between such buildings shall be increased by not less than one foot.
(iv) Local shopping facilities to serve the residents of the building may be provided
only on the ground floor and basement, provided the total floor area of the uses
does not exceed 10 percent of the total area of the principal building.
(mm) Outdoor Retail Sales and Display
(1) Vending machines or kiosks, such as beverage dispensers, ice machines, or DVD
rental units, are permitted as follows:
(i) CB, CL and IR-R – Vending machines or kiosks not permitted;
(ii) CG and CS – such machines may occupy 40% of each building face fronting a
street;
(iii) CMU and IR – such machines may occupy 20% of each building face
fronting a street.
(nn) Parking Lot in Residential District.
(1) Where this use is allowed under the District regulations, land may be utilized for offstreet
parking facilities as a principal use of the lot providing the requirements in
Articles 1319 and 1321 and the following are met:
(i) The applicant must be the owner of both the property which is to be served by
the parking lot and the property in the residential district to be used as the
parking lot.
(ii) No repair, service, display, or storage of vehicles shall be permitted on said
parking lot.
(iii) Parking lot shall be used exclusively for customer and employee parking.
(2) See also Vehicle Garages for Use by Residents in the Vicinity, in this Section.
(oo) Pawn Shop.
(1) The building area occupied by a Pawn Shop facility shall not be located within:
(i) 1,000 feet from the closest building area occupied by another Pawn Shop or
(ii) 5,000 feet from the lot line of a Licensed Gaming Facility.
(2) The Pawn Shop shall fully comply with record-keeping requirements of the State
Pawnbrokers License Act, as amended, and such records shall be available for
review by the City Police upon request.
(pp) Personal Care Home, Nursing Homes and Assisted Living Facilities.
(1) No building shall be erected nearer than 30 feet from any side or rear lot line within a
residential district.
(2) Buffer yards as required by Article 1318.23 shall be provided.
(3) The maximum permitted density shall not exceed 25 beds per acre.
(4) The facility shall have obtained any and all licenses and permits required by the
Federal, State, or Local government which may be relevant to the facility.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
189
(5) A minimum of 20 percent of the site shall be suitable and developed for outdoor
passive recreation uses. The passive recreation areas may include, but shall not be
limited to sitting areas and pedestrian walks.
(6) In a residential zone, Personal Care Homes or Assisted Living Facilities shall be
permitted only on arterial or collector roads.
(7) The location, design, and operating characteristics of the use shall be compatible
with and not adversely affect adjacent properties and the surrounding area. The
proposed development shall be harmonious with surrounding buildings with respect
to scale, architectural design and building placement.
(8) In a residential zoning district, Personal Care Homes and Assisted Living Facilities
are limited to a maximum of 30 beds.
(qq) Planned Office Commercial Development (POCD).
(1) The provisions for a POCD shall only be applicable if both of the following
conditions are met:
(i) there shall be a minimum tract size of 8 acres in common ownership or common
equitable ownership at the time of preliminary subdivision or land development
submittal, and
(ii) a minimum of 35 percent of the total floor area of buildings on the tract shall be
composed of office uses.
(2) The POCD shall make maximum use of interior driveways or private streets, in order
to minimize the number of vehicle entrances onto a public street.
(3) The POCD shall allow for shared or coordinated parking among various uses.
(4) The POCD shall include a set of deed restrictions or similar legally binding
provisions upon all buildings in the POCD. A draft of such restrictions shall be
provided to the City Staff and Planning Commission for review at the time of
preliminary subdivision or land development submittal. Such restrictions shall be
designed to ensure a high quality of exterior building materials, coordination of sign
designs, and appropriate exterior lighting fixtures. A consistent and coordinated
design shall also be required among buildings on the tract. Such restrictions shall be
subject to approval by the City Planning Commission as a condition of subdivision
and/or land development approval, and shall be in place prior to or at the time of
recording of a final plan.
(5) A POCD shall meet all of the other requirements for the CMU District that are not
specifically modified by this subsection.
(6) A POCD may include any use that is listed as permitted by right in subsection
1314.B.02(a) above in the CMU District, plus the following additional uses: retail
sales, branch post office, restaurant provided that the restaurant building is set back a
minimum of 250 feet from an existing dwelling, or personal service use, and
provided that:
(i) the total building floor area occupied by any individual retail establishment shall
not exceed 20,000 square feet,
(ii) drive-through services shall only be allowed for:
(a) a financial institution or pharmacy/drug store, or
(b) a restaurant specializing in and having a predominant product of hot nonalcoholic
beverages and associated foods with a building floor area of less
than 2,000 square feet.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
190
(c) Any ordering area for a drive-through facility shall be located a minimum
of 250 feet from any principal dwelling. The applicant for a drive- through
shall control the volume of any loudspeaker and/or use setbacks or an
acoustic barrier so that the loudspeaker cannot be heard from a dwelling.
The hours of the drive-through shall be limited to between 6 AM and 10
PM. Any drive-through service shall be designed to have adequate stacking
capacity in a manner that does not obstruct traffic onto or through the site.
Any drive-through service lane shall have provisions for pedestrian
crossings with proper sight distance. The design of the drive-through shall
be subject to approval by the City Planning Commission.
(7) At least one sidewalk or City-approved pathway shall be provided to connect
buildings within the tract and to connect to two points along the perimeter of the
tract.
(8) If a building has a length or width greater than 200 feet it shall include architectural
features, such as variations in facades, setbacks or rooflines, which make it appear to
be two or more connected buildings.
(9) Prior to the development of any new building under the POCD provisions, the
applicant shall submit an Overall Master Plan (OMP) for the tract. The OMP shall
show the approximate locations, heights and uses of all buildings, as well as the
approximate locations of proposed parking, streets, and landscaped areas, and the
designs of exterior light poles. The OMP may include a range of allowed uses, as
opposed to identifying each specific use. If the OMP submittal occurs before a
submittal of a subdivision or land development plan, then a minimum of 30 days
shall be provided for reviews of the OMP by the City. The OMP shall be made
available for review by the City Planning Commission, the City Planning Bureau and
the City Engineer.
(10) As each phase of development is approved, and prior to any lot receiving subdivision
or land development approval, the applicant shall provide evidence that the
requirements of this CMU District will be met, even if later phases of development
would not be completed. This shall include, but not be limited to, providing evidence
of compliance with the landscaped area and buffer requirements. Each phase of
development shall be developed in full coordination with prior and future phases, to
ensure that proper traffic circulation and utility services will be provided.
(11) Prior to receiving final subdivision or land development approval, the applicant shall
submit a set of preliminary proposed architectural sketches to the City Planning
Commission for review and comment. Such drawings or sketches shall be prepared
with the involvement of a Registered Architect.
(12) More than one permitted use or building shall be allowed on a lot in a POCD,
provided there is compliance with the requirements for each use or building. A
building may include two or more allowed uses. Individual uses or buildings may be
owned in a condominium arrangement, or handled through pad leases or other
ownership or lease arrangements approved under the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. A condominium or single owner form of arrangement is
allowed, which may include parking and driveways held in common ownership,
provided that suitable legal mechanisms are in place to ensure long-term
maintenance, which shall be subject to acceptance by the City.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
191
(13) As part of the creation of any new lot, the applicant shall be required to establish
legally binding restrictions to limit vehicle access to public streets in a manner
consistent with the approved POCD plan.
(rr) Planned Unit Development. This use is no longer allowed. See Section 1318.24.
(ss) Residential Retirement Complex.
(1) All buildings and active recreation areas shall be set back from adjacent
residentially-zoned properties a minimum of 50 feet.
(2) All methods to be used for outdoor lighting shall be shown on the development plan.
Such lighting shall not intrude on the privacy of adjacent residentially-zoned
properties.
(3) Buffer yards shall contain screening materials which, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, are of adequate type, height, and width to properly buffer adjacent
residentially-zoned properties from any parking areas or structures within the
development.
(4) Starting 5 years after the completion of construction, all health care and community
building facilities shall be designed and maintained solely for the use of the complex
residents.
(i) The health care facility shall be limited to a clinic which may also provide
nursing care and supervision for extended periods of time. This facility shall not
be considered a hospital.
(ii) Sales items shall be limited to foods, drugs, gifts, toiletries and periodicals
within an area of no greater than 500 square feet.
(5) The provisions limiting the number of dwelling units in a multi-family building in
this Section 1322.04 shall not be applicable to Residential Retirement Complexes.
(tt) Self-Storage Development.
(1) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats and trailers. No "junk
vehicles" shall be stored within view of a public street or a dwelling.
(2) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse, explosives or
flammable materials, hazardous substances, animal carcasses or skins, or similar
items shall not be stored.
(3) Interior traffic aisles shall be kept clear of obstructions to emergency vehicles.
(4) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be directed away or
shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(5) Any outdoor storage or garage doors within 200 feet of a street right-of-way and
visible from the street shall be screened from that street by a buffer yard meeting
Section 1318.23x. Any fencing shall be placed on the inside of the plantings.
(6) Minimum separation between buildings- 20 feet. Maximum length of any building -
300 feet.
(uu) Shopping Center.
(1) The primarily vehicle route into and through the site should be directed away from
the primary pedestrian routes into the main doors of the commercial uses.
(2) The development shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses, and groupings of
buildings, service and parking area, circulation and open spaces, planned and
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
192
designed as an integrated unit in such manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and
convenient retail shopping center or related planned business development.
(3) The appropriate use of property adjacent to the shopping center or planned business
development shall be safeguarded. Along each side or rear property line which
directly abuts a Residential or Institutional District boundary line, a 20 foot buffer
yard shall be required which shall include a suitable and uninterrupted coniferous
planting screen not less than 4 feet in height nor 15 feet in width along each street
line which directly abuts a Residential or an Institutional District boundary line. A
strip of the required front yard area not less than 10 feet in width, measured from the
street line, shall be suitably landscaped except for necessary sidewalks and
accessways and may include a wall not more than 4 feet in height.
(4) No storage of materials, equipment or goods shall be permitted outside a building,
and no merchandise shall be displayed on the exterior of a building, except in
conformance with the following regulations.
(i) Only merchandise intended for immediate sale shall be displayed on the
sidewalk in front of any store. At least 8 feet of sidewalk shall remain
unobstructed for pedestrian use between the merchandise or display and the
curb.
(ii) Any other area of a shopping center property proposed for storage or display
purposes shall be subject to site plan approval by the City Planning
Commission. All such areas shall be enclosed in a suitable fence or plant screen,
located adjacent to the main building in such a manner as to prevent a view of
the stored items from any adjacent property at ground level, and placed in such
a manner as to control pedestrian and vehicular movement in the area.
(5) Adequate provisions shall be made for safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic circulation within the boundaries of the shopping center. Such provisions shall
include raised curbs or medial walkways which shall prohibit vehicles from straying
from their designated circulation routes. Also, these walkways shall be suitably
planted to help reinforce the proper routing of traffic and add to the overall
appearance of the shopping center.
(6) All access roads, parking area, service and other areas for vehicular use shall be
paved with bituminous, concrete material or other hard surface material meeting
specifications acceptable to the City Engineer.
(7) The proposed development shall be served by public sewer and water facilities.
(8) Each multiple family development permitted in conjunction with a principal business
shall comply with the provisions of the RT district, unless specified otherwise.
(9) If the development of the shopping center is to be carried out in progressive stages,
each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing requirements and the intent of this
Ordinance shall be fully complied with at the completion of any stage. The initial
stage of development shall comprise a minimum total ground floor area of 7,500
square feet, or a minimum of six (6) permitted main uses.
(10) See Section 1318.23, Buffer Yards.
(vv) Reserved.
(ww)Solid Waste Transfer Facility, Solid Waste Landfill or Solid Waste-to-Energy Facility.
(1) All solid waste storage, disposal, incineration or processing shall be at least 100 feet
from the following: public street right-of-way, exterior lot line, 100 year floodplain,
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
193
edge of a surface water body (including a water filled quarry) or wetland of more
than ½ acre in area.
(2) All solid waste storage, disposal, incineration or processing shall be a minimum of
300 feet from any residential district, perennial creek, publicly-owned park or any
existing dwelling that the applicant does not have an agreement to purchase.
(3) No burning or incineration shall occur, except within an approved Waste to Energy
Facility.
(4) Any facility shall be operated in such a manner to prevent the attraction, harborage or
breeding of insects, rodents or vectors.
(5) Gates. Secure gates, fences, earth mounds and/or dense vegetation shall prevent
unauthorized access.
(6) Adequate means of emergency access shall be provided.
(7) For a solid-waste-to-energy facility or solid waste transfer facility: a) all loading and
unloading of putrescent solid waste shall only occur within an enclosed building, and
over an impervious surface drains to a holding tank that is then adequately treated,
and b) all solid waste processing and storage shall occur within enclosed buildings or
enclosed containers.
(xx) Stable or Other Keeping of Horses.
(1) Minimum lot area - 2 acres for the first horse or similar animal, plus 1 acre for each
additional horse or similar animal.
(2) Any horse barn, manure storage areas or stable shall be a minimum of 50 feet from
any lot line of an adjacent dwelling.
(3) Manure shall be regularly collected and disposed of in a sanitary manner that avoids
nuisances to neighbors. Manure shall be stored in a manner that prevents it from
being carried by runoff into a waterway.
(yy) Swimming Pools.
(1) All pools placed in a residential zoning district shall meet the front yard setback
regulations for a structure except in the RT district, where a minimum setback
requirement from the front lot line along any street shall be 20 feet.
(2) All pools shall be located at least 6 feet from any side or rear property line.
(3) Any deck over 3 feet high and placed adjacent to a pool shall be setback a minimum
of 6 feet from any lot line.
(4) See the fencing requirements in the Uniform Construction Codes.
(zz) Townhouses (Also known as “Single Family Attached Dwellings”).
(1) Maximum number of townhouses in any attached grouping - 8.
(2) All off-street parking spaces, except spaces on driveways immediately in front of a
carport or garage entrance, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any
dwelling.
(3) It is strongly recommended that all Townhouses be designed so that garages and/or
carports are not a prominent part of the view from public streets. For this reason,
parking courts, common garage or carport structures or garages at the rear of
dwellings are strongly encouraged rather than individual garages opening onto the
front of the building, especially for narrow townhouse units.
(i) Vehicle parking spaces and any garages or carports shall be located to the rear
of new townhouses to the maximum extent feasible, preferably accessed by a
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
194
rear alley. Where a shared parking area is proposed, and a location to the rear of
the townhouses is not feasible, then a location to the side of a set of townhouses
shall be considered.
(4) Any mailboxes provided within the street right-of-way should be clustered together
in an orderly and attractive arrangement or structure. Individual freestanding
mailboxes of non-coordinated types at the curbside are discouraged.
(5) Vehicular access points onto all arterial and collector streets shall be minimized to
the lowest reasonable number. No townhouse dwelling within a tract of 5 or more
dwelling units shall have its own driveway entering onto an arterial or collector
street.
(6) The proposed site layout of townhouses shall be submitted for site plan review by the
City Planning Commission, prior to subdivision or land development reviews.
(aaa) Treatment Center or Temporary Shelter.
(1) A Treatment Center shall not be located within 800 feet of an existing Treatment
Center or Temporary Shelter.
(2) Each Temporary Shelter or Treatment Center shall meet the following requirements:
(i) Proof of adequate supervision by people qualified by training and experience in
the field for which the facility is intended shall be provided.
(ii) The facility must comply with all applicable Fire, Housing, Building, Property
Maintenance, and Health Codes, and all regulations pertaining to transient
occupancy with respect to emergency lighting, smoke detectors, exit lights, and
other safety devices.
(iii) Any food preparation, service, or distribution shall be licensed by the City and
inspected by the Bureau of Health.
(iv) All services provided on site shall be contained within the structure and
operated by a non-profit, charitable, or for-profit organization.
(v) The applicant for these facilities shall submit with its application a plan
outlining in detail the management of the facility. This shall include information
on personnel, supervision, hours of operation, services provided, rules and
regulations, and any other information pertinent to the operation of the facility.
(3) This subsection (3) shall apply to a Treatment Center. The applicant shall provide a
written description of all conditions (such as criminal parolees, alcohol addiction)
that will cause persons to occupy the use during the life the permit. Any future
additions to this list shall require an additional special exception approval.
(i) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that
the use will involve adequate on-site supervision and security measures to
protect public safety. If any applicable County, State, Federal or professional
association standards provide guidance on the type of supervision that is needed,
the proposed supervision shall be compared to such standards.
(ii) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use to protect public
safety, such as conditions on the types of residents and security measures.
(iii) This lot shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a lot line of a lot occupied
by each of the following: a school, public park or playground, day care center,
college or university.
(4) To address requirements of Federal law, see possible modification provisions in
Section 1325.07(d).
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
195
(bbb) Unit for Care of Relative.
(1) See the definition.
(2) The accessory unit shall be occupied by a maximum of two persons, who shall be
"relatives" of the permanent residents of the principal dwelling unit. At least one
resident of the accessory unit shall need such accommodations because of an illness,
old age or disability.
(3) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that the accessory unit has been
designed and constructed so that it can be easily reconverted into part of the principal
dwelling unit or is a modular cottage that will be completely removed from the lot
after the relative no longer resides within the unit. Such accessory unit may be
converted into an additional bedroom(s), permitted home occupation area or similar
use. A lawful detached garage may be converted into a Unit for Care of Relative, and
then be reconverted to a garage or permitted home occupation area or otherwise
function as part of the principal dwelling unit.
(4) The applicant shall establish a legally binding mechanism in a form acceptable to the
City that will prohibit the use of the accessory unit as a separate dwelling unit after
the relative no longer resides within the unit. Such mechanism shall also be binding
upon future owners.
(5) The owner of the property shall be required to annually renew the permit for the use.
Such renewal shall be conditioned upon the owner providing a written and statement
that such relative of the occupants of the principal dwelling unit continues to reside
within the accessory unit.
(6) Such accessory unit shall not decrease the residential appearance of a one family
dwelling, as viewed from exterior property lines.
(7) Additional parking for the accessory unit is not required if the applicant proves that
the resident(s) of the accessory unit will not routinely operate a vehicle.
(8) If the unit is attached to the principal dwelling, there must be an internal doorway
that connects the main dwelling unit to the unit for the relative.
(9) There shall only be one entry door facing onto a public street.
(ccc) Vehicle Garages for Use by Residents in the Vicinity.
(1) Such garage shall be the main building on a lot, unless located as a part of a multiple
family dwelling planned as a complete unit.
(2) Such garage shall preferably be arranged as a unit in which no doors would face
directly upon a public street. Plantings may be required to permit the building to
become an attractive element of the neighborhood.
(3) Such garages shall not be used for commercial storage or vehicle repair.
(ddd) Wind Turbines. The following provisions apply to wind turbines other than as
allowed as an accessory use by Section 1305.01 and the following subsection (ddd).
(1) The wind turbine shall be set back from the nearest principal building on another lot
a distance not less than two times the maximum height to the top of the extended
blade, unless a written waiver is provided by the owner of such building. All wind
turbine setbacks shall be measured from the center of the base of the turbine. This
provision shall apply to buildings that existed prior to the application for a zoning
permit.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
196
(2) The audible sound from the wind turbine(s) shall not exceed 45 A-weighted decibels,
as measured at the exterior of a occupied principal building on another lot, unless a
written waiver is provided by the owner of such building.
(3) The owner of the facility shall completely remove all above ground structures within
12 months after the wind turbine(s) are no longer used to generate electricity.
(4) Wind turbines shall not be climbable for at least the first 12 feet above the ground
level.
(5) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest public street right-of-way a
minimum distance equal to the maximum height to the top of the maximum height of
the extended blade.
(6) All wind turbines shall be set back from the lot line a minimum distance equal to the
maximum height to the top of the maximum height of the extended blade, unless a
written waiver is provided by the owner of the abutting lot(s).
(7) If guy wires are used, and they are not within a fence, they shall be marked near their
base with reflectors, reflective tape or similar method.
(8) The turbine shall include automatic devices to address high speed winds.
(9) Accessory electrical facilities are allowed, such as a transformer, provided that any
building shall meet setbacks for a principal building.
(10) The site plan shall show proposed driveways, turbines and areas of woods proposed
to be cleared.
(11) Temporary towers designed to test possible locations for a wind turbine shall be
permitted by right, provided they are removed within one year and meet the same
setbacks as a wind turbine.
(12) For a wind turbine, a professional engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation
and tower design of the windmill is within accepted professional standards, given
local soil conditions.
(13) Rotor blades or airfoils must maintain at least 12 feet of clearance between their
lowest point and the ground.
(14) Decommissioning - A wind turbine shall be considered a discontinued use after one
year without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the
Zoning Officer outlining the steps and schedule for returning the wind turbine to
service. All wind turbines and above ground facilities shall be removed within 90
days after the use is discontinued.
(15) The maximum height of any wind turbine shall be 250 feet.
(eee) Wind Turbines, One Per Lot. As accessory use, primarily for on-site electrical use
where allowed by Section 1305.01.
(1) All wind turbines shall be set back from the lot line a minimum distance equal to the
total maximum height to the top of the extended blade, unless a written waiver is
provided by the owner of such adjacent lot. All wind turbine setbacks shall be
measured from the center of the base of the turbine.
(2) The audible sound from the wind turbine shall not exceed 45 A-weighted decibels, as
measured at the exterior of a occupied principal building on another lot, unless a
written waiver is provided by the owner of such building.
(3) The owner of the facility shall completely remove all above ground structures within
12 months after the windmill is no longer used to generate electricity.
(4) A wind turbine shall not be climbable for at least the first 12 feet above the ground
level, unless it is surrounded by a fence with a minimum height of 6 feet.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1322
197
(5) All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest public street right-of-way a
minimum distance equal to the total maximum height to the top of the extended
blade.
(6) If guy wires are used, and they are not within a fence, they shall be marked near their
base with reflectors, reflective tape or similar method.
(7) The turbine shall include automatic devices to address high speed winds, such as
mechanical brakes and overspeed controls.
(8) The maximum total height above the ground level to the tip of the extended blade
shall be 80 feet.
(9) New electrical wiring to the wind turbine shall be placed underground, to the
maximum extent feasible.
(10) Contiguous property owners may construct a wind turbine for use in common,
provided that the required setbacks are maintained from the lot lines of nonparticipating
landowners. A maximum of one wind turbine that would be shared by
certain dwelling units within a development may also be placed in the common open
space, if specifically approved to be included, at the time of final subdivision
approval.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1323
198
ARTICLE 1323
PROCEDURES AND CONTROLS GOVERNING NON-CONFORMITIES
1323.01 Purposes. The regulations governing existing non-conforming uses are set forth in this
Article and are intended to provide a gradual remedy for the incompatibilities resulting
from such non-conforming uses. While such lawful uses are generally permitted to
continue, these regulations are designed to avoid changes that could increase nuisances
and hazards. These regulations are thus designed to preserve the character of the districts
established in this Zoning Code in light of their peculiar suitability to particular uses, and
thus to promote and protect health, safety, and general welfare.
1323.02 Definitions. See Section 1302.
1323.03 Continuation. The lawful use of any building, any structure or the lawful use of any land
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued although such structure
or use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, except as otherwise
provided in this Article.
1323.04 Additions and Enlargements. A lawful nonconforming use or structure shall only be
expanded if the following requirements are met:
(a) The total building floor area or total land area occupied by the nonconforming use or
structure, whichever is more restrictive, shall not be increased by greater than 50 percent
beyond the area that existed at the time the use or structure first became nonconforming.
(1) The 50 percent maximum shall be measured in aggregate over the entire life of the
nonconformity. Therefore, for example, if a use became nonconforming in 1971, and
was expanded by 20 percent in 1980, then one 30 percent expansion would be
permitted today.
(2) These provisions apply regardless of whether the use or structure is expanding within
an existing building or an addition.
(b) Special exception approval shall be required, except that a one-time expansion of up to 5
percent of the nonconforming first floor building footprint in existence as of the adoption
date of this ordinance shall be permitted by right.
(c) Any expansion of a nonconforming use or structure shall meet all required setbacks and
all other requirements of this Ordinance. No new nonconformity shall be created.
(d) If an existing single family detached dwelling, twin dwelling, rowhouse or townhouse in
the RG or RT zoning districts has a lawfully nonconforming side yard building setback,
additions may occur as a "permitted by right" use to increase the height above such
setback or to extend other portions of the dwelling up to such nonconforming side yard
setback line, provided:
(1) the building shall not be extended beyond the existing side yard setback line,
(2) no additional nonconformity shall be created, except as is allowed by this subsection,
(3) all other requirements of this Ordinance shall be met,
(4) no additional intrusions occur into the minimum rear yard,
(5) an absolute minimum side yard setback of 4 feet is maintained for any addition in the
RG zoning district and 3 feet for any addition in the RT zoning district.
(6) the total building coverage shall not be increased by more than 25 percent.
(e) See also Section 1306.07 for dimensional standards.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1323
199
1323.05 Restoration.
(a) A nonconforming structure which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or by
act of God shall only be rebuilt or restored or used in a nonconforming manner if the
majority of the exterior walls are still structurally sound. However, a nonconforming
residential building may be reconstructed regardless of the amount of destruction or the
cause, provided that the building is rebuilt and used as a one family dwelling, and no new
nonconformities are created.
(b) Where a nonconforming structure is permitted to be rebuilt or restored in a
nonconforming manner, such permission shall only be granted if:
(1) the structure is properly secured after the damage or destruction,
(2) work begins within 12 months after the date of damage or destruction, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board by special exception grants a time extension for good cause,
(3) work is diligently pursued to completion, and
(4) no new nonconformity is created and no existing nonconformity is increased.
(c) An existing detached building that is accessory to a dwelling may be replaced with a new
building, provided the new building is no more nonconforming than the previous building.
1323.06 Abandonment. Termination and abandonment of nonconforming uses, buildings, or
structures shall be subject to the following:
(a) Any nonconforming use, building or structure that is replaced by a conforming use,
building or structure shall be deemed immediately abandoned and cannot thereafter be
changed back to a nonconforming use or structure.
(b) A nonconforming use, building or structure discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months shall be presumed abandoned and shall not thereafter be revived without proof
satisfactory to the Zoning Officer, that the owner did not intend its abandonment through
disuse.
(c) Failure to market a vacant property for sale or lease for a period of 12 months will result
in abandonment and evidence of intent to discontinue and abandon a non-conforming use,
building or structure.
1323.07 Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted to
revert to a non-conforming use. A non-conforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use only under the following conditions:
(a) Such change shall be permitted only by special exception, under the provisions of Article
1325.07, before the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) The applicant shall show that a non-conforming use cannot reasonably be changed to a
permitted use.
(c) The applicant shall show that the proposed change will be less objectionable in external
effects than the existing non-conforming use with respect to:
(1) Traffic generation and congestion including truck, passenger car and pedestrian
traffic.
(2) Noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare, and vibration.
(3) Storage and waste disposal.
(4) Appearance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1323
200
1323.08 Displacement. No non-conforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
1323.09 Applicability to Approved Non-Conforming Plans. Nothing contained in this Ordinance
shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a structure for which a
building permit was issued more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance or change in zoning district and the construction of which is begun within three
(3) months after such adoption of change and diligently carried on. The approved plans
shall not be altered in any way to increase the non-conformity.
1323.10 Prior Violations Continued. A building altered or erected or a use created in violation of
any previously in effect zoning provision, shall be regarded as continuing in such
violation and shall not enjoy the privilege of legal continuance conferred by this Article
upon other non-conforming buildings and uses.
1323.11 District Changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification, this Section 1323
shall also apply to any nonconforming uses or structures existing therein.
1323.12 Nonconforming Lots.
(a) Nonconforming lots are subject to the applicable provisions of Article 1318.
(b) If a nonconforming lot is contiguous to another lot with a common owner, and at least one
of the lots does not include a principal building, then the two lots shall be considered to be
merged, and shall not be separately sold and shall not be separately developed.
(c) A lot which is created in accordance with a Final Subdivision Plan approved by the City
Planning Commission with respect to which an applicant has commenced and
substantially completed public improvements in accordance with the approved
Subdivision Plan (e.g. water and sewer mains, water and sewer laterals serving individual
lots, curb with curb cuts for individual lots and/or streets) within five (5) years from the
date of such approval or within any additional extension period created by the Legislature
shall for all purposes of this Ordinance be considered a conforming lot and not a nonconforming
lot.
1323.13 Nonconforming Signs.
(a) See Section 1320.07(d).
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1324
201
ARTICLE 1324
ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS AND PENALTIES
1324.01 Enforcement. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Officer. One or more City Staff persons may be appointed by the Director of the
Department of Community and Economic Development to serve as Assistant Zoning
Officers, who shall serve under the direction of or in the absence of the Zoning Officer. It
shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer and he / she shall have power to:
(a) Review all applications for zoning permits, and issue permits when there is compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Officer may condition the issuance of a
Zoning Permit upon the applicant proving compliance with other applicable City
regulations.
(b) Receive applications for special exceptions and variances and forward these applications
to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.
(c) Following disapproval of a zoning permit or another determination, to receive
applications for appeals from the decision of the Zoning Officer and forward these
applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for action thereon.
(d) Conduct inspections and investigations to determine compliance or noncompliance with
the terms of this Ordinance.
(e) Order in writing correction of all conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of
this Ordinance. An enforcement notice shall meet requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. Prior to issuing an Enforcement Notice, the Zoning Officer
may informally seek compliance.
(f) Record and file all applications for permits and approvals with accompanying plans and
documents, and all approvals and permits issued. All applications, plans, and documents
shall be a public record.
(g) Maintain a map or maps showing the current zoning classification of all land in the City.
(h) Upon the request of City Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing
Board, present facts, records or reports which they may request to assist such body in
making decisions.
(i) Review and approve or deny temporary permits which shall be issued for a period not to
exceed one (1) year and which may be renewed annually for the following two years.
(1) For non-conforming uses incidental to housing and construction projects and
including such structures and uses as storage of building supplies and machinery, and
a real estate office located on the tract being offered for sale, provided such permits
are issued only upon agreement by the owner to remove the structure upon expiration
of permit.
(2) For structures or uses which are deemed by the Zoning Officer to be beneficial to the
public health and necessary to the public welfare.
1324.02 Zoning Permits. At the option of the City, a “Zoning Permit” may be a separate permit or
may be considered to be the zoning portion of a City Construction Permit. All requests for
zoning permits shall be made in writing by the owner or his authorized agent to the office
of the Zoning Officer on application forms furnished by the City. Zoning permits shall be
secured prior to starting any construction, erection or alteration of any building, structure
or portion thereof. Issuance of a zoning permit shall be subject to review and approval by
all City Departments noted on the permit. The City Staff shall require that the application
of a zoning permit and any additional material requested by the various City Departments
shall contain all the information necessary to enable them to ascertain whether the
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1324
202
proposed structure complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. No zoning permit for
construction, erection or alteration of any structure, use or portion thereof, shall be valid
for more than 12 months unless work at the site has commenced within such period or a
written time extension has been provided by the City. The applicant shall submit a Site
Plan drawn to scale showing existing and proposed features and lot lines for any new or
expanded building, or other improvements when required by the Zoning Officer. An
example of a typical Site Plan is included on the following page.
1324.03 Fees. Fees for zoning and building permits shall be paid in accordance with the applicable
Fee Schedule enacted by City Council, which was adopted by Resolution and which may
be revised from time to time.
(a) If an appeal has been advertised and/or notice has been sent to abutters, then an additional
fee shall be paid for any continuance requested by the applicant. The continuance fee
shall be adopted by Resolution and revised from time to time.
1324.04 Violations and Penalties. For any and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance:
The owner, general agent, architect, contractor of a building or premises where such a
violation has been committed or shall exist, or any other person who commits, takes part
or assists in any such violation or who maintains any buildings or premises in which any
such violation shall exist, shall be liable on conviction thereof to a fine or penalty not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per violation, which shall be paid over
to the City Treasurer.
(a) Such fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceedings brought in the
name of the City before any Magistrate.
(b) Whenever any such person specified above shall have been notified by the Zoning Officer
in writing that he is violating this Ordinance, such person shall commence correction of
all violations within five days after notice and correct all violations within 30 days of
notice. If corrections are not commenced within five days or completed within 30 days,
each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense punishable by
the like fine. This Ordinance does not authorize imprisonment.
1324.05 Cancellation of Permit. The Zoning Officer may cancel or revoke a permit previously
granted for violation of this Ordinance or of any order of the Zoning Officer or condition
established by the Zoning Hearing Board.
1324.06 One-Year Limitation on Approvals.
(a) The holder of any approval or variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board under the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance adopted June 15, 2012, shall be required to
commence and proceed with substantial construction of the improvement authorized
within a period of one year from the date of such decision.
(b) If the holder of any approval or variance granted by the Zoning Hearing Board fails to
commence and proceed with substantial construction pursuant to such approval or
variance within one year of the date of such decision, said approval or variance shall lapse
and no construction shall thereafter be commenced in reliance on such approvals or
variances.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1324
203
1324.07 Notice to Adjoining Municipalities. Where a property is located within 500 feet of a
municipal boundary, the City Staff should refer any Zoning Hearing Board application to
the neighboring municipality for its comments, unless such application only involves a
dimensional variance for an existing residential lot.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1325
204
ARTICLE 1325
ZONING HEARING BOARD
1325.01 Establishment of Board. The existing Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve.
1325.02 Membership, Terms of Office, Compensation. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of
five regular members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council
for 5 year terms. The terms of office shall be so fixed that the terms of office of one
member shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the
City. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place
becomes vacant, and the Mayor may remove any member for cause. The compensation of
each member of said Board shall be set by Resolution of City Council. Compensation
shall be paid by the City in conformance with such Resolution.
1325.03 Procedures.
(a) Officers. The Board shall elect a chairperson from its membership and shall prescribe
rules in accordance with State law and this Ordinance for the conduct of its officers.
(b) Public Hearings. At least one public hearing shall be held on each complete application
that was duly submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board, in conformance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The Zoning Hearing Board may establish
and revise rules of procedure or bylaws to guide its operations. Hearings shall be
scheduled by the chairperson of the Zoning Hearing Board or be established in the
Board’s rules of procedure. The Chairperson or Acting Chairperson shall have the power
to administer oaths and to compel the attendance of essential witnesses.
(c) Records and Decisions. The Board shall keep a record of all proceedings which shall
contain evidence and data relevant to every case considered together with the votes of the
members and the final decision of each case. These proceedings shall become public
records.
1325.04 Notice of Hearings.
(a) Upon filing with the Board for an application for a special exception, variance or other
appeal under this Ordinance, the Board shall determine a place and a reasonable time, and
the City shall give notice as follows:
(1) The City shall publish a public notice describing the location of the building or lot
and the general nature of the matter involved in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City in conformance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) The City shall give written notice to the applicant and persons who have made a
timely request for notice of such hearing. In addition, notice shall be provided to
those persons whose properties adjoin the property in question, and to the City
Planning Commission. Such notice should be sent at least 7 days prior to the hearing.
(3) The City shall provide written notice to the last known address of the primary owner
of lots within 300 feet of the subject lot, unless the application only involves a
dimensional variance on an owner occupied single family dwelling unit or its
accessory structure. Failure of a person(s) to receive such notice shall not be grounds
for an appeal, provided that a good faith effort was made to provide such notice.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1325
205
1325.05 Powers and Duties - Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision by the Zoning Officer,
the Zoning Hearing Board shall decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this Ordinance, including determination of the exact location of any district
boundary line if uncertainty exists with respect thereto; where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer in the
enforcement of this Ordinance.
1325.06 Powers and Duties - Variances.
(a) Upon a written appeal from a determination by the Zoning Officer, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall have the power to approve a Variance to one or more specific provisions of
this Ordinance for a specific property.
(b) The power to authorize a variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall only be used
where authorized under the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or in diminimus
situations. As of the adoption date of this Ordinance, the Municipalities Planning Code
provided that all of the following findings must be made, where relevant:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions (including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property) and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located;
(2) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and a Variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property;
(3) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
(4) The Variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood
or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair
the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare; and
(5) The Variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(c) The applicant shall establish and substantiate his appeal to prove that the appeal for the
variance is in conformance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
(d) In granting any Variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance.
1325.07 Powers and Duties - Special Exceptions.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to approve special exceptions for any
uses for which this Ordinance requires the obtaining of such exceptions and for no other
use or purpose.
(b) General Requirements and Standards Applicable to all Special Exceptions. The Board
shall grant a special exception only if it finds adequate evidence that any proposed use
submitted for a special exception will meet all of the following general requirements, as
well as any specific requirements and standards listed for the proposed use. The Board
shall, among other things, require that any proposed use and location be:
(1) In accordance with the City of Bethlehem Comprehensive Plan and consistent with
the spirit, purposes, and intent of this Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1325
206
(2) In the best interest of Bethlehem, the convenience of the community, the public
welfare, and be a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity.
(3) Suitable for the property in question, and designed, constructed, operated and
maintained so as to be in harmony with and appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity.
(4) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
(5) The proposed use shall not substantially change the character of any surrounding
residential neighborhood, after considering any proposed conditions upon approval
such as limits upon hours of operation.
(6) Suitable in terms of effects on street, traffic and safety with adequate sidewalks and
vehicular access arrangements to protect streets from undue congestion and hazard.
(7) The proposed use shall not create a significant hazard to the public health and safety,
such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(8) The proposed use shall be suitable for the site, considering the disturbance of steep
slopes, mature woodland, wetlands, floodplains, springs and other important natural
features.
(c) The Zoning Hearing Board may impose such conditions, in addition to those required in
the Ordinance, as are necessary to insure that the general purpose and intent of this
Ordinance is complied with and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included
in the proposed change or modification is adequately safeguarded, which conditions may
relate to, but are not limited to, harmonious design of buildings, aesthetics, planting and
its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, hours of operation, lighting, allied activities,
ventilation, noise, sanitation, safety, smoke and fume control, and the minimizing of
noxious, offensive or hazardous elements.
(d) Persons With Disabilities. After the Zoning Officer receives a complete written
application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a special exception allowing
modifications to specific requirements of this Ordinance that the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board are required under applicable Federal law to
provide a "reasonable accommodation" to serve persons who the applicant proves have
"disabilities," as defined in and protected by such laws.
(1) Such reasonable accommodations shall be requested in accordance with the U.S. Fair
Housing Act Amendments and/or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended.
(2) If the applicant is requesting a reasonable accommodation under the United States
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 or the Americans with Disabilities Act, the
applicant shall identify the disability which is protected by such statutes, the extent
of the modification of the provisions of this Ordinance necessary for a reasonable
accommodation, and the manner by which the reasonable accommodation requested
may be removed when such person(s) with a protected disability no longer will be
present on the property.
(3) Any modification approved under this Section may be limited to the time period
during which the persons with disabilities occupy or utilize the premises.
1325.08 Special Conditions and Safeguards for Special Exception Uses. In addition to the
requirements and standards specified in Section 1325.07, special exception uses shall
meet the additional requirements provided in Section 1322 and other provisions of this
Ordinance.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1325
207
1325.09 Actions of the Board on Exercising Powers. No decision of the Board permitting the use
of a building or land shall be valid for more than two years unless such use is established
within this period. Where such use is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a
building, the Board's decision shall continue in force and effect if a construction permit
for such work is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and
proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the decision. (Amended 9-17-13
by Ordinance 2013-22)
1325.10 Who May Appeal. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken by any person with
legal standing concerning any provision of this Ordinance or by any decision issued by
the Zoning Officer or by City Council. An appeal may also be made by City Council.
1325.11 Rules and Procedures for Filing Interpretation and Variance Appeals and Special
Exception Applications.
(a) General rules and procedures for appeals and applications:
(1) All appeals and applications made to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be in writing
on standard forms prescribed by the Zoning Officer.
(2) Any appeal shall be made by filing the same with the Zoning Officer within 30 days
after the date of the Zoning Officer's determination.
(3) All appeals and applications shall refer to the specific provisions of this Ordinance
involved.
(4) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Zoning Officer certified to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board or by a Court of Record on application, on notice to the Zoning Officer and on
due cause shown.
(5) Once an appeal is filed, the Zoning Officer shall set a date for a hearing and shall
issue a decision within time limits provided by the Municipalities Planning Code.
(b) Interpretation Appeals. Appeals concerning the interpretation of any provisions of this
Ordinance shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed and the applicable
zoning ordinance section numbers.
(c) Variance Appeals.
(1) Appeals for variance from the strict application of this Ordinance shall include the
denial by the Zoning Officer, together with a statement with any supporting evidence
regarding the requirements listed in Section 1325.06.
(d) Special Exception Applications.
(1) Applications for special exceptions shall include a Zoning Permit Application with
all information required therein and a statement with any supporting evidence
regarding the merits of the proposed use at the proposed location and how the
proposal complies with the general and specific requirements of this Ordinance.
1325.12 Court Appeals. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of
the Board, or any taxpayer or any officer, Department, Board or Bureau of the City may
present to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County or Northampton County a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented to the Court
within 30 days after the receipt of the written decision of the Board.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1326
208
ARTICLE 1326
AMENDMENTS
1326.01 Power of Amendment. City Council may, from time to time, amend or repeal this
Ordinance, including the Zoning Map. When doing so, the Council shall proceed in the
manner prescribed in the Municipalities Planning Code.
1326.02 Who May Initiate. Proposals for amendment or repeal may be initiated by City Council on
its own motion, by the Planning Commission, or by petition of one or more citizens,
subject to the following provisions:
(a) Proposals originated by City Council. The City Council shall refer every proposed
amendment or repeal originated by Council to the Planning Commission no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing before City Council. Prior to the public hearing
the Planning Commission should submit to City Council a report containing the
Commission's recommendations, including any additions or modifications of the original
proposal. Failure of the Planning Commission to submit such report shall not by itself
delay a hearing.
(b) Proposals originated by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may, at any
time, transmit to City Council, any proposals for the amendment or repeal of this
Ordinance or any part thereof.
(c) Proposals originated by a citizen's petition. Each petition of a proposal for amendment to
the zoning ordinance by citizens or a landowner must be submitted in writing to the City
Council together with a fee as provided in the City Fee Schedule, plus payment in full by
the applicant of all costs incurred by the City in publishing of legally required advertising.
On receipt of said petition and payment, Council shall transmit a copy of the petition to
the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment. Within 30 days after its submission to the Planning Commission, the
Commission should submit to City Council a report containing the Commission's
recommendation, including any additions or modifications of the original proposal.
Failure of the Planning commission to submit such report within 30 days shall not by
itself delay a hearing. All proposal originated by a citizen’s petition for rezoning/zoning
map revisions must be acknowledged by a Notary Public and signed by the owners of
50% or more of the land proposed to be rezoned. (Amended 9-17-13 by Ordinance 2013-
22)
(d) An applicant and/or interested party who requests a continuance of a public hearing
scheduled to consider a zoning amendment shall be responsible for the full cost of readvertising
the date of the subsequent public hearing. In order for the subsequent public
hearing date to be established, the cost of the re-advertisement must be deposited with the
City Clerk's office.
1326.03 Notice of Hearings and Enactment. No such amendment or repeal shall become effective
until after a public hearing in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard. Notice shall be given as follows:
(a) Publish a notice of the time, place, and the general nature of such public hearing in a
manner consistent with the Municipalities Planning Code.
(b) When such hearing concerns a Zoning Map change, should give at least 30 days notice to
abutting property owners, who shall be those persons whose properties adjoin or are
across the street from the property in question, and to the addresses to which real estate
tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned.
(c) A copy of the proposed amendment shall be forwarded to the Lehigh Valley Planning
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance Article 1326
209
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing by City Council.
(d) If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing
shall be conspicuously posted by the City at points deemed sufficient by the City, along
the perimeter of the tract to be rezoned at least one week prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(e) Notice of the intended date of the vote on a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance
shall be provided consistent with the Municipalities Planning Code.
1326.04 Amendment Change. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is revised, or further revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the
City Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
1326.05 Amendment Listing. Amendments to this Ordinance should be listed in Appendices, but
shall not be considered an official part of the Zoning Ordinance.
1326.06 Notice to LVPC. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance shall be forwarded to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
210
INDEX
Section No.
Accessory Structures 1306.03
Adult Uses 1322.03
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses 1322
Administration, Permits and Penalties 1324
Airport Approach Overlay Zoning See Article 1360 of Codified Ordinances
Allowed Uses in Primarily Non-Residential Districts 1305
Allowed Uses in Primarily Residential Districts 1304
Amendments to This Ordinance 1326
Buffer Yards 1318.23
CL and CB Districts, Design Guidelines in the 1311
Classification of Districts 1303
CM-LTN District, Additional Requirements for the 1314
CMU District, Additional Requirements for the 1313
Conversion 1322(o)
Corner Lots 1318.04, 1318.07
Day Care 1322.03
Definitions 1302
Dimensional Requirements in Each District
Enforcement 1324
Fences 1318.12, 1318.16, 1318.17
Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts 1317
General Regulations 1318
Green Incentives 1318.27
Group Home 1322.03
Height Exceptions 1318.20
Historic Resources Identified 1321,
Table 1
Home Occupations
1306 + 1322.03(z)
Impervious Coverage 1306.01(a)
I-O Institutional Overlay District, Additional Requirements in the 1312
IR and IR-R Districts, Additional Requirements for the 1306.08
Licensed Gaming Facility 1322.03
Lighting Control 1318.25
Live Work Units 1306 + 1322.03(z)
Loading Facilities 1319.04, 1319.05
Medical Marijuana 1322.03.hh
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
211
Noise Restrictions 1318.22
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses 13
Section No.
Open Space Development in RR District 1309
Parking and Loading 1319
PI District, Additional Requirements for the 1305.01, 1306.01, 1306.06
RR-T and RR-F Overlay Districts, Additional Requirements for the 1304.01, 1305.01, 1310
Setback Exceptions 1318
Sign Area 1320.05
Signs 1320
Signs, Types of 1320.04
Site Plan 1324.02
Steep Slope Provisions 1316
Swimming Pools 1324
Title, Purposes and Interpretation 1301
Tree Conservation 1318.28
Uses Allowed in Primarily Non-Residential Districts 1305.01
Uses Allowed in Primarily Residential Districts 1304.01
Wind Turbines 1322.03
Workforce Housing Incentive 1307
Zoning Hearing Board 1325
Zoning Permits 1324
Zoning Variances 1325
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
212
AMENDMENTS
Ordinance 2012-43 Recreation Vehicles 1302.99, 1319.03.i, 1319.06 12/24/12
Ordinance 2012-44 Corner Properties 1304.04 12/24/12
Ordinance 2013-20 Map Change Portion of I District to R-RC 8/21/13
Between Center St & Madison Ave
Ordinance 2013-21 Landmarks and 1321.07.c.1, 1321.07.c.2 9/19/13
Historic Resources
Ordinance 2013-22 Fences 1318.12, 1318.16, 1318.17 9/19/13
Kennels 1302.60
Recreation Fees 1322.03.o.9
Residential Retirement 1304.01.b.3
Complex
Temporary Commercial 1305.01.b
Use
ZHB Powers 1325.09
Citizen’s Petition 1326.02.c
Ordinance 2014-20 Flood Plain Ordinance 1317 7/16/14
Ordinance 2015-16 Definitions 1302.08 4/07/15
Green Incentives 1318.27 4/07/15
Solar Energy 1318.29 4/07/15
Ordinance 2015-17 Parking 1319.01 4/07/15
Ordinance 2015-25 Tree Conservation 1318.28 07/07/15
Ordinance 2015-27 Impervious Coverage 1306.01(a) 7/07/15
Ordinance 2015-39 Definitions 1302.106, 1302.107, 1302.126 12/16/15
Classification of 1303.07.n 12/16/15
Districts
Ordinance 2015-39 Map Change All of CM-LTN District to OMU 12/16/15
Ordinance 2015-39 Allowed Uses in 1305. 12/16/15
Primarily Non-
Residential Zoning
Districts
Dimensional 1306.01 12/16/15
Requirements in Each
District
City of Bethlehem Zoning Ordinance
213
Article 1311 1311, 1311.01, 1311.04, 1311.05 12/16/15
1311.06, 1311.08, 1311.10
Article 1314 1314 12/16/15
Ordinance 2017-24 Definitions 1302.73, 1302.74, 1302.75 07/05/17
1302.76, 1302.77, 1302.78
Types of Uses 1305.01.b 07/05/17
Medical Marijuana 1322.03.hh 07/05/17
Ordinance 2017-25 Hospital Definition 1302.56 07/05/17
Treatment Center
Definition 1302.138
Ordinance 2018-02 Retail Use on 1st
Floor in CB & CL 1305.01.a, 1306.01.b.1, Note I 03/06/18
Ordinance 2018-03 Definition (Hotel) 1302.57 03/06/18
Ordinance 2018-12 CRIZ Qualified
Definition &
Dimensional
Requirements 1302.29 & 1306.08 06/05/18
Ordinance 2018-13 Change Max.
Bldg. Coverage in
CB District 1306.01.b.1.b & 1306.01.B, Note I 06/05/18
Ordinance 2018-14 Fast Casual
Drive-thru remove 1305.01.b 06-05-18
Ordinance 2018-16 Map Change Property to the rear of 143 W Broad 07-17-18
(1.8 Acs) from I-Institution to
CL – Limited Commercial