ZONING ORDINANCE
City of Beaver Falls
ORDINANCE __ 3054 _
Revised November 28, 2017
Prepared by:
City of Beaver Falls Planning Commission
Assisted By
Environmental Planning and Design
AJ Schwartz
This ordinance was funded, in part, through a Land Use Planning and Technical Assistance Grant, administered by the Pa Department of Community and Economic Development
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS .............................................................................................. 1
ARTICLE 2 ZONING DISTRICTS ..................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE 3 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS .............................................................................. 5
ARTICLE 4 DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................ 6
ARTICLE 5 R-1A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ................................................................................... 20
ARTICLE 6 R-1B RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ................................................................................... 21
ARTICLE 7 R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ..................................................................................... 23
ARTICLE 8 CON CONSERVATION DISTRICT .............................................................................. 25
ARTICLE 9 TRAN TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT .............................................................................. 26
ARTICLE 10 DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICTS .................................................................... 28
ARTICLE 11 C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................... 36
ARTICLE 12 CLI COMMERCIAL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT .................................................. 37
ARTICLE 13 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ............................................................................................ 39
ARTICLE 14 PEI PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL DISTRICT .................................................................... 41
ARTICLE 15 SIGNS .......................................................................................................................... 42
ARTICLE 16 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS ............................................................................. 50
ARTICLE 17 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS ..................................... 57
ARTICLE 18 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND CONDITIONAL USES: ............................................... 61
ARTICLE 19 NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS .......................................... 77
ARTICLE 20 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ................................................................. 79
ARTICLE 21 ZONING HEARING BOARD ........................................................................................ 87
ARTICLE 22 ADMINISTRATION ...................................................................................................... 88
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 1
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
BE IT HEREBY ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the City Council of the City of Beaver Falls, County of Beaver, State of Pennsylvania, by authority of and pursuant to the provisions of Article VI, Sections 607 and 608 of Act 247, as amended, of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved July 31, 1968, and known and cited as the “Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code” as follows:
SECTION 101 SHORT TITLE
A. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Beaver Falls City Zoning Ordinance".
B. The accompanying map is a part of this Ordinance and shall be know as the "Beaver Falls City Zoning Map". The official map for administrative purposes is on record at the City Building, Office of the Zoning Officer.
SECTION 102 PURPOSE
A. The regulations of the "Zoning Ordinance" are made in accordance with the City’s Land Use Plan and designed:
1. to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers,
2. to promote health and the general welfare,
3. to provide adequate light and air,
4. to prevent the overcrowding of land,
5. to avoid undue congestion of the population,
6. to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
B. Such regulations are also made with consideration to the character of the districts set forth and their suitability for particular uses, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
SECTION 103 SCOPE
A. The "Zoning Ordinance" regulates within the boundaries of the City of Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania:
1. The height and size of buildings and other structures.
2. The percentage of the lot that may be occupied with buildings or structures.
3. The size of yards, courts, and other open spaces.
4. The density of population.
5. The location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes.
6. The establishment of building lines upon any or all public roads or highways.
7. The amount, location and size of parking and loading facilities required for business, industry, residence or other purposes.
8. The number and type of signs permitted in any zoning district.
9. Establishes standards for development and the review and approval processes for same.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 2
SECTION 104 APPLICATION
A. In applying the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, they shall be held to the minimum requirements as they shall apply to the use, and/or occupancy of all buildings, other structures, and/or lots. Where the Zoning Ordinance imposes greater restriction than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulations, the provisions of the Zoning shall govern. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than the Zoning Ordinance, those shall govern.
B. The Zoning Ordinance is not intended to interfere with any covenant or other agreement between private parties. However, where the Zoning Ordinance imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any such easement, covenant or agreement, the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall govern. Where any such easement, covenant or other agreement imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by the Zoning Ordinance, those shall govern.
SECTION 105 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
A. This Ordinance is enacted to protect and promote the public health and general welfare. Accordingly, it is and is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council that no private rights of any kind or nature shall be created by this Ordinance or any permit issued hereunder. The issuance of any such permit is not to be relied upon by the applicant or any other person as a finding that the work and method or manner of performing the same complies with all applicable safety standards, laws, rules, codes and regulations governing same, nor shall such approval be relied upon for any other reason whatsoever, except as expressly set forth in this Ordinance. A permit issued as required by this Ordinance is not intended and shall not, in any manner, be construed or held to be an approval, guarantee, warranty or representation of any kind on the part of the City or any officer, agent or employee thereof, concerning the efficiency, adequacy, suitability and safety of that which is authorized by said permit.
B. This Ordinance shall not create any liability to any person on the part of the City, or any officer, agent or employee thereof for any and all injuries and damages that may result from reliance on this Ordinance or any permit issued or decision made hereunder.
SECTION 106 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
A. This Ordinance and the Beaver Falls City Zoning Map are intended to promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper density of population, civil defense, the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements as well as preventing the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, lost of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
B. The specific objectives upon which the Comprehensive Plan and this Ordinance have been based upon the City’s 2013 Comprehensive Plan and are adopted herein by reference.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 3
ARTICLE 2
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 201 ZONING DISTRICTS
A. The City of Beaver Falls is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts:
1. R-1A - Residential (low density)
2. R-1B - Residential (medium density)
3. R-2 - Residential (Multiple family)
4. CON Conservation
5. TRAN Transitional
6. DBD DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT
a. Gateway District (GD)
b. Downtown South District (DSD)
c. Downtown Central District (DCD)
d. Downtown North District (DND)
7. C-2 – Commercial
8. CLI Commercial/Light Industrial
9. I - Industrial
10. PEI- Public Educational Institutional
SECTION 202 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The location and boundaries of the aforementioned zones are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map for The City of Beaver Falls, which is attached hereto and is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. Said map and all notations, references and designations shown thereon shall be a part of this Ordinance as if the same were all fully described and set forth herein.
SECTION 203 BOUNDARIES OF ZONING DISTRICTS
A. The boundaries of the Zoning Districts shall be as shown upon the Zoning Map entitled "City of Beaver Falls Zoning Map". Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various Zoning Districts, the following rules shall apply:
1. Where a Zoning District Boundary Approximately Follows the Center Line of a Street or Alley - The center line of such street or alley shall be interpreted to be the Zoning District boundary.
2. Where a Zoning District Boundary Approximately parallels a Street Lot Line or Alley Lot Line - The boundary shall be interpreted as being parallel to it and at such distance from it as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official Zoning Map.
3. Where a Zoning District Boundary Approximately Follows a Lot Line - The lot line shall be interpreted to be the Zoning District boundary.
4. Submerged Areas - All areas within the City which are under water and are bounded by two or more zoning districts the boundary line of these districts shall be extended to the center of the body of water.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 4
5. Classification of Annexed or Unzoned Lands - For zoning purposes all areas annexed to the City or which are discovered to be unzoned due to administrative oversight, mapping error, or any change in municipal boundaries shall be classified as "R-1A" Residential until such time as the Ordinance and Map are officially amended to include the annexed or excluded areas and classify them in accordance with the City of Beaver Falls Comprehensive Plan.
6. Vacation of Public Ways - Whenever any street or alley is vacated the Zoning District or Districts adjoining such street or alley, shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacated area.
7. Lots in Two Zoning Districts - Where a Zoning District boundary divides an existing lot of record, it shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Hearing Board to determine the extent to which the boundary shall be extended to the rest of the lot or if it would be more appropriate to request an amendment to the Zoning Map.
8. Boundary Determination Problems - Where it is not possible or practical for the Zoning Officer to determine the location of a zoning district boundary line, or if a petitioner contests the Zoning Officer's determination of the boundary, the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall determine and establish the location of said boundary line.
9. All distances pertaining to the delineation of zoning districts as shown on the Zoning Map shall be measured from the existing road right-of-way line when such distance is measured from a public road.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 5
ARTICLE 3
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
SECTION 301 USE OF PROPERTY
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless it is in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the District in which said building or land is located.
SECTION 302 RESTRICTIONS
A. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered.
1. To exceed the height.
2. To accommodate a greater number of dwelling units.
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area.
4. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, or side yards than are specified herein for the District in which such building is located.
B. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building.
C. Side yard set back provisions for corner lots -- lots which abut on more than one street shall provide the required front yard set back from all lot lines that abut a public street. Required side yard setbacks shall be maintained from all other lot lines for a corner lot.
D. Exemptions from Setback Regulations: Walls and fences, handicapped access facilities, and parking lots and certain accessory structures under Section 1616 are exempt from side yard requirements.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 6
ARTICLE 4
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 401 INTERPRETATION
For the purpose of this Ordinance, words used in the present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as if followed by the words "or any part thereof." The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated association, or any other legal entity. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specified example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character. Except as defined within this Ordinance, all words and phrases shall have their normal meanings and usage.
SECTION 402 SPECIFIC TERMS
The following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section.
Accessory Building - a subordinate building or structure incidental to, and located on the same lot as, the principal building, and used for an accessory use.
Accessory Use - a use incidental to, and subordinate to and located on the same lot occupied by the principal use to which it relates.
Antique Shop/Secondhand/Consignment Store – A business establishment used for the sale or trading at a negotiated price or fee of articles which are over 50 years old or have collected value at the time of the sale.
Area - area of a lot or site shall be calculated from dimensions derived by horizontal projections of the site.
Assisted Living Facility any premises in which food, shelter, assisted living services, assistance or supervision and supplemental health care services are provided for a period exceeding 24-hours for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation from the residence in the event of an emergency or medication prescribed for self-administration, and licensed and regulated as such by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. For the purpose of this ordinance, Assisted Living facilities shall be considered as nursing homes.
Automobile Parts Sales (Inside Only) – A facility for the retail sale of auto parts, tools, and related items.
Automobile Sales/Services – A business establishment devoted to the retail sales of motor vehicles, including accessory service and repair facilities, if such service and repair are conducted within a completely-enclosed building and/or the retail repair, servicing, maintenance and reconstruction of motor vehicles, but not including car washes per se and/or use whereby motor vehicles are stored awaiting transport to a different location.
Banks/Financial Establishment – A business establishment specializing in, but not limited to, savings and loans, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodity exchanges, insurance agents, lessors, lessees, buyers, sellers, agents and developers of real estate.
Basement - a floor level completely below grade or floor level in which more than two-thirds (2/3) of the perimeter walls are below grade. A wall shall be considered below grade where the dimension from the first-floor line to the finished grade is five (5) feet or less, and the slope of the finished grade extending ten (10) feet from the building walls does not exceed thirty (30) degrees.
Bed and Breakfast - an owner-occupied residence offering, for pay, overnight or short-term lodging and breakfast for transient guests. Said Bed and Breakfast must comply with regulations of the Beaver Falls Rental registration program.
Bicycle Shop – A business establishment specializing in the sale and/or repair of bicycles and bicycle related merchandise.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 7
Billboard - a sign that identifies or communicates a commercial or non-commercial message related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located.
Bottle Club – an establishment operated for profit or pecuniary gain, which has a capacity for the assemblage of twenty (20) or more persons and in which alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are not legally sold but where alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed beverages are either provided by the operator or agents or employees of the operator for consumption on the premises or are brought into or kept at the establishment by the patrons or persons assembling there for use and consumption. The term shall not include a licensee under the act of April 12, 1951 (P.L.90, No.21), known as the Liquor Code, or any organization as set forth in section 6 of the act of December 19, 1990 (P.L.1200,No.202), known as the Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act.
Brew Pub - A business establishment that brews a limited amount of beer and/or cider, with less production than that of a micro-brewery, and serves their brewed product in addition to other alcoholic beverages in their establishment, in addition to food as a secondary focus.
Brewery - A business establishment focusing on the large-scale production of beer and/or cider, brewing more than 15,000 barrels of product per year, which may serve their product in this establishment but does not offer food.
Building - a roofed structure, whether or not enclosed by walls, to be used for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, goods, materials or animals.
Building or Set-Back Line – The line to which a building or structure may encroach towards a yard or setback.
Building Material/Supply Yards –The storage of material in outdoor yards for retail sale, including, lumber, pipe, culverts and block
Business Service - any business activity that renders service to other commercial or industrial enterprises. including banks, credit unions and other financial services.
Car Wash - an area of land and/or a structure with machine- or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
Cemetery - land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Charging Station – An element in an infrastructure that supplies electric energy for the recharging of electric vehicles, such as plug-in electric vehicles, including electric cars, neighborhood electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids.
Check Cashing/Pawn Shop - A business establishment that for compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose.
Child Daycare Center- A facility licensed by the PA Department of Public Welfare that provides out of home care at any one time, for a part of a twenty-four (24) day to seven (7) or more children that are under the age of fifteen (15) years.
Coffee Shop/Café – A business that serves non-alcoholic coffee and other non-alcoholic drinks as well as other foods as a secondary focus.
Commercial Recreation, Indoor - a facility which offers various indoor recreational opportunities for its patrons including such games as: pool, billiards, bowling, video or computer games, other electronic simulation games, and similar pursuits.
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor - a facility which offers outdoor recreational or spectator opportunities for its patrons including such games as: miniature golf, driving ranges, tennis, team sports such as soccer or baseball, camps and clinics for sport instruction and similar pursuits. This category does not include recreation fields accessory to schools, churches or community based non-profit organizations.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 8
Commercial School – A school that may offer a wide range of educational or instructional activities (excluding vocational-mechanical trade schools as defined below) that may, or may not, be operated as a gainful business by some person or organization other than the public-school district. Examples include, but are not limited to, ballet, karate, painting, photography, computer training, and dance schools.
Communication Antenna – Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devises used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves eternal to or attached to the exterior of any building.
Conditional Use - a use to be allowed or denied by the City Council pursuant to public notice and hearing and recommendations by the City Planning Commission and pursuant to the express standards and criteria set forth in this Ordinance. In allowing a conditional use, the City Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Planning Code and of this Ordinance.
Construction - the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
Control Room – A sound-proof room used in a Media/Sound Production/Recording Studio which allows for the recording of optimum acoustic properties by acoustic isolation through the absorption, diffusion, or deflection of sound by use of the installation of specially designed, insulated materials within the room.
Convenience Store with Gas – A small business establishment, selling a limited variety of food and nonfood precuts, including prepare food but with limited or no patron seating, typically with extended hours of operation, which also sell gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels.
Convenience Store without Gas – A small business establishment, selling a limited variety of food and nonfood precuts, including prepare food but with limited or no patron seating, typically with extended hours of operation, but does not sell gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels.
Coverage – the percentage of a lot covered by buildings or structures, measured as gross floor area divided into lot area.
Correctional Facility: A facility that provides lodging, meals, counseling, treatment, and rehabilitation to adjudicated delinquents, parolees, and individuals, with security to confine said persons. This definition includes community corrections centers as well as other similar transitional housing for offenders. (see also halfway house)
Craftsman/Fabrication – A business establishment that produces on the premises articles for sale of artistic quality or effect and/or handmade workmanship. Examples include candle making, glass blowing, weaving, pottery making, woodworking, and similar products.
Dormitory: A residential facility or dwelling that only houses full-time students and staff persons of an accredited college or university. Dormitories differ from other student dwellings by their formal relationship with a college or university. Residence is based upon adherence to all rules and policies of said college or university (See Also Student Dwelling).
Drive-Thru Facility - A building opening, including windows, doors, or mechanical devices, through which occupants of a motor vehicles obtain a product or service.
Dwelling - a building arranged, intended, designed or used as the living quarters for one (1) or more families living independently of each other upon the premises. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include "hotel," or "motel."
(a) Single-family dwelling - a building containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
(b) Two-family dwelling - a building containing two (2) dwelling units, collectively defined under this Ordinance as a duplex, regardless of configuration.
(c) Multi-family dwelling - a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including apartment houses, townhouses, flats, and garden apartments.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 9
(d) Detached dwelling - a dwelling with yards on all four (4) sides.
(e) Student Dwelling A dwelling unit occupied by three (3) or more persons who are not related by blood marriage or adoption, and attending or about to attend, a post-secondary college or university on a full-time basis, but the dwelling unit is not formally associated with a College or university and residence is not based upon adherence to college or university rules and policies.
Dwelling Unit - a building or portion thereof containing one (1) or more rooms for living purposes together with separate and exclusive cooking and sanitary facilities, accessible from the outdoors either directly or through an entrance hall shared with other dwelling units, and used or intended to be used by one (1) family.
Electronic and Satellite Dish Antenna – See Communications Antenna.
Essential Services - the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health and safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. Essential Services shall have no minimum lot size.
Equipment Sales and Service – businesses involved in the sale, rental, or servicing of motor vehicles or machinery not necessarily intended for registration, licensing, and travel on highways, including those used for agriculture, forestry, and construction.
Family -an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or foster child care, including domestic servants or gratuitous guests, thereof, or a group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons living together without supervision in a dwelling unit; or, any number of persons protected by the provisions of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et. seq., as now or hereafter amended) living together in a Group Residence with supervision, provided those persons do not have a criminal record. Family shall not include persons living together in a Halfway House, Dormitory, Assisted Living Facility, or Nursing Home, as defined herein, or any other supervised group living arrangement for persons other than those protected by the Fair Housing Act, or persons who constitute a direct threat to others or their physical property. (See also Student Dwelling)
Family Day Care Home- Applies to facilities licensed by the PA Department of Public Welfare in which out of home care is provided, at any one time, for part of a twenty-four (24) hour day, to four, five or six children who are not related to the operator and are under the age of fifteen (15) years.
Fast Food Restaurant – A business establishment that offers quick food service for consumption on or off the premises which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service or prepared, fired or grilled quickly or heated in a device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer’s table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
Sit Down Restaurant - A business establishment maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are served to the public on demand from a menu during stated business hours, served in and on reusable containers and dinnerware, to be consumed on the premises primarily inside the building at tables, booths, or counters, with chairs, benches, or stools.
Flea Market – a business which leases outdoor, tent or partially enclosed space to persons who wish to vend a variety of new and used goods for sale to the general public by displaying those goods on tables, in or on motor vehicles, or on the ground. This definition does not include farmers’ markets, which sell produce, flowers, and similar agricultural products.
Forestry– the management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, Pursuant to Section 603f of the Pa Municipalities Planning Code, forestry shall be a permitted use by right in all zoning districts wherein harvesting of timber is not conducted pursuant to any land development.
Floor Area - the sum of the gross area of the several floors of a building or buildings measured from the face of the exterior walls, or from the center line of the walls separating two (2) buildings.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 10
Funeral Home – A business establishment which prepares the remains of deceased humans for burial and cremation. This use may also conduct funeral services.
Furniture Store - A business establishment specializing in the retail sale and/or repair of furniture.
Gallery - A business establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or display of art books, paintings, sculpture, or other works of art.
Garage or Yard Sale– A temporary event to sell used household goods from a single-family dwelling, an accessory building, or a yard area.
General Retail - A business establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumptions and rendering services incidental the sale of such goods and has a lot size greater than 5,000 sq. ft.
Green Grocer - A business establishment that sells primarily fresh fruits and vegetable for an advertised price.
Grocery Store - A business establishment that sells produce, dry goods, meats, baked goods, dairy items, frozen foods and the like. This includes supermarkets, food stores, dairies, delicatessens, but does not include convenience stores.
Gross Floor Area (GFA) - the total floor area for which the tenant pays rent and that is designed for the tenant’s occupancy and exclusive use.
Group Residence–A permanent, family-like living arrangement for persons who may have a disability or other limitation that requires additional care or supervision in daily living. This definition does not include group housing for persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of having been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent, having a criminal record, or have a status as a sex offender, persons who currently use illegal drugs, persons who have been convicted of the manufacture or sale of illegal drugs, or persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others.
Halfway House/Transitional Housing Facility – a transitional residential facility licensed and operated by a government or social service agency or other entity that provides a supervised environment to residents who require psychiatric, correctional or behavioral treatment between periods of institutional and independent living. (see also correctional facility)
Hardware/Appliance Store - A business establishment where retail items such as plumbing, heating, electronic supplies, tools, and paints are sold.
Health/Fitness Center – A business establishment where members or nonmembers use equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise.
Heavy Industry – the manufacture, storage, processing, and treatment of materials which are potentially hazardous, or processes which produce significant amounts of smoke, noise, glare, or dust or odor as a primary or secondary effect of the principal use of the land or buildings. Heavy Industry characteristically employs some of such equipment such as smokestacks, tanks, distillation or reaction columns, chemical processing equipment, scrubbing towers, pickling equipment and waste-treatment lagoons. Heavy industry, although conceivably operable without polluting the environment, has the potential to pollute when equipment malfunctions or human error occurs. Examples of heavy industry are oil refineries, basic steel manufacturing plants (such as foundries, blast furnaces, and stamping mills), industries handling animal offal or hides, basic cellulose pulp-paper mills and similar fiberboard and plywood production, production of cement and asphalt, lime manufacturing, ore and metal smelting and refining, natural gas distillation, natural gas processing plants, and natural gas compression and/or bulk storage, and chemical plants such as petrochemical complexes. An incinerator structure or facility which, including the incinerator, contains five thousand (5,000) square feet or more, whether public or private, is “heavy industry” for purpose of this Ordinance, as is any electric power production plant which is a principal use, whether said power is generated by coal, natural gas, cogeneration or wind turbines.
Height of Building - the vertical distance measured from the average level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of the building to the highest point of the roof and to the highest point on any structure which rises wholly or partly above the roof.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 11
Home Occupation - any use customarily carried on entirely within a dwelling, by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the residential character thereof. Examples include, but are not limited to: professional services, such as legal, financial, accounting or engineers, barber and beauty shops, studios of artists, writers and associations. (See also No Impact Home Based Business.)
Indoor Commercial Recreation See Commercial Recreation
Jeweler – A business establishment specializing in the retail sale and/or repair of jewelry.
Junk - any discarded material or article, and shall include, but not be limited to, scrap metal, scrapped or abandoned motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers and structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a proper container shall mean a solid plastic or metal container, with a sealable lid, specifically designed for the storage of waste matter.
Junk Yard - any place where any junk is stored, disposed of, or accumulated. This definition shall include recycling centers, recycling yards, and salvage businesses and vehicles lacking current inspection or registration except for storage in within a building. However, it does not include municipal recycling centers where no materials are stored in an exterior environment.
Laboratory – A facility for scientific research, analysis, investigation, testing, or experimentation of natural resources, medical resources, and manufactured materials.
Library – A public enterprise for the use, but not sale, or literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials.
Light Manufacturing - the assembly, fabrication, manufacture, production, processing, storage and/or wholesale distribution of goods or products where no process involved will produce: noise, light, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or emissions, noxious or dangerous to neighboring properties within four hundred (400) feet, including production of the following goods: home appliances; electrical instruments; office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices; time pieces; jewelry; optical goods; musical instruments; novelties; wood products (but not manufacture of fiberboard, paper mills, or similar operations); printed material; lithographic plates; type composition, machine tools and machine shops, dies and gauges; tool and die, valve grinding, ceramics; apparel; light weight nonferrous metal castings; light sheet metal products; plastic goods; pharmaceutical goods; food products (but not including animal slaughtering, curing nor rendering of fats).
Lot - a tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint ownership, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures, and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required. The term "lot" shall also mean "parcel," "plot," "site," or similar term.
Lot, Corner - a lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets.
Lot, Line - any line dividing a lot from another lot or from an abutting street or other right-of-way.
Media/Sound Production/Recording Studio – A business establishment engaged in the production and recording of sound, whether it be through broadcasting with the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms or by use of acoustic and electronic instruments in combination with mixing consol devices. The studio may include a control room.
Medical Clinic– An institution providing health services primarily for human medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities and staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities. Any facility for methadone treatment or other narcotic treatment programs approved by the Pennsylvania Department of health shall not be considered a Medical Clinic use.
Medical Office - A business establishment where one (1) or more licensed medical professionals provide diagnostic services, medical, dental, and/or psychiatric services and/or treatment diagnosis and treatment to the general public without overnight accommodation and may include uses such as reception areas, waiting areas, consultation rooms, x-ray and dispensary, providing that all such uses shall have access only from the interior of the building or structure. The clinic generally operates on an appointment basis and does not
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 12
primarily take walk-in patients. Any facility for methadone treatment or other narcotic treatment programs approved by the Pennsylvania Department of health shall not be considered a Medical Office use.
Micro-Brewery - A business establishment where beer, ale, etc. are brewed, typically in conjunction with a bar, tavern, or restaurant use. The maximum brewing capacity shall not exceed 15,000 gallons per year.
Mineral Extraction: Mineral extraction shall include all activity which removes from the surface or beneath the surface of the land some material mineral resource, natural resource or other element of economic value, by means of mechanical excavation necessary to separate the desired material from an undesirable one; or to remove the strata or material which overlies or is above the desired material in its natural condition and position. Open pit mining includes, but is not limited to, the excavation necessary to the extraction of: sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, coal, clay, and shale and iron ore.
Mixed-Use – A lot or building on or in which various land uses, such as office, commercial, institutional and/or residential are combined with non-residential at street level and residential or non-residential on upper floor(s).
Hotel/Motel – A business establishment or group of detached or connected buildings designed or used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for travelers.
Mobile Home - a transportable, single-family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one (1) or more units designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site, complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
Multi-Purpose Workshop – A facility either operated as a for-profit, or public enterprise, that provides building space, tools, equipment and materials for a nominal fee and which can be used to fabricate artwork, goods, etc., with the exception of sound production, for sale or personal use. Neighborhood Business – small-scale retail enterprises intended to benefit neighborhood residents or tourists. Limited retail businesses are distinguished from other retail businesses by smaller size less than five thousand (5,000) square feet gross floor area and confining all commercial activities indoors. No Impact Home-Based Business – a business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery, or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements: A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses. B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling. C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature. D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking signs or lights. E. The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood. F. The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. G. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the habitable floor area. H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 13
I. If the business meets all such requirements, it shall be considered a lawful accessory use to a dwelling. (See also Home Occupation)
Nonconforming Lot - a lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
Nonconforming Structure - a structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable dimensional or extent of use provisions of this Ordinance or an amendment hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this Ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of this Ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming Use - a use, whether of land or structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this Ordinance or amendment hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this Ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of this Ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Non-Medical Office – An office or studio of a lawyer, architect, artist, engineer, certified public accountant, real estate broker or salesman, insurance broker or agent, musician, teacher, or similar occupation.
Nursing Home - a facility to give long-term skilled care to geriatric or handicapped patients and licensed as such a facility by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, a nursing home, as licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania may also include personal care or assisted living options.
Older Adult Daily Living Center- a facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, serving clients with functional impairment who are 60 years or older, or who are 18 years and older who have post-stroke dementia, Parkinson’s or dementia related disease such as Alzheimer’s or other organic brain syndrome.
Outdoor Seating (for Eating Establishments) – Designated outdoor area and furniture reserved for patrons of an eating establishment which does not impose upon the public right-of-way.
Parking Lot, Public/Private Off-Street – Any public or private parking lot wholly outside any public right-of-way, constructed to provide parking spaces and is connected to a public street by a driveway.
Parking Space - an open space with an approved, paved dustless all-weather surface, or space in a private garage or other structure with an effective length of at least eighteen (18) feet and a uniform width of at least nine (9) feet for the storage of one (1) automobile and accessible from a public way. All variations of dustless surfaces are subject to the approval of the zoning officer.
Personal Care Home - a facility licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Personal Services - any enterprise conducted for people which primarily offers services to the general public, such as: shoe repair, valet services, watch repairing, barber shops, beauty parlors and related activities.
Pet Grooming – A business establishment devoted exclusively to the grooming and hygienic cleaning of domestic animals but not the temporary housing, breeding, and/or sale of domestic animals.
Pharmacy - A licensed to business establishment which primarily sells prescription drugs, patent medicines and legal surgical, medicinal and sickroom supplies. A pharmacy may be within a retail establishment.
Place of Assembly/Worship – An institution that is designed for a not-for-profit assembly or collection of persons, for civic, political, educational, social or religious purposes and where recreation, amusement, dining or religious worship may occur as accessory activities. A place of assembly does not include a private club, a public school, university, college, trade or commercial school, day care services or any form of group residence or halfway house.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 14
Planning Code - the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as re-enacted and amended by Act No. 170 of 1988 and Acts 67 and 68 of 2000, and as further amended from time to time.
Print/Copy Shop - A business establishment that provides duplicating services using photocopying, blueprint, and printing equipment and may include the collating and binding of booklets and reports.
Private Clubs – buildings and related facilities owned and operated by an association or group of individuals established for fraternal, social, educational, conservation, recreational or civic benefit of members. Full access to facilities is typically restricted to members and their guests for the purposes of this Ordinance, this definition does not include miniature golf, golf driving ranges, paintball, or other uses defined by this Ordinance as various forms of commercial recreation. No sexually oriented business or bottle club may operate as a private club under this definition.
Non-Medical Office – An office or studio of a lawyer, architect, artist, engineer, certified public accountant, real estate broker or salesman, insurance broker or agent, musician, teacher, or similar occupation.
Pub/Tavern – A business establishment specialize in the sale of alcoholic beverages, as well as the sale of food not necessarily as a secondary focus.
Public Parks and Playgrounds - parks and playgrounds that are owned and operated by the City or by an authority created for such purposes by the City or any government agency.
Retail Bakery - A business establishment specializing in the retail production and sale of pastry confections to be sold primarily at the establishment and secondary at local establishments that sell food.
Retail Liquor Store– A business establishment, either a private enterprise or state-owned and operated, which sells distilled spirits.
Sandwich Shop – A small restaurant where lunches are served, specializing in sandwiches.
Screening - screening shall mean an opaque fence, screen planting or wall at least six (6) feet high, provided in such a way that it will block a line of sight.
Self Service Storage Facilities–a building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractors supplies.
Service and Repair Business – a form of equipment service or repair which may include woodworking enterprises, repair services such as welding, vehicle or machinery repair, and incidental fabrication or retail sales of items.
Service Station - an area of land, together with any structure thereon, used for the retail sale and dispensing of motor fuel, and lubricants and incidental services, such as lubrication and washing of motor vehicles, and the sale, installation or minor repairs of tires, batteries or other automobile accessories.
Sexually Oriented Business – businesses which require a license and meet the definitions contained in the Beaver Falls City Sexually Oriented Business Licensing Ordinance.
Shopping Center – a commercial facility developed as a mixture of uses, including retail sales, theaters, personal services and eating and drinking places, but planned, constructed, managed or promoted as an integral whole.
Sign- any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or other representations used for announcement, direction, advertisement or identification. The actual area of any sign shall be measured in square feet and determined by the sum of the geometrically computed area(s) encompassing separate individual letters, words, or graphic elements on the background.
Sign, Business - a sign that directs attention to a business, profession or industry conducted on the premises or to products sold, manufactured or assembled upon the same premises upon which it is displayed.
Sign, Changeable Copy–a sign or portion thereof which has a readerboard for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an illumination
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 15
device and may be changed or re-arranged manually with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be
changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
Sign, Electronic–Electronic signs are identified by their subtype: electronic changeable copy signs, electronic
graphic display signs multi-vision signs, or video display signs.
Sign, Electronic Changeable Copy - a sign or portion thereof that displays single color electronic information in
which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using
different combinations of single color light emitting diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination
devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable,
microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official or time
and temperature signs. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
Sign, Electronic Graphic Display - a sign or portion thereof that displays multiple color electronic, static images,
static graphics or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small number of matrix elements
using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination
devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by
means of fade, repixalization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic graphic display signs include
projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
Sign, Multi-Vision – any sign composed in whole or in part of a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders
that are capable of being rotated at intervals so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a
different image and when properly functioning allows on a single sign structure the display at any given time
one of two or more images.
Sign, Video Display - a sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method of display
characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special
effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which
give the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands
of light, or expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. Video display
signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
Sign, Façade, Fascia, or Wall - A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure
and that projects not more than eighteen (18) inches from the building or structure wall. Also, includes signs
affixed to architectural projections that project from a building provided the copy area of such signs remains on
a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which
it is affixed.
Sign, Freestanding- a sign principally supported by one or more columns, poles, or
braces placed in or upon the ground.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 16
Sign, Freestanding Monument– a freestanding sign where the supporting structure of the sign face is architecturally and aesthetically integrated into the overall design of the sign and the base of supporting structure is often embellished to conceal all structural or support members. Either eighty percent (80%) of the base supporting structure shall be in contact with the ground, or the lowest portion of the sign face shall be no greater than 36 inches from the ground. The sign face should be solid and not intended to be a pole type design
Sign, Freestanding Pole– a sign erected, supported, mounted on a pole or poles which is wholly independent of any building or other structure for support.
Sign, Roof- a sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves, and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 17
Sign, Sandwich Board- a temporary sign created by attaching two sign faces at a single point, intended to be self-supporting.
Sign, Window - a sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message intended to be visible to exterior environment.
Single Room Occupancy – a residential facility in which furnished rooms are rented on a weekly or monthly basis and which provides common facilities and services for laundry, cleaning, and meals.
Sit Down Restaurant - A business establishment maintained, operated, and/or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are served to the public on demand from a menu during stated business hours, served in and on reusable containers and dinnerware, to be consumed on the premises primarily inside the building at tables, booths, or counters, with chairs, benches, or stools.
Small-Scale Retail - A business establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumptions and rendering services incidental the sale of such goods and has a lot size less than 5,000 sq ft.
Social Services – An enterprise providing assistance and aid to those persons requiring counseling for psychological problems, employment, learning disabilities and physical disabilities, and residential care such as child day care and nurseries.
Solar Collectors and Solar Related Equipment – A device or combination of devices located exclusively on the roof of a building or structure that does or will use direct sunlight as a source of energy for such purposes as hearing or cooling a structure, heating or pumping water, or generating electricity.
Special Exception - a use permitted with special permission granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, to occupy or use land and/or a building for specific purposes in accordance with the criteria set forth in this Ordinance when such use is not permitted by right.
Story – The vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling, or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. Parapet facades do not constitute a story.
Street - a public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, which provides a means of access to abutting property. The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, lane, alley and road or similar terms.
Street Line - a line defining the right-of-way boundaries of a street.
Structure - any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
Studio - A business establishment used by an artist, photographer, or artisan or used for radio or television broadcasting.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 18
Theatre – A business establishment devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.
Trade School – A school establishment to provide for the teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial, or artistic skills.
Treatment Center – A detoxification clinic devoted to catalyzing the elimination or reduction of substance abuse through out-patient care treatment.
Truck Terminal - land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or long-term accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal.
Transitional Housing Facility a structure whose principal use is to provide shelter for more than a 12 hour period to two (2) or more persons who are homeless, subject to abuse, under a protection from abuse order, or whom otherwise need transitional housing, but are not persons in group housing due to being adjudicated a juvenile delinquent, having a criminal record, or have a status as a sex offender, or persons who currently use illegal drugs, or persons who have been convicted of the manufacture or sale of illegal drugs, or persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others.(See also Halfway House)
Veterinary Clinic - a facility used for the treatment of domestic animals for pay with health treatment provided by a licensed veterinarian.
Warehousing and Distribution - a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured product, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, storage of explosive, flammable, hazardous or community-recognized offensive conditions shall be considered heavy industry.
Wholesale Business - A business establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise, dry goods and food stuffs to retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business customers or other wholesalers, not to the general public. The activities may include the merchandise warehousing and distribution.
Winery – An agricultural processing facility use for the fermentation and or processing of fruit juice into wine or the re-fermenting of still wine into sparkling wine.
Yard – An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, not occupied by structure or used for parking or storage, except as otherwise provided, and not including any portion of a street or alley. (SEE LOT AND YARD AREA SKETCH)
Yard, Front – a setback line from an adjacent right-of-way extending for the full width of the lot. (SEE LOT AND YARD AREA SKETCH)
Yard, Rear – a yard between the rear lot line and a line drawn, parallel thereto at such distance as may be specified herein for any zoning district, and extending for the full width of the lot. (SEE LOT AND YARD AREA SKETCH)
Yard, Side – an open yard space between the side lot line and parallel thereto extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. (SEE LOT AND YARD AREA SKETCH)
Yard Sale-See Garage Sale
Zoning Officer - the Zoning Officer of the City or his/her authorized representative or deputies.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 19
Yard Area Sketch #1
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 20
ARTICLE 5
R-1A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 501 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to establish a low density, single family residential district that protects the integrity of single family residential development from land use conflicts by development of greater density or intensity.
TABLE 502 R-1A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, TABLE OF USES
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Single family dwellings
Home occupations (See Section 1825)
Place of Assembly/Worship
Essential Service Structure (See Section 1814)
Public Parks and Playgrounds
Family Day Care Home (See Section 1815)
Essential Services
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
ACCESSORY USES:
Private garages
Private residential swimming pools, tennis courts, tool and/or storage sheds and greenhouses.
No-impact home based business
Walls, fences, lamp posts and similar accessory structures subject to the limitations contained in Article 16
Storage or parking of a commercially licensed vehicle, see Article 16
Storage or parking of major recreation equipment, see Article 16
Shelter for Household Pets, see Article 16
Other accessory uses, provided They shall be customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use and they shall be located on the same lot as the principal use.
TABLE 503 R-1A DISTRICT
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT STANDARDS
Single-Family
Dwellings, Family
Day Care Homes, No impact Home Based Business
Place of Worship, Public Parks, Essential Service Structure, Parks and Playgrounds
Minimum Lot Area
7,000 square feet
8,500 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
40 Feet
40 Feet
Minimum Front Yard
20 Feet
20 Feet
Minimum Side Yard
12 Feet
30 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard
20 Feet
30 Feet
Maximum Height
35 Feet
35 Feet
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
70 Percent
See Also Section 1614 for Alternative Standards for existing single family dwellings on lots of record.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 21
ARTICLE 6
R-1B RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE FAMILY)
SECTION 601 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to establish a medium density residential district and to encourage homeownership for younger families.
TABLE 602 R-1B RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, TABLE OF USES
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Single family dwellings
Medical Office (Section 1832) and Non-medical Office (See Section 1836)
Duplexes, or two family dwellings; provided that no duplex or two family dwelling shall abut another duplex or two family dwelling on any side lot line
Nursing, convalescent or Personal Care homes (See Section 1837)
Churches
Home occupations (See Section 1825)
Public and parochial schools
Essential Service Structure (See Section 1814)
Public and non-commercial recreation facilities
Family Day Care Home (See Section 1815)
Essential services as defined in Article IV and provided they shall be necessary to the adequate distribution of service and shall not include any type of equipment that will interfere with local radio and/or television reception or otherwise be detrimental to the surrounding area.
Dormitories (see section 1812)
ACCESSORY USES:
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Private garages
Private residential swimming pools, tennis courts, tool and/or storage sheds and greenhouses
Walls, fences, lamp posts and similar accessory structures subject to the height limitations contained in Article 16
Storage or parking of a commercially licensed vehicle, see Article 16
Storage or parking of major recreation equipment, see Article 16
Shelter for Household Pets, See Article 16
Other accessory uses, provided They shall be customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use and they shall be located on the same lot as the principal use.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 22
TABLE 603 R1B DISTRICT
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT STANDARDS
Single-Family
Dwellings
Duplexes
Place of Assembly/Worship, Public parks and Playgrounds, Essential Service Structure
Minimum Lot Area
6,000 Square Feet
8,500 Square feet for Duplex
10,000 Square feet for first three units in multiple family dwelling plus 1,500 square feet per each unit thereafter
8,500 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
40 Feet
40 Feet
40 Feet
Minimum Front Yard
20 Feet
20 Feet
20 Feet
Minimum Side Yard
12 Feet
20 Feet
30 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard
20 Feet
30 Feet
30 Feet
Maximum Height
35 Feet
35 Feet
35 Feet
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
70 Percent
70 Percent
See Also Section 1614 for Alternative Standards for existing single family dwellings on lots of record.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 23
ARTICLE 7
R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(HIGH DENSITY)
SECTION 701 PURPOSE
The purpose of the R-2 Residential is to provide areas within the City where residential development can occur or be encouraged at higher densities than are permitted in other residential districts. Multi-family units are permitted and the development of such units, at higher residential densities, can be an incentive for encouraging "infill" development in those portions of the City.
TABLE 702 R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, TABLE OF USES
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Single family dwellings
Medical Office (See Section 1832) and Non-Medical Office (See Section 1836)
Duplexes
Nursing, convalescent or Personal Care homes (See Section 1837)
Multi-family dwellings, no structure shall contain more than eight dwelling units
Home occupations (See Section1825)
Churches
Essential Service Structure (See Section 1814)
Public and parochial schools
Family Day Care Home (See Section 1815)
Public and non-commercial recreation facilities
Dormitories (See Section 1812)
Essential services as defined in Article IV and provided they shall be necessary to the adequate distribution of service and shall not include any type of equipment that will interfere with local radio and/or television reception or otherwise be detrimental to the surrounding area.
Transitional Housing Facility (See Section 1822)
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
ACCESSORY USES:
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
Private garages
Transitional Housing Facility (See Section 1822)
Private residential swimming pools, tennis courts, tool and/or storage sheds and greenhouses
Walls, fences, lamp posts and similar accessory structures subject to the height limitations contained in Article 16
Storage or parking of a commercially licensed vehicle, see Article 16
Storage or parking of major recreation equipment, see Article 16
Shelter for Household Pets, see Article 16
Other accessory uses, provided They shall be customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted use and they shall be located on the same lot as the principal use.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 24
TABLE 703 R-2 DISTRICT
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT STANDARDS*
Single-Family
Dwellings
Duplex and Multiple Family Dwellings
Place of Assembly/Worship, Public parks and Playgrounds, Essential Service Structure
Minimum Lot Area
6,000 Square Feet
8,500 Square feet for Duplex
10,000 Square feet for first three units in multiple family dwelling plus 1,500 square feet per each unit thereafter
8,500 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
40 Feet
40 Feet
40 Feet
Minimum Front Yard
20 Feet
20 Feet
20 Feet
Minimum Side Yard
12 Feet
30 Feet
30 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard
20 Feet
20 Feet
30 Feet
Maximum Height
35 Feet
35 Feet
35 Feet
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
80 Percent
80 Percent
See Also Section 1614 for Alternative Standards for existing single family dwellings on lots of record.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 25
ARTICLE 8
CON CONSERVATION DISTRICT
SECTION 801 PURPOSE
The purpose of the "C" - CONSERVATION District is to ensure careful site planning and appropriate densities for development in areas of steep slope and other environmental limitations.
Table 802 C Conservation District, Table of Uses
PERMITTED USES:
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
Single Family Dwellings
Cemeteries (See Section 1804)
Essential services as defined in Article IV provided they shall be necessary to the adequate distribution of service and shall not include any type of equipment that will interfere with local radio and/or television reception, or otherwise be detrimental to the surrounding area
CONDITIONAL USES:
Public recreation facilities.
Multiple Family Dwellings (See Section 1834)
ACCESSORY USES:
Mineral extraction (See Section 1833)
Private garages
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Private residential swimming pools, tennis courts, tool and/or storage sheds and greenhouses.
Craftsman/Fabrications (See Section 1810)
Shelter for Household Pets, see Article 16
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
No-impact home based business
Walls, fences, lamp posts and similar accessory structures subject to the limitations contained in Article 16
Storage or parking of a commercially licensed vehicle, see Article 16
Storage or parking of major recreation equipment, see Article 16
TABLE 803 CON DISTRICT
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT STANDARDS
Single-Family
Dwellings
Duplex and Multiple Family Dwellings
All other Uses
Minimum Lot Area
15,000 Square Feet
20,000 Square feet for Duplex
15,000 Square feet for first three units in multiple family dwelling plus 1,500 square feet per each unit thereafter
10,000 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
75 Feet
75 Feet
75 Feet
Minimum Front Yard
20 Feet
20 Feet
20 Feet
Minimum Side Yard
12 Feet
30 Feet
30 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard
30 Feet
30 Feet
30 Feet
Maximum Height
35 Feet
35 Feet
35 Feet
Maximum Coverage
33 Percent
33 Percent
30 Percent
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 26
ARTICLE 9
TRAN TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION 901 PURPOSE
The purpose of the TRAN Transitional District is to provide an area within the City where residential and commercial development can be mixed to accommodate the needs of Geneva College students and create business opportunities for small scale business. This area is to encourage housing of students around the immediate area of the campus and rather than in established residential districts.
Table 902 TRAN Transitional district, Table of Uses
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Single-family detached dwellings.
Student Dwellings (See Section 1849)
Duplex, two-family dwellings.
Essential Service Structure (see Section 1814)
Place of Assembly/Worship
Dormitories (See Section 1812)
Community Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
Home occupations (See Section 1825)
Essential services.
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
Banks, drive-in and/or walk in.
Conversion Apartment (See Section 1809)
Medical Clinic/Laboratory
Bed & Breakfast Homestay & Inn (See Section 1801)
Barber shops and beauty salons.
Halfway House/Transitional Housing Facility (See Section 1822)
Retail Businesses limited to 40,000 square feet of gross floor area per building.
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Non-medical Office
Craftsman/Fabrications (See Section 1810)
Mixed residential and commercial buildings with no more than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area commercial uses located on the ground floor and/or basement levels of the building
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
Funeral Home
Child Care Center
ACCESSORY USES:
Private garages and parking areas
Signs
Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a principal permitted use
No-impact home base business
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 27
TABLE 903 TRAN DISTRICT
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT STANDARDS
Single-Family
Dwellings, Family
Day Care Homes, No impact Home Based Business, essential service structure
Duplex and Multiple Family Dwellings
All other Uses
Minimum Lot Area
6,000 Square Feet
20,000 Square feet for Duplex
8,500 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
40 Feet
15,000 Square feet for first three units in multiple family dwelling plus 1,500 square feet per each unit thereafter
40 Feet
Minimum Front Yard
30 Feet
75 Feet
30 Feet
Minimum Side Yard
10 Feet
10 Feet
10 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard
15 Feet
15 Feet
15 Feet
Maximum Height
35 Feet
35 Feet
35 Feet
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
80 Percent
80 Percent
See Also Section 1614 for Alternative Standards for existing single family dwellings on lots of record.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 28
ARTICLE 10
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION 1001
The purpose of this district is to create an automobile-oriented commercial zone whose establishments provide day-to-day convenience to the surrounding neighborhood. The district accommodates general retail, medical, professional and business services on moderately large lots with moderately sized building footprints.
TABLE 1002 DOWNTOWN NORTH DISTRICT (DND) TABLE OF USE
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Bank/Financial Establishment
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Brew-Pub
Coffee Shop/Sandwich Stop/Cafe
Dormitories (See Section 1812)
Convenience Store without Gas
Child Day Care Center/Older Adult Daily Living Center (See Section 1811)
Fast Food Restaurant
Funeral Home (See Section 1817)
Gallery
General Retail (See Section 1820)
Green Grocer
Health/Fitness Center (See Section 1823)
Personal Service (barber, salon, etc.)
Jeweler (See Section 1828)
Medical Office
Parking Lot, Public/Private Off-Street (See Section 1839)
Mixed Use
Pub/Tavern (See Section 1843)
Multi-Purpose Workshop
Retail Bakery (See Section 1844)
Non-Medical Office
Theatre (See Section 1850)
Pet Grooming
Winery (See Section 1854)
Pharmacy
Print/Copy Shop
Sit-Down Restaurants
Small-Scale Retail
Automobile Parts Sales (Inside Only)
Craftsman/Fabrication
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (SEE ARTICLE 15):
Carport
Communications Antenna
Drive-thru Facility
Electronic and Satellite Dish Antenna
Essential Services
Charging Station
Home-based Business, No Impact
Parking Space(s), Private Off-Street
Outdoor Seating (for Eating Establishments)
Solar Collectors and Solar-related Equipment
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 29
TABLE 1003 DOWNTOWN NORTH DISTRICT (DND)
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS USE TYPE/DIMENSION ALL USES
Minimum Lot Area
10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
30 Feet
Maximum Lot Width
n/a
Maximum Footprint of tenant space (ground floor)
7,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Front Yard Setback
10 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Setback
10 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
25 ft.
Maximum Front Yard Setback
15 ft.
Maximum Side Yard Setback
40 ft.
Maximum Rear Yard Setback
n/a
Minimum Parking Setback in Front
15 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Side
10 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Rear
10 ft.
Minimum Height of Structure
n/a
Maximum Height of Structure
35 ft.
Maximum Coverage
70%
SECTION 1004 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
A. Building façade/main entrance location of principal use must face 7th Avenue.
B. If the lot has a yard adjoining a single family residential uses, there is a minimum building setback of 30 ft.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 30
SECTION 1005 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide a pedestrian-orientated commercial nucleus that supports dining, traditional retail, and personal service establishments on smaller lots with smaller building footprints.
TABLE 1006 DOWNTOWN CENTRAL DISTRICT (DCD) TABLE OF USE
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Antique Shop/Secondhand/Consignment Store
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Bank/Financial Institution
Bicycle Shop
Health/Fitness Center (See Section 1823)
Brew-Pub
Indoor Commercial Recreation (See Section 1827)
Gallery
Media/Sound production/Recording Studio (See Section 1831)
Green Grocer
Medical Office (See Section 1832)
Hardware/Appliance Store
Multi-Family Dwellings (See Section 1834)
Jeweler
Non-Medical Office (See Section 1836)
Library
Pharmacy (See Section 1840)
Personal Service (barber, salon, etc.)
Private Club (See Section 1842)
Mixed Use
Multi-Purpose Workshop
Pet Grooming
Print/Copy Shop
Pub/Tavern
Retail Bakery
Sit-Down Restaurants
Small-Scale Retail
Theatre
Winery
Craftsman/Fabrication
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (SEE ARTICLE 15)
Communications Antenna
Electronic and Satellite Dish Antenna
Essential Services
Charging Station
Home-based Business, No Impact
Parking Space(s), Private Off-Street
Outdoor Seating (for Eating Establishments)
Solar Collectors and Solar-related Equipment
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 31
TABLE 1007 DOWNTOWN CENTRAL DISTRICT (DCD)
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS USE TYPE/DIMENSION ALL USES
Minimum Lot Area
3,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
20 Feet
Maximum Lot Width
150 ft.
Maximum Footprint of tenant space (ground floor)
3,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Front Yard Setback
0 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Setback
0ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
5 ft.
Maximum Front Yard Setback
0 ft.
Maximum Side Yard Setback
0 ft.
Maximum Rear Yard Setback
n/a
Minimum Parking Setback in Front
5 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Side
n/a
Minimum Parking Setback on Rear
n/a
Minimum Height of Structure
25 ft.
Maximum Height of Structure
75 ft.
Maximum Coverage
100%
SECTION 1008 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
A. Building façade/main entrance location of principal use must face 7th Avenue.
B. If the lot had a yard adjoining a single family residential uses, there is a minimum building setback of 20ft.
C. Every new building as of the date of this Ordinance that is constructed within the Downtown Central District must be a minimum of two stories, with both full stories visible from 7th Ave. The second story may be used as an upstairs outdoor patio, but at least 60% of the floor area of this second story must be completely enclosed, with the exception of windows. The front façade of the second story shall be constructed with the same materials as the first story’s front façade.
D. Second stories may be completely enclosed without operable windows in order for the space to function as storage space. If functioning as such, inoperable, non-transparent glass windows may be incorporated instead of operable, transparent glass windows on the front façade and shall complement the existing character of the district.
E. If the lot width exceeds 40 ft., architecture features such as architectural/structural columns or piers, differentiating parapets or building material shall be incorporated to articulate the front façade as multiple buildings rather than one continuous building and facade. The minimum width of an articulated façade shall be the same as the minimum lot width of the district, and the maximum articulated façade width shall not exceed 30 ft.
F. Private Off-Street Parking Spaces shall have ingress/egress points only accessible from alleys.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 32
SECTION 1009 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to define an automobile and pedestrian-oriented commercial corridor that offers retail establishments attracting both local and regional patrons. It also provides civic amenities and social services to the surrounding community and is characterized by large lots and building footprints.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 33
TABLE 1010 DOWNTOWN SOUTH DISTRICT (DSD) TABLE OF USE
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Antique Shop/Secondhand/Consignment Store
Commercial School/Trade School (See Section 1805)
Convenience Store without Gas (See Section 1807)
Bank/Financial Establishment
Bicycle Shop
Grocery store (See Section 1821)
Brew-Pub
Indoor Commercial Recreation (See Section 1827)
Brewery
Light Manufacturing (See Section 1830)
Check Cashing/Pawn Shop
Medical Office (See Section 1832)
Coffee Shop/Sandwich Shop/Café
Multi-Family Dwellings (See Section 1834)
Furniture Store
Non-Medical Office (See Section 1836)
Gallery
Pharmacy (See Section 1840)
Green Grocer
Private Club (See Section 1842)
Hardware/Appliance Store
Retail Liquor Store (See Section 1845)
Health/Fitness Center
Veterinary Clinic (See Section 1853)
Hotel/Motel
Jeweler
Library
Micro-Brewery
Mixed Use
Multi-Purpose Workshop
Personal Service (barber, salon, etc.)
Pet Grooming
Place of Assembly/Worship
Print/Copy Shop
Pub/Tavern
Retail Bakery
Sit-Down Restaurants
Small-Scale Retail
Theatre
Wholesale Business
Winery
Craftsman/Fabrication
Automobile Parts Sales (Inside Only)
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Carport
Communications Antenna
Drive-thru Facility
Electronic and Satellite Dish Antenna
Essential Services
Charging Station
Home-based Business, No Impact
Parking Space(s), Private Off-Street
Outdoor Seating (for Eating Establishments)
Solar Collectors and Solar-related Equipment
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 34
TABLE 1011 DOWNTOWN SOUTH DISTRICT (DSD)
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS USE TYPE/DIMENSION ALL USES
Minimum Lot Area
20,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
30 Feet
Maximum Lot Width
200 ft.
Maximum Footprint of tenant space (ground floor)
n/a
Minimum Front Yard Setback
0 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Setback
0ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
5 ft.
Maximum Front Yard Setback
0 ft.
Maximum Side Yard Setback
n/a
Maximum Rear Yard Setback
n/a
Minimum Parking Setback in Front
5 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Side
5 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Rear
5 ft.
Minimum Height of Structure
n/a
Maximum Height of Structure
50 ft.
Maximum Coverage
80%
SECTION 1012 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
A. Building façade/main entrance location of principal use must face 7th Avenue.
B. If the lot had a yard adjoining a single family residential uses, there is a minimum building setback of 20 ft.
C. If the lot width exceeds 60 ft., architecture features such as architectural/structural columns or piers, differentiating parapets or building material shall be incorporated to articulate the front façade as multiple buildings rather than one continuous building and facade. The minimum width of an articulated façade shall be the same as the minimum lot width of the district, and the maximum articulated façade width shall not exceed 50 ft.
D. Private Off-Street Parking spaces shall have ingress/egress points only accessible from alleys.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 35
SECTION 1013 PURPOSE
The purpose of this corridor is to establish a district for moderate scale fabrication activities and regional-scale commercial attraction, characterized by moderately sized lots and building footprints.
TABLE 1014 GATEWAY DISTRICT (GD) TABLE OF USE
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Automobile Parts & Repair
Bottle Club (See Section 1802)
Automobile Sales/Services
Commercial School/Trade School (See Section 1805)
Brewery
Car Wash
Gallery (See Section 1818)
Convenience Store with Gas
Halfway House (See Section 1822)
Convenience Store without Gas
Medical Office (See Section 1832)
Fast Food Restaurant
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
General Retail
Parking Lot, Private/Public Off-Street (See Section 1839)
Green Grocer
Place of Assembly/Worship (See Section 1841)
Grocery Store
Treatment Center (See Section 1851)
Hardware/Appliance Store
Veterinary Clinic (See Section 1853)
Hotel/Motel
Indoor Commercial recreation
Light Manufacturing
Medical Clinic
Micro-Brewery
Mixed-Use
Multi-Family Dwellings
Personal Service (barber, salon, etc.)
Pharmacy
Private Club
Retail Liquor Store
Social Service
Wholesale Business
Winery
Automobile Parts Sales (Inside Only)
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Carwash
Carport
Communications Antenna
Drive-thru Facility
Electronic and Satellite Dish Antenna
Essential Services
Charging Station
Home-based Business, No Impact
Parking Space(s), Private Off-Street
Outdoor Seating (for Eating Establishments)
Solar Collectors and Solar-related Equipment
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 36
TABLE 1015 GATEWAY DISTRICT (GD)
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS USE TYPE/DIMENSION ALL USES
Minimum Lot Area
10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
30 Feet
Maximum Lot Width
n/a
Maximum Footprint of tenant space (ground floor)
n/a
Minimum Front Yard Setback
0 ft.
Minimum Side Yard Setback
20 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
30 ft.
Maximum Front Yard Setback
25 ft.
Maximum Side Yard Setback
n/a
Maximum Rear Yard Setback
50 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback in Front
5 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Side
20 ft.
Minimum Parking Setback on Rear
10 ft.
Minimum Height of Structure
n/a
Maximum Height of Structure
50 ft.
Maximum Coverage
90%
SECTION 1016 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
A. Building façade/main entrance location of principal use must face 7th Avenue or 3rd Street or 4th Street.
B. If the lot had a yard adjoining a single family residential uses, there is a minimum building setback of 50ft.
SECTION 1017
A. No first-floor residential dwelling or dormitory of any type shall abut Seventh Avenue/Pa Route 18 in the DBD and any other commercial zone.
B. All new construction requiring a land development plan shall be subject to any Downtown Design Manual adopted by the City
C. Any side yard area on Seventh Avenue, Pa Route 18, not utilized for vehicular access or parking and of less than Ten (10) feet from building to property line, shall be screened with an opaque fence of approved design to prevent accumulation of trash.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 37
ARTICLE 11
C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1101 PURPOSE
The C-2 Commercial District is established to provide a full range of commercial opportunities in areas of the City with a goal toward establishing commercial cores that meet the needs of both highway and pedestrian access
TABLE 1103 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS USE TYPE/DIMENSION ALL USES
Minimum Lot Area
10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
80 Feet
Minimum Lot depth
125 Feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback
0 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
When abutting another commercial or nonresidential use or zone—10 Feet on one at least one side, and 5 feet on the other side.
When abutting a residential zone--20 feet.
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
When abutting another commercial or nonresidential use—10 feet
When abutting a residential zone--15 feet.
Maximum Height of Structure
Principal use--45 feet.
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent TABLE 1102 C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT TABLE OF USES
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Bed and Breakfast
Auto Sales, Service and Repair (See Section 1819)
Eating/Drinking Places
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Place of Assembly/Worship
Craftsman/Fabrications (See Section 1810)
Non-medical Office
Child Day Care Center/ Older Adult Daily Living Center (See Section 1811)
Community Libraries, Public Parks, Museums and Municipal Buildings
Gas Station/Convenience Store (See Section 1819)
Retail Sales
Indoor Commercial Recreation (See Section 1827)
Personal Services
Drive Through Facilities (See Section 1813)
Business Services including financial services such as banks
Office and Shopping Centers (See Section 1838)
Family Day Care Home
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
Personal Care Homes
Automobile Parts Sales (Inside Only) (See Section 402)
Nursing Homes and Personal care homes
Funeral Homes
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (SEE ARTICLE 15)
Private or public garages and parking areas
Signs
Other accessory and structures customarily appurtenant to a principal permitted use
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 38
ARTICLE 12
CLI COMMERCIAL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1201 PURPOSE
The CLI Commercial Light Industrial District is established to provide for businesses that require significant infrastructure and access to major traffic arterials.
TABLE 1203 CLI DISTRICT
LOT, YARD, AND HEIGHT STANDARDS
All Uses
Minimum Lot Area
10,000 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
30 Feet
Minimum Front Yard
0 Feet
Minimum Side Yard
When abutting another commercial or nonresidential use or zone—10 Feet on one side and 5 feet on the other side.
When abutting a residential zone--20 feet.
Minimum Rear Yard
another commercial or nonresidential use—15 feet
When abutting a residential zone--35 feet
Maximum Height
45 Feet 1202 CLI COMMERCIAL DISTRICT, TABLE OF USES
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Automobile Parts Sales (Inside Only)
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Automobile and Equipment Sales and Service
Craftsman/Fabrication (See Section 1810)
Building Material/Supply Yards
Flea Markets (See Section 1816)
Business Services including financial services such as banks
Halfway House/Transitional Housing Facility (See Section 1822)
Car wash
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
Place of Assembly/Worship
Light Manufacturing* See 1204
Essential Services
Hotel/Motel
Landscaping and Nursery See 1204
Veterinary Clinics
Funeral Homes
Personal Services
Non-Medical Office
Retail Businesses
Self Service Storage Facility See 1204
Service Station/Convenience Store
Shopping Centers
Theaters
Accessory Uses and Structures (see Article 5)
Private or public garages and parking areas
Signs
Other Accessory and structures customarily appurtenant to a principal permitted use
Warehousing and Distribution
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 39
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 40
SECTION 1204 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
For the purposes of making transitional provisions with the DBD, the following uses may not locate upon any lot in the CLI district which abuts Seventh Avenue:
A. Light Manufacturing
B. Self Service Storage Facility
C. Landscaping and Nursery
D. Warehousing and Distribution
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 41
ARTICLE 13
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1301 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide areas where various industrial and heavy commercial activities can be conducted or developed without creating undesirable or incompatible situations and/or conflicts with adjacent land uses and zoning districts and without causing increased traffic congestion and/or traffic circulation problems and conflicts.
Table 1302 I Industrial District, Table of Uses
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Communications Antennas
Sexually Oriented Business (See Section 1846)
Light Manufacturing
Bottle Clubs (See Section 1802)
Self service Storage buildings
Bulk Fuel Storage (See Section 1803)
Non-Medical Office
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
Public Utility Structures
Communications Towers (See Section 1806)
Research Lab
Correctional Facility/ Treatment Center (See Section 1808)
Building Material and Supply Yard
Craftsman/Fabrications (See Section 1810)
Truck Terminals and Warehousing
Heavy Industry (See Section 1824)
Business Services including financial services, such as banks
Junk Yards, Salvage and Recycling Centers (See Section 1829)
Place of Assembly/Worship
Halfway House/Transitional Housing Facility (see Section 1822)
Landscaping Supply and Nursery
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
Contractors’ Office Garage and Storage Yard
Auto Service and Repair
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (SEE ARTICLE FIVE
Private or public garages and parking areas
Signs
Other accessory and structures customarily appurtenant to a principal permitted use
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 42
TABLE 1303 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS Use Type/Dimension All Uses
Minimum Lot Area
40,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
100 Feet
Minimum Lot depth
200 Feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback
50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
When abutting another industrial or nonresidential use--20 feet each side.
When abutting a residential zone--50 feet,
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
When abutting another industrial or nonresidential use--20 feet.
When abutting a residential zone--50 feet.
Maximum Height of Structure
Principal use--45 feet.
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
SECTION 1304 SPECIAL SETBACK (BUFFER STRIP) PROVISIONS
Where an industrial district abuts any residential district, the required side and/or rear yard(s) for all uses shall be 50 feet and said side and/or rear yard(s) shall contain a twenty-five (25) foot buffer strip or green area. The purpose of said buffer strip is to provide a reasonable measure of protection to the adjacent residential districts.
The buffer strip shall be measured inward from the perimeter property line (the side and/or rear property line(s). The buffer strip shall remain completely free of parking areas, storage areas, driveways, fences, signs, lighting fixtures, principal or accessory structures, other similar structures, use areas and fixtures.
The buffer strip may be landscaped, and it shall be maintained by the owner/occupant in such a manner as to ensure that the buffer strip does not become a nuisance area nor does it present an unsightly appearance that would detract from the subject property and/or neighboring properties. Those portions of the buffer strip that are naturally wooded (tree covered) need not be maintained or landscaped and can remain in their natural state.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 43
ARTICLE 14
PEI PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION 1401 PURPOSE
The purpose of the PEI Public University District is to create a zoning district to preserve and protect the unique and substantial investment of public wealth in the Geneva College campus, which creates an atmosphere where learning, scholarship and research may flourish. The district is also meant to protect neighboring areas of private residential uses from land use conflicts due to disparities of size and scale.
1402 PEI PUBLIC UNIVERSITY DISTRICT, TABLE OF USES
PERMITTED USES:
CONDITIONAL USES:
Colleges and universities, including classrooms administrative and support buildings, but not including college stadiums and sports fields, which are conditional uses.
Student Dwellings (See Section 1849)
Community Libraries, parks and playgrounds.
Essential Service Structure (See Section 1814)
Essential services.
Stadiums and sports fields (See Section 1848)
Planned research and business park.
Dormitories (See Section 1812)
Single Family Dwellings
Commercial School (See Section 1805)
ACCESSORY USES:
Craftsman/Fabrications (See Section 1810)
Private or public garages and parking areas
Multi-Purpose Workshop (See Section 1835)
Signs
Other a Accessory and structures customarily appurtenant to a principal permitted use
No-impact home base business
TABLE 1403 PEI
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS Use Type/Dimension Single Family Dwellings Colleges and Universities Other Non-Residential Uses
Minimum Lot Area
40,000 Square Feet
20,000 square feet
40,000 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Width
150 Feet
100 Feet
200 Feet
Minimum Front Yard Depth
20 Feet
40 Feet from a state road or city street, 0 feet (no setback) from a college or university owned and maintained road or street
50 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Width
10 Feet
20 feet between buildings within a college or University campus 75 feet from single family residential use or an R-1A or R1B District
50 Feet from other nonresidential, 100 feet from residential District
Minimum Rear Yard Depth
35 Feet
20 feet between buildings within a college or University campus 75 feet from single family residential use or an R-1A or R1B District
50 Feet from other nonresidential, 100 feet from residential District
Maximum Height of Structure
35 Feet
65 Feet
45 Feet
Maximum Coverage
80 Percent
80 Percent
80 Percent
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 44
ARTICLE 15
SIGNS
The following sign regulations shall be observed in all districts: It is not the purpose of this section to abridge commercial or non-commercial free speech. The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that the time, place, and manner of sign emplacement within the City is conducted with regard to the safety of motorists and pedestrians (especially in avoiding distractions or confusion in high traffic areas), access to light and air by neighboring properties, and avoidance of negative impact upon neighboring properties, including unnecessary glare.
SECTION 1500 EXEMPT SIGNS
A. The following types of signs are permitted in all zoning districts, and exempt from permitting requirements, but not from performance standards relative to traffic safety, or overall sign limitations of any specific sign type or district.
B. Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organization, provided such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and shall be emplaced no more than thirty (30) days before the event and removed immediately upon the completion of the campaign, drive or event
C. Temporary signs erected in connection with the development or proposed development of the premises or property provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on property held in single and separate ownership unless the property fronts on more than one (1) street, in which case one (1) such sign shall be permitted on each separate street frontage. Such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days after the development has been completed and/or the last structure occupied. No such sign may be erected until all zoning, subdivision and land development approvals have been obtained.
D. Political signs announcing candidates seeking public office, a referendum, or similar political speech are permitted as subject to Ordinance Number 1707 of the City.
E. Religious or holiday displays or messages with no commercial content.
F. The flag of the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any state or nation.
G. Signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon which the sign is erected, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet and not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed on the property unless such property fronts on more than one (1) street, in which case one (1) sign may be erected on each street frontage.
H. Auctions, garage, or yard sale signs provided that they do not exceed One square (1) foot and are removed as soon as the event or activity has occurred.
I. Directory signs which list all the occupants of a multi-tenant or multiple-family building, or buildings in a multi-building development; provided, that the area of such signs does not exceed one-half square foot per tenant or two square feet per individual building.
J. Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects, engineers, builders and artisans, erected and maintained on the premises where the work is being performed, provided that the area of such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in any Residential District, and thirty-two (32) square feet in all other districts; provided that such sign shall be removed within seven days’ completion of the work.
K. Any signs not visible from outside a lot or building.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 45
L. Displays of time and temperature with no other content, including electronic displays.
M. Rest room, exit, public telephone, handicapped parking or access, and similar directional or informational signs emplaced for the benefit of the public or building tenants.
N. No trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway or premises, signs controlling fishing on the premises, provided that the area of such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
O. House and address numbers, home occupation or nameplate sign displaying the name and address of the occupant or the profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling unit, provided that not more than one (1) such sign shall be erected for each permitted use, and provided that the area of each such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet and may not be illuminated.
P. Memorial signs or tablets denoting the date of erection of a building.
Q. Temporary signs announcing the birth of a child, birthday commemoration, marriage, graduation, or similar event in the life of a householder shall be permitted provided such signs do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
R. Any sign warning of a hazard that contains no other information or commercial content.
S. Signs erected by the City or an authorized entity that serve to provide directions and explanations for public recreational purposes and facilities, City events and meetings, for dedication/memorial purposes, and to mark and explain historical events, persons or structures. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such signs may include the name or logos of businesses or individuals who have sponsored a public improvement or general support of said facility.
T. Traffic signs and similar regulatory notices placed by a duly constituted governmental body.
U. Signs erected for the purpose of scoring an athletic event taking place upon the site, which may include electronic scoring devices and names and or logos of sponsors of the sign, provided there is no illumination of the sign at times when the activity is not taking place.
SECTION 1501 SIGN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Except where specifically noted, all signs shall adhere to all performance standards.
A. Unless specifically exempted by Section 500 of this Ordinance, a permit must be obtained from the City for the erection or alteration of all signs. Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign involved from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner and in a manner in accord with all the other provisions of this Ordinance and other codes.
B. No signs shall be permitted within public rights-of-way, except Penn DOT-approved traffic signs and devices; signs and banners specially approved by the City for decoration or promotion of community events and activities; signs not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily to advertise the sale of real estate or a yard sale; political signs not exceeding nine square feet placed temporarily; signs not exceeding nine (9) square feet placed temporarily to provide notice of or direction to a civic, philanthropic, political, educational, or religious event or activity, or other signs specifically permitted under section 503.7 of this Ordinance (projecting business signs). The City may require proof of insurance for any sign within a City right-of-way.
C. No person shall construct, erect, place, use or permit the use of any permanent or temporary sign or sign structure on private or public property except for the property owner or tenant, or a person with the express written consent of the property owner.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 46
D. Construction and maintenance: All signs shall be constructed in a workmanlike fashion using durable materials. Signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind forces and in accordance with appropriate mechanical or electrical standards. The owners of signs shall keep them in safe and good repair. Signs which become deteriorated or otherwise present a public hazard shall be removed or repaired by the sign's owner. If the owner of a sign cannot be found or identified, the owner of the property whereon the sign is located shall be responsible for its repair or removal.
E. No sign structure may block a vehicular line of sight for a driveway, access lane, or public street, or be placed at any location where by its position, shape, or color it may interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Sign structures erected directly upon the ground within fifteen (15) feet of any vehicular driveway, or street intersection shall have at least three (3) feet six (6) inches of clear space between such sign and the ground; however, necessary supports may extend through such open space.
F. No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled or otherwise attached to public utility poles, trees, fire hydrants, traffic signposts, light posts, or any City owned structure.
G. Nonconforming signs, once removed, shall be replaced only with conforming signs. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired, providing such repainting or repairing does not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign.
SECTION 1502 SIGN ILLUMINATION
A. Except as specifically provided for electronic signs by Special Exception, no sign shall employ intermittent light, electronic or movable text, strobes or other animations that may serve to distract motorists, or abutting homeowners.
B. Lighting for signs shall not create a hazardous glare for pedestrians or vehicles either in a public street or on any private premises.
C. Except as specifically provided for electronic signs by Special Exception, or the use of diffused neon, the light source, whether internal to the sign or external, shall be shielded from view.
D. Sign illumination for externally illuminated signs shall utilize focused light fixtures that do not allow light or glare to shine above the horizontal plane of the top of the sign or onto any public right-of-way or adjoining property.
E. All electrical connections shall be shielded by underground or overhead electrical wires which meet all relevant codes. No temporary signs shall be illuminated by direct means.
SECTION 1503 SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION
All applications for signs, as required under this section, shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer. The application shall contain:
A. Type, area and number of signs proposed
B. Type of illumination proposed (if permitted), including the luminance proposed and direction of lighting. This shall also be depicted upon a map that illustrates the distance to any R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning districts.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 47
C. For freestanding signs, a sketch showing the placement of the sign in relation to all driveways, vehicular rights of way, property lines and cart ways. The developer shall submit current sight distances, before and after erection of the sign with sufficient information to show that sight distances shall not be reduced.
D. A photograph or graphic rendition of the proposed sign copy, including all symbols, letter, and graphic elements shown to scale and all structural elements intended to anchor the sign.
E. The City must specifically approve signs within public rights of way. In the case of temporary signs, the Zoning Officer or his designee shall review the application and grant approval if all applicable standards of this Ordinance are met. In the case of permanent signs, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Planning Commission, who may refer the application for advice to City Council or any similar advisory committee.
F. The information required by this section may be integrated into the City’s land development plan application and approval process where applicable.
SECTION 1504 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE R-1A, R-1B RESIDENTIAL, R-2 RESIDENTIAL, AND CON DISTRICTS
A. Subdivision identification signs, and/or signs identifying apartment or condominium complexes, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet, and further provided that one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each separate street and/or separate building frontage occupied by the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex and/or for each means of entrance to or exit from the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex. Such signs may not be illuminated.
B. Signs for permitted non-residential or permitted institutional uses provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet, and further provided that one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each separate street and/or separate building frontage occupied by the permitted use, and for each means of entrance to or exit from the permitted use. Such signs may not be illuminated.
C. Institutional uses may have one (1) changeable copy sign of no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet, either freestanding or permanently attached to a building. Illumination of any such non-electronic changeable copy sign shall be from external sources only, and shielded to prevent unnecessary glare to neighboring properties. Luminance shall not exceed ten (10) luxes (1 foot-candle) measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from the sign.
D. No freestanding signs within these districts may be erected within ten (10) feet of a side or rear lot line.
E. No freestanding signs within these districts may exceed six (6) feet in height
SECTION 1505 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE PEI PUBLIC DISTRICT
A. All signs permitted in the R-1A, R-1B, R-2 and CON Districts.
B. Signs for permitted non-residential or permitted institutional uses provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet, and further provided that one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each separate street and/or separate building frontage occupied by the permitted use, and for each means of entrance to or exit from the permitted use. Such signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect means. Illumination of the sign face shall not exceed ten (10) luxes (1 foot-candle) measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from the sign.
C. In multi-building, institutional developments, each building may include one (1) freestanding or wall sign of up to thirty-two (32) square feet. Such signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect means.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 48
D. No freestanding signs within this district may be erected within ten (10) feet of a side or rear lot line, or ten (10) feet from a public right of way. All freestanding signs shall be set back from a property line or right of way by the height of the sign.
E. Institutional Uses in the PEI District may have one (1) Electronic sign of no greater than sixteen (16) square feet per each road frontage, either permanently attached to a building or as a freestanding monument sign. Illumination of any such electronic signs shall not exceed ten (10) luxes (1 foot-candle) measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from the sign. Signs shall not be illuminated before dawn or after 10 PM except for emergency or public safety use, such as school closing information or Amber Alerts.
F. No freestanding signs within this district may exceed eight (8) feet in height.
SECTION 1506 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE TRAN, DBD, C-2, CLI AND I ZONING DISTRICTS
A. All signs permitted in the R-1A, R-1B, R-2 and CON Districts. and PEI Districts.
B. Unless limited by special exception or Traditional Neighborhood Development design standards, the number of signs permitted shall be consistent with the following table:
1. TRAN, DBD, C-2: two (2) permanent signs per street frontage.
2. HCL, I three (3) permanent signs per street frontage and one (1) additional sign per each street frontage of more than one hundred (100) feet in width.
C. Buildings or properties with multiple businesses may have one (1) additional sign per each additional business located within the building or property. However, all signs must remain within any dimensional limits of Table 1506.1.
D. The dimensions of signs shall be consistent with the following table. No freestanding signs within this district may be erected within ten (10) feet of a side or rear lot line, or ten (10) feet from a public right of way. All freestanding signs shall be set back from a property line or right of way by the height of the sign. Projecting Signs, where permitted, may not project into any required building setback.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 49
TABLE 1506.1 BUSINESS SIGN REGULATIONS
District
Sign Type
TRAN Transitional
DBD/C-2 Commercial
HCL Commercial Light Industrial
I Industrial
Freestanding Pole Signs
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
16 square feet only one (1) freestanding pole sign per property
16 square feet only one (1) freestanding pole sign per property
Freestanding Monument Signs
Maximum Area: 32 Square Feet
Maximum Height: 8 feet
Maximum Area: 32 Square Feet
Maximum Height: 10 feet
Maximum Area: 40 Square Feet
Maximum Height:10 feet
Maximum Area: 40 Square Feet
Maximum Height: 10 feet
Projecting Signs
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Maximum Size: 16 square feet
Maximum Height: The lowest part of the sign shall be no more than 15 feet above grade
Maximum Size: 16 square feet
Maximum Height: The lowest part of the sign shall be no more than 15 feet above grade
Facade Wall Signs
Maximum Size:10 percent of one surface per street front
Maximum Size:15 percent of one surface per street front
Maximum Size:20 percent of one surface per street front
Maximum Size:20 percent of one surface per street front
Roof Signs
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Maximum Area: 100 Square Feet Maximum Height: 10 feet above building
*sf means square feet
1906.2 Signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect means. Illumination of the sign face shall not exceed one hundred (100) luxes (10 foot candles) measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from the sign, unless any portion of the illuminated sign face is within one hundred (100) feet of an R-1, R-2, or R-3 Residential District and visible from an occupied dwelling in said district. In such cases, illumination shall be reduced to ten (10) luxes (1-foot candle) measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from the sign.
1506.3 Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall be permitted in building windows, and shall not require a permit.
A. In The DBD District, temporary sandwich board signs of up to four (4) square feet in area are permitted on sidewalks during the hours the business is open.
B. Permanent Window Signs, Banners and Temporary Business Signs:
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 50
1. Permanent window signs are permitted in the DBD, C-2, and HCLI Districts by right without a permit provided no more than fifty percent (50%) of each window surface and twenty-five percent (25%) of all building windows include such signs. Such permanent window signs do not count towards the allowed number of signs per district.
2. Temporary business signs, such as vinyl banner signs or manual changeable copy signs, are also permitted as accessory to all business uses, and do not require a permit. However, such signs remain subject to all setback requirements for business signs, and may not exceed 32 square feet in size. No temporary banner sign or changeable copy sign may be lighted except by indirect means. No temporary banner sign or changeable copy sign shall remain in place for more than 30 continuous days or 120 total days per calendar year.
1506.4 Canopy Signs
A Canopy signs may project into rights of way in areas served by sidewalks only in the DBD and C-2 Zoning Districts, and shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. No portion of an awning or canopy shall be less than eight (8) feet above the level of the public sidewalk.
2. The awning or canopy shall be set back at least four (4) feet from the curb or a public street.
3. Awnings and canopies shall be constructed of canvas, vinyl or similar flexible, cloth-like material. Backlit or metal awnings or canopies are prohibited for signs within rights-of-way.
4. Awnings and canopies shall be securely attached to the building. All frames and supports shall be made of metal or other rigid material.
5. The name of the business or logo may be printed on the portion of the awning or canopy above the valance provided that such name or logo does not comprise more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the total canopy area.
SECTION 1507 ELECTRONIC SIGNS
The inherent characteristic of electronic signs is their flexibility. This creates the potential for such signs to create an undue distraction to motorists if poorly placed or poorly programmed. These regulations are designed to encourage evolving methods of advertising, while preventing light pollution, and driver distraction hazards.
A. A single LED window sign of up to two (2) square feet in size is permitted in the DBD, C-2 and CLI Commercial Districts for any business use. LED window signs shall not be included as part of calculations of total signage permitted.
B. An electronic sign is permitted in the Commercial Light Industrial District as an accessory portion of a freestanding monument sign, provided that the LED sign is no greater than twelve (12) feet in surface area, and mounted on the same frame as a static freestanding sign. The area of the LED shall be included in total sign area calculations.
C. Pole Signs with video or multicolored LED displays are permitted only as a Conditional Use in the CLI Commercial Light Industrial and I-1 industrial Districts.
1. Setback from other electronic changeable copy, electronic graphic display or video display signs: Electronic signs must be separated from other electronic signs by at least 600 feet. No more than one electronic sign is permitted per each road frontage, regardless of how many tenants occupy that lot.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 51
2. Orientation. When located within 150 feet of an occupied residential dwelling or the R-1A, R-1B, or R-2 Residential District, all parts of the electronic changeable copy sign must be oriented so that no portion of the sign face is visible from an existing or permitted principal structure on that lot;
D. Performance Standards for all Electronic Signs (Except Window Signs under Section 1907A)
1. Electronic signs may contain permanent content about any business located on the premises upon which the sign is placed. They may also contain temporary messages with content about such businesses, or temporary messages announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, provided that such message is changed upon the cessation of such a campaign, drive or event.
2. Message display shall remain static for a minimum of five (5) seconds. There shall be no strobe, flashing effect or other animation during the display. Any transitions or change of the display between messages shall not be more than one (1) second. Transitions that involve fading, scrolling, or other animations shall not be permitted.
3. Illumination: The owner of the sign or his agent shall measure sign luminance with a luminance meter set to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two decimals. Luminance shall be measured with the sign off, and again with the sign displaying a white image for a full color-capable sign, or a solid message for a single-color sign. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the sign at the distance determined by the total square footage of the sign. Electronic signs of ten square feet or less shall be measured at a distance of thirty-two (32) feet. Electronic Signs of greater than ten (10) square feet shall be measured at a distance of 39 feet. The difference between the off and solid-message measurements using the criteria shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles at night. A letter certifying compliance shall be provided to the zoning officer.
4. Dimming Capabilities All permitted electronic signs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot-candle measurement.
5. Electronic signs which malfunction shall be turned off except for testing during any correction or repair.
6. Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited in association with an electronic sign.
SECTION 1508 BILLBOARDS:
Billboards as defined by this ordinance, including electronic billboards are permitted in the I Industrial Zoning District.
No billboard shall exceed six hundred (600) square feet in size.
No billboard shall be located within thirty-five (35) feet of a public street intersection.
No Billboard shall be placed within seventy-five (75) feet of another billboard on the same side of the street.
Electronic Billboards shall meet all performance standards for electronic signs under Section 1907. No electronic Billboard shall exceed Three hundred (300) square feet in size.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 52
ARTICLE 16
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 1601 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to such exceptions, additions or modifications as herein provided by the following supplemental regulations. Note: These regulations may not be in alphabetical order.
SECTION 1602 ADDITIONAL DWELLINGS
A. Residential Uses: Except for the new construction of multiple family dwellings Individual lots or parcels shall have no building or buildings in addition to the principal building on the same lot that may be used for sleeping or housing purposes.
B. Nonresidential Uses: Where a lot or tract is used for a non-residential purpose, more than one principal building may be located upon the lot or tract but only when such buildings conform to all open space and yard requirements around the lot for the district in which the lot or tract is located.
SECTION 1603 CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
In order to prevent the creation of a traffic hazard by limiting visibility at a street intersection, no structure, building, earthen bank, vegetation accumulation of snow or other materials exceeding three feet in height above the finished paved area at the center to the roadway shall be allowed within the clear sight triangle on corner lots. The clear sight triangle shall be a triangular area of unobstructed vision on corner lots formed by a 100-foot sight line along the centerline of a secondary or primary road, by a 75-foot sight line along the centerline of a local street and by a line joining these two sight lines at the greatest distance from their intersection.
SECTION 1604 COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT STORAGE
Commercial equipment including trucks (greater than one-ton capacity) tandems, tractor-trailers, school buses, tractors or other commercial construction, earth moving, or cargo-moving vehicles and/or equipment shall not under any conditions be stored or parked overnight on the street in any Residential District.
SECTION 1605 CONSTRUCTION OF ACCESSORY BUILDING
No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal building has been actually commenced and except as provided elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, no accessory building shall be used for sleeping or housing purposes.
SECTION 1606 FENCES OR HEDGES
Subject to the following conditions, fences may be erected along the boundaries of a lot.
Fences, hedges or other plantings, structures or walls at street corners shall not be located so as to interfere with the clear sight triangle on corner lots. The height of such objects is restricted to three feet within the clear sight triangle above the centerline of the adjacent road surface.
The maximum height of Fences in side and Rear yards shall be six (6) feet for the R-1A, R-1B, R-2, Districts, or for residential uses in other districts. Fences for lawful commercial and industrial uses may be erected to a maximum height of ten (10) feet. Fences for Front Yards may be erected to a maximum height of four (4) feet, but must be no more than fifty percent (50 percent) opaque.
No lot or premise shall be used as a storage area for junk vehicles, junk watercraft, appliances or the storage or collection of any other miscellaneous items except as permitted under the I-Industrial District. Also, no lot or premise shall be used as a garbage dump or a dead animal rendering plant nor any manure, rubbish or
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 53
miscellaneous refuse be stored in the open within any District where the same may be construed as a menace to the public health or safety.
SECTION 1608 HEIGHT REGULATION EXCEPTIONS
A. Public, semi-public or public services building, hospitals, public institutions or schools when permitted in a district may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet, and churches or temples may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty-five (65) feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each additional two feet of building height above the height limit, otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located.
B. Special industrial structures such as cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, tanks, water towers which require a greater height than provided in the district may be erected to a greater height than permitted providing:
1. The structure shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area.
2. The yard requirements of the district in which the structure is erected shall be increased by one foot for each foot of height over the maximum height permitted.
3. The structure shall not exceed 85 feet in height
C. The height limitations of this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, and essential service structures.
SECTION 1609 HOUSEHOLD PETS
Household Pets are limited to domesticated animals that normally or can generally be kept within the immediate living quarters of a residential structure. Any member of the swine, sheep, poultry, bovine or equidae family or quadrupeds, members of the crocodilia or alligators, or reptiles having a venomous or constrictor nature, does not constitute a household pet under any provision of the Ordinance. No more than Three (3) domesticated animal pets are permitted per dwelling unit.
Kennel structures, tie out chains, and fences for shelter of household pets shall meet all setbacks for accessory buildings and structures.
SECTION 1610 JUNK YARDS
All junk yards existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, within one year thereafter, and all new junk yards, where permitted, shall comply with the following provisions:
A. No junk materials, appurtenant structure, or other enclosure shall be stored or placed within twenty-five (25) feet of any adjoining property or public right-of-way and such setback area shall be kept free of weeds and scrub-growth unless the adjoining property is wooded.
B. Any junk yard shall be completely enclosed with a visual screen of evergreen or evergreen type hedge or tree-row of a variety and size at the time of planting that such will attain a height of eight feet within three years thereafter and maintained in a sound and attractive manner.
C. All junk shall be stored or arranged so as to permit access by firefighting equipment and to prevent the accumulation of water and with no junk piled to a height of more than six feet.
D. No oil, grease, tires, gasoline or other similar material shall be burned at any time, and all other burning shall be attended and controlled at all times.
E. Any junk yard shall be maintained in such a manner as to cause no public or private nuisance, nor to cause any offensive or noxious sounds or odors, nor to cause the breeding or harboring of rats, flies or other vectors.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 54
SECTION 1611 PATIOS
A patio is defined as a portion of a structure which may or may not be partially or totally enclosed by a roof and one or more walls. A patio constructed at "grade level" and with no roof or walls may extend into any required yard space. However, at any point in the future, only that portion of the patio that is within the required building setback lines may be enclosed by applying for a building permit.
SECTION 1612 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
Where permitted, private swimming pools, including any above ground and in-ground pools capable of holding water to a depth of greater than twelve 12 inches, shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:
A. The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the property on which it is located.
B. It may be located only in the rear yard or side of the property on which it is an accessory use.
C. The pool including shall not be closer than ten feet to any property line of the property.
D. The swimming pool area or the entire property on which it is located shall be so walled or fenced or otherwise protected as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties. Said barrier shall not be less than four feet but not more than six feet in height and maintained in good condition. When a fence is used, it shall not have any openings greater than two inches in width, except for necessary gates; and when said fence is formed of metal or wire, such metal or wire shall be not less than number six gauge. All gates shall be enclosed by self-latching locks.
SECTION 1613 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
Trailers as defined within the terms of this Zoning Ordinance and including travel trailers, pickup coaches, motorized homes, watercraft, and boat trailers, may be parked or stored subject to the following requirements:
A. Major recreational equipment as defined for purposes of these regulations, includes travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment whether occupied by such equipment or not.
B. Occupancy: No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
C. Permanent Parking and Storage of Camping and Recreational Equipment: Permanent storage of such equipment shall be permitted in any Zoning District provided parking of the unit conforms with all applicable yard setback requirements of the Zoning District.
D. Spacing: Major recreational equipment six feet or more in average height above the ground shall be governed as to spacing with respect to buildings on the lot as though it were a building. IT must be stored on an approved paved surface and tarped when in storage for more than fourteen consecutive days.
E. Lot Coverage: Major recreational equipment six feet or more in average height shall be included on the same basis as buildings for regulations of lot coverage by all buildings with area covered computed on the basis of the largest horizontal area covered by such equipment.
F. Derelicts: No major recreational equipment shall be stored out of doors on residential premises unless it is in condition for safe and effective performance of the function for which it is intended or can be made so at a cost not exceeding the value of the equipment in its existing state. In no case, shall any such equipment be so stored for a period of more than six months if not in condition for safe and efficient performance of the function for which it is intended.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 55
SECTION 1614 EXPANSION AND CONSTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS:
In any District in which single family dwellings are permitted, single family dwellings in existence upon the adoption of this ordinance on lots of record may be extended or expanded to an extent that encroaches on the established side yards for the district, provided
1. The applicant demonstrates to the Zoning Officer that the dwelling and lot predate the zoning classification.
2. The applicant presents the Zoning Officer with a sketch of the proposed extension or expansion that shows that all improvements are upon the applicant’s property.
3. The applicant does not own sufficient land on the lot or a separate abutting lot to expand and remain within the standards for the District as expressed in the applicable district dimensional tables.
4. In such cases, the alternative side or rear yard standard shall be no closer than Five (5) feet from the property line.
SECTION 1615 TEMPORARY USES
Only the following uses are permitted temporarily (from a period of one to four weeks in one calendar year) -- see Article XXII.
A. Christmas tree sales in commercial districts.
B. Carnival, circus and street fairs in commercial or industrial districts.
C. Mobile amusement and lighting equipment for promotion, advertisement and grand openings in commercial and industrial districts.
D. Tents erected for community or family events, auctions or residential yard and garage sales are exempt from this section provided that temporary structures are removed within five (5) days of erection. However, no such exempt tent or truck shall block any vehicular line of site on a public street.
E. Retail Tent Sales. Sales of new retail goods within tents are only permitted in the CLI District. Where the proposed tent, truck used for retail sales, or other temporary sales event will remain in place for more than five (5) days, a zoning certificate for a temporary use must be obtained.
A. The applicant shall show the location of all temporary signs emplaced in conjunction with the sale, and pay a deposit in an amount established by the Borough fee resolution to ensure all signs are removed upon conclusion of the sale.
B. If the property owner is not the sponsor of the sales event, the applicant shall have written permission of the property owner.
C. No part of any operation shall be located within any required yard or setback.
D. Mud and dust free parking shall be provided, adequate to the proposed size and use of the tent, truck, or other temporary sales structure.
E. The event shall not impede or adversely affect vehicular or pedestrian traffic sight distance, flow or parking maneuver. The driveway shall be clearly delineated and if necessary, show any PennDOT approval and/or adequate site distance.
F. Unless clearly accessory to another retail operation, the maximum duration of any tent or other temporary retail sale shall be fourteen (14) calendar days. No tent sale shall be held upon the same property for thirty (30) days after said event, unless Conditional Use approval as a flea market is obtained.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 56
G. The applicant shall have sufficient secure trash receptacles on site for all waste generated by the retailer or anticipated customer use.
H. All signs, merchandise, equipment used in such sales, and all debris and waste resulting from a temporary sale shall be removed from the premises within three (3) days of the termination date of the permit.
F. Garage and Yard Sales. Garage sales are a permitted temporary accessory use to a single-family dwelling, provided that no such sales shall exceed seven (7) days in duration, and no more than thirty (30) days of such sales occur within any calendar year upon the premises.
G. Mobile Food Vendors. Licensed commercial vehicles or licensed trailers selling food are exempt from this ordinance provided they are making local deliveries, catering special events of less than 48-hour duration, or are operating in a zone district where similar uses are otherwise permitted. All mobile food vendors must have written permission of the property owner.
SECTION 1616 YARD REQUIREMENTS
A. All yards required to be provided under this Zoning Ordinance shall be unobstructed by any building or structure except for accessory buildings in the rear and side yards and fences.
B. The following may project into the required yards as established in this Zoning Ordinance:
1. Steps and stoops not exceeding 24 square feet, or handicapped access ramps necessary to fulfill requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements.
2. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projection of chimneys and flues into the rear or side yard not exceeding three and one-half feet in width and placed so as not to obstruct light or ventilation.
3. Sills, eaves, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not exceeding two feet in width.
4. Small garden sheds, storage sheds, garages, and similar structures may be permitted in yard areas, provided such structure does not exceed one thousand (1000) square feet and lies no closer than five (5) feet to an abutting lot line.
5. Flag poles, and religious symbols may encroach upon any yard area.
6. Lawn furniture such as benches, sundials, birdbaths may encroach upon any yard area
7. Outdoor lighting otherwise meeting this ordinance may encroach upon any yard area.
C. Front Yard Averaging: where a structure exists on an adjacent lot and/or is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the proposed structure, and the existing structure has a front yard less than the minimum depth required, the minimum front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the existing structure on the adjacent lot and the minimum depth required for the district; where structures exist on both adjacent lots, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be the average depth of the front yards of the existing adjacent structures. However, this shall not result in a setback of less than four (4) feet.
D. Irregular Lots: Where any main wall of a structure located on any irregular shaped lot does not parallel the lot line which the wall faces, the yard or minimum distance to the lot line at every point shall be at least equal to the minimum dimension required for the yard or distance to the lot line.
SECTION 1617 AUTO WRECKING, JUNK AND SCRAP ESTABLISHMENTS
All auto wrecking, junk and scrap establishments shall meet the following regulations in addition to the specific district regulations in which such use(s) may be located.
A. No material shall be placed in any establishment in such a manner that it is capable of being transferred off the premises by wind, water, or other natural cause.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 57
B. No material shall be placed within the front, side, or rear yard setback area. All yard setback areas shall at all times be clean, vacant, and well maintained. All unpaved yard setback areas shall be covered with grass or similar vegetative material.
C. All paper, cloth and rags, and other fibers, and activities involving the same, other than loading and unloading, shall be within fully enclosed buildings.
D. All materials and activities not within fully enclosed buildings shall be surrounded by a masonry or metal fence or wall at least six feet in height. Such fence shall be completely sight obscuring and maintained in good condition. No fence may be permitted in any yard setback area. Any gate in a fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation.
E. The establishment shall at all times be maintained in such a manner as to prevent (1) any menace to public health and safety, (2) offensive or obnoxious odors, (3) the breeding, harboring or infecting of rats and other rodents and vermin, and (4) violation of any health or sanitary law, ordinance, or regulation of the City or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
F. All gasoline and oil shall be drained from any junked motor vehicle into containers and stored at only one location on the premises. No more than twenty (20) gallons in aggregate shall be stored above ground.
G. No burning shall be permitted on the premises. Fire hazards shall be minimized by the segregation of combustible from noncombustible materials, and the provision of adequate aisles for escape and firefighting equipment.
H. The storage of material shall no exceed ten (10) feet in height.
I. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
J. Every structure erected upon the lot after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be of fireproof construction.
SECTION 1618 SCREENING OF OUTDOOR WASTE STORAGE FOR NONRESIDENTIAL, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED, AND MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
A. General
1. Waste storage areas (refuse containers, etc.) shall be constructed, located and screened to prevent interference with the peace, comfort, and repose of the occupants of any adjoining building or residence.
2. The location, construction, and screening of all waste storage areas (refuse containers, etc.) shall be shown on the design drawings.
B. Accessory Use Requirement and Location Standards
Refuse containers, trash dumpsters/containers, trash compactors, box compactors, and other similar containers which are used for waste disposal purposes shall:
1. Only permitted as an accessory use, and
2. Only permitted when located behind the building line established by the structure and not within any side or rear yard setback or any required landscaped area.
3. In case of permanent placement of a container, the zoning officer shall refer the application to the Planning Commission for review and approval.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 58
C. Setbacks
Refuse containers, trash dumpsters/containers, trash compactors, box compactors, and other similar containers shall be setback from all residential uses a minimum of twenty-five feet (25’).
D. Screening Required
For nonresidential uses, refuse containers, trash dumpsters/containers, trash compactors, box compactors, and other similar containers shall be enclosed on all four sides that shall be constructed to a minimum height of one foot above the container height, but shall not exceed eight feet (8’) in height.
1. The container shall be screened and shall remain closed at all times except when filling or emptying the container.
2. The screening wall shall be similar to or extensions of the development’s architectural design.
SECTION 1619 BOARDERS
A. In any single-family unit occupied by a family as defined in Article IV, Section 402, A, 47a, a family can have no more than one (1) additional boarder who need not be related by blood or marriage. Said boarder shall occupy a room for sleeping purposes only and such room is not for eating or preparing of food.
B. Two student boarders (defined as persons who would otherwise occupy a student home or dormitory) are permitted in single family unit occupied by a family as defined in Article IV, said boarders shall occupy one or two rooms for sleeping purposes only, and such rooms are not for eating or preparing of food.
SECTION 1620 SIDEWALKS
In any Business District sidewalks, shall be installed along the abutting street(s) of any lot at the time any commercial building is erected on said lot.
A. When a commercial building is to be constructed pursuant to a land development or subdivision application, the estimated costs of sidewalk construction shall be included within the developer’s financial security tendered in accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and administered under that ordinance.
B. If the commercial building is not being constructed pursuant to a land development or subdivision application, the developer shall tender to the Zoning Officer financial security in a form authorized in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost of construction as certified by a professional engineer. Such security shall be tendered prior to issuance of a Zoning Permit.
C. Required sidewalks shall be constructed prior to occupancy of the constructed building and prior to issuance of a UCC certificate of occupancy.
D. Failure to complete construction of required sidewalks within one year after issuance of the zoning permit or prior to occupancy of the constructed building, whichever first occurs, shall constitute a default by the developer, in which event the financial security tendered for construction of sidewalks shall be taken by the City and used to ensure the required sidewalk construction.
SECTION 1622 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ASSOCIATED WITH COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS
A. Front Yard Setbacks
1. Fuel Pumps and Canopies shall have a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 59
2. Lighting that otherwise meets this ordinance is exempt from setbacks.
B. Merchandise Storage and Display
1. Except for permitted temporary sales events, Merchandise shall not be placed on any sidewalk or at any location that will reduce the number of parking spaces below the minimum required by ordinance. Additionally, merchandise shall not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic patterns.
2. The City Council must approve the location of all outside merchandise display area after recommendation by the Planning Commission.
3. There shall be no outside merchandise storage trailers permitted on the site except when utilized during the time of construction or renovation for the temporary storage of merchandise or equipment.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 60
ARTICLE 17
OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING
AND UNLOADING REGULATIONS
SECTION 1701 GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the streets. The facilities required herein shall be available throughout the hours of operation of the particular business or use for which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term "parking space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered parking lot space located off or beyond the public right-of-way.
B. Each parking space shall have an area of not less than one hundred and eighty (162) square feet (a parking space 9' x 18'), whether inside or outside of a structure, for the temporary parking of automotive vehicles to be used exclusively as a parking stall for one automobile vehicle plus one hundred and fifty (150) square feet used exclusively for turning and access to the parking stall. This latter provision (150 square feet of turning area) shall not apply to single family and two family residences.
C. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of the principal building, or attached to the outer walls. If separated from the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory building requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard or court. The space above an underground garage shall be deemed to be part of the open space of the lot on which it is located.
D. Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing the principal use with the approval of the City as a land development.
E. Surfacing: Any new or enlarged commercial, industrial or multi-family off-street parking area shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete surface, and shall be so arranged as to provide for orderly and safe parking and storage of vehicles.
F. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining premises and public rights-of-way.
G. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking and loading spaces designed for use by employees, customers, delivery services, sales people and/or the general public as approved by the Planning Commission. Where a parking or loading, area does not abut on a public right-of-way, or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive of not less than twelve (12) feet in width per lane of traffic and not less than eighteen (18) feet in width in all cases where the access is to storage areas or loading and unloading spaces required hereunder.
H. Combined Spaces: When any lot contains two or more uses having different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use shall apply to the extent of that use. Where it can be conclusively demonstrated that one or more such uses will be generating a demand for parking spaces primarily during periods when the other use or uses is not or are not in operation, the Planning Commission may reduce the total parking spaces required for that use with the least requirement.
I. Multiple Uses in Single Structure: When two or more uses that require off-street parking spaces are located in a single structure, the separate parking requirements for each use shall be applied.
J. Reduction of Parking Spaces: The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the reduction of the number and size of the off-street parking spaces as a special exception in cases where they can justify a reduction and still provide adequate parking facilities to serve the proposed uses of the building and/or land.
K. Joint Facilities: Required parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be provided in spaces designated to serve jointly two or more establishments whether or not located on the same lot, provided that the number of required spaces in such joint facilities shall be not less than the total required for all such establishments.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 61
SECTION 1702 PARKING FACILITIES REQUIRED
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the streets. Any structure or building hereafter erected, converted, or enlarged for any of the following uses, or any open area hereafter used for commercial purposes, shall be provided with not less than the minimum spaces, as set forth below. Said spaces shall be readily accessible to the uses served thereby. Fractional numbers of parking spaces shall be increased to the next whole number. The final number and arrangement of parking spaces shall be subject to review and approval of the Planning Commission in addition to provisions for ingress and egress.
Number of Parking Spaces Required: The number of off-street parking spaces required is set forth below. Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply. If no similar uses are mentioned, the parking requirements shall be one (1) space for each two (2) proposed patrons and/or occupants of that structure. Where more than one (1) use exists on a lot, parking regulations for each use must be met, unless it can be shown that peak times will differ.
Alternative Standards for The DBD Commercial District: Any new development or existing development in the DBD District shall not be subject to parking or loading standards, unless specifically required by Conditional Use or Special Exception.
Alternative Standards for On Street Parking: In Any District of the City except R-1A, and R1B, where off street parking is required, a developer may arrange for non-exclusive utilization of on street spaces in lieu of all or part of the required number of off street spaces. A developer wishing to pursue this shall confer with the City, who shall determine the adequacy of on street parking within 500 feet of the proposed development. For each on street space substituted for on off street space, the developer shall pay the City $1,500, or an amount determined sufficient by the City Engineer for marking, paving, signage, striping and maintenance. Upon such an agreement, the City may mark said parking spaces for nonexclusive use for 2-12 continuous hours, dependent upon the proposed use.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 62
PARKING Use Parking Spaces Required
Residential
Single-Family Dwelling and Duplex
2 per dwelling unit, need not be paved
Multi-Family Dwelling
2. per dwelling unit, unless limited to persons over the age of 55, or 1 bedroom units, then 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit. Multiple Family Dwellings occupied by university students shall provide one parking space for each occupant of each dwelling unit, plus one visitor space for each three dwelling units.
Mobile Home Parks
2.5 per dwelling unit
Home Occupations
2 per dwelling unit, plus one per non-resident employee and one additional space
Dormitories, student dwellings
1 per intended occupant
Institutional Uses
Churches, Auditoriums, Indoor Assembly Places
1 per each 3 seats or 1 per each 4 persons permitted in maximum occupancy
Stadiums, Race Tracks, Sports Arenas and Places of Outdoor assembly, including commercial uses
1 per each 6 seats or 1 per each 4 persons permitted in maximum occupancy
Schools
1 per each teacher and staff 1 for each 4 classrooms plus 1 for each 2 students age 16 and over
Nursing Homes and Personal Care Homes
1 per each staff on the largest shift plus 1 per each 4 beds
Hospitals
1 per each staff on the largest shift plus 1 per each bed
Commercial Uses
Auto Sales and Service, Trailer Sales, and Similar Outdoor Sales
1 per 5,000 square feet developed lot area for vehicle display and 1 per 300 square feet customer service area; to a required maximum of 30 designated customer parking spaces
Convenience Store/Service Stations
1 per 200 square feet gross floor area
Hotels/Motels
1 per guest room plus 1 per each employee on the largest shift
Funeral Homes
25 for the first parlor or viewing room, plus 10 per each additional viewing room
Indoor Commercial Recreation
One per each 3 persons in maximum occupancy
Outdoor Commercial Recreation,
driving ranges and miniature Golf
1 per each 2,500 of lot area developed and used for the recreational activity or three spaces per each tee
Golf Courses
3 per tee
Medical and Dental Office
8 spaces per doctor
Professional Office and Banks
1 per each 250 square feet of gross floor area
Furniture Stores
1 per each 800 feet of gross floor area
Eating and Drinking Places
1 per each 2 patron seats
Retail Stores/Shopping Centers
1 per each 400 square feet of gross floor area
Recreation Campgrounds
2 per campsite
Industrial Uses
Business Parks, Light Manufacturing, Heavy Manufacturing, Truck Terminals and Warehouses
1 per each employee as calculated from the maximum working shift or overlapping shift largest shift plus 1 visitor space per each 25 employees
SECTION 1703 LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE
Off-Street Loading Requirements: Off-street loading, berths, open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to any use (except one or two family residences) subject to the following minimum provisions:
A. Uses for Which Required: Accessory off-street loading berths shall be provided for any use specified below. Any land which is developed as a unit under single ownership and control shall be considered a single lot for the purpose of these minimum loading requirements.
1. For a public library, museum, or similar quasi-public institution, or governmental building, community center, hospital or sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home, institution for children
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 63
of the aged, or school with floor area of 10,000 square feet, one berth; for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof, one additional berth.
2. For buildings with professional, governmental or business offices, or laboratory establishments, with floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet, one berth; for each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof up to 100,000 square feet, one additional berth; for each additional 50,000 square feet or fraction thereof, one additional berth.
3. For buildings with offices and retail sales and service establishments, one berth for 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of floor area, and one additional berth for each additional 25,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof so used.
4. For undertaker and funeral homes, one berth for each chapel. (Such berths shall be at least 10 feet wide, 20 feet long, and 14 feet high.)
5. For hotels, motels, and resorts, one berth for each 25,000 square feet of floor area.
6. For manufacturing, wholesale and storage uses and for dry-cleaning and rug establishments and laundries, one berth for 5,000 to 10,000 square feet of floor area in such use, and one additional berth for each additional 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof so used.
B. Size of Spaces: Each required loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide, 45 feet long, and 14 feet high.
C. Location and Access: Unobstructed access, at least 10 feet wide, to and from a street shall be provided. Such access may be combined with access to a parking lot. All permitted or required loading berths shall be on the same lot as the use to which they are accessory. No off-street loading berth shall be located in any front yard. Required off-street parking space shall not be used for loading and unloading purposes except during hours when business operations are suspended.
SECTION 1704 ACCESS TO OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
A. Access to and from all off-street parking, loading and vehicle service areas along public right-of-ways shall consist of well defined separate or common entrances and exists and shall comply with the following provisions:
i. Access drives shall not open upon any public right-of-way:
ii. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest right-of-way line of any intersecting public street or highway in residential, and seventy-five (75) feet from the nearest public right-of-way for commercial and manufacturing uses.
iii. Where the sight distance in either direction along the public thoroughfare would be less than three hundred (300) feet when the posted speed limit exceeds thirty-five (35) miles per hour; however, when the posted speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less, the sight distance requirement may be reduced to two hundred (200) feet.
B. All access drives entering onto a State highway shall not be approved by the Planning Commission unless and until a State Curb Cut Permit and/or Highway Occupancy Permit has been approved and presented. Moreover, no zoning permit shall be issued for new construction where such permits are required until such permits have been approved and presented.
SECTION 1705 PARKING AND LOADING AREA SETBACKS
All non-residential parking and loading areas and parallel circulation and service lanes shall be separated from the right-of-way line of a public thoroughfare or adjoining property line by a planting strip at least ten (10) feet in depth, unless adjoining owners mutually agree to common facilities subject to greater setbacks as may be required elsewhere in this Ordinance.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 64
ARTICLE 18
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND CONDITIONAL USES:
SECTION 1801 BED AND BREAKFAST HOMESTAY
Bed & Breakfast Homestay are subject to the following conditions:
A. Lot size 2000 sq. ft. per guest bedroom.
B. Maximum of 6 guest bedrooms.
C. No more than 2 adults and 2 children per bedroom.
D. Guest rooms must be located in the primary dwelling unit and not in accessory structures.
E. There shall be no changes to the external appearance of the building other than normal upkeep.
F. No guest can stay more than (7) seven consecutive overnights.
G. Breakfast is the only meal served and to overnight guests only.
H. Signs shall be regulated as home occupation
I. Parking requirements:
a. One (1) space per guest room plus two (2) for primary use.
b. Parking cannot extend into setback areas or in front of primary dwelling.
c. Parking areas located to the side and rear of the structure must be screened from the adjacent properties by a minimum five-foot-high wood fence and/or by sign obscuring vegetation of the same height.
SECTION 1802 BOTTLE CLUB
A. Shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from the nearest property line of any other bottle club, church, school, or other institution of learning or education, hospital, library, park, or playground.
B. Shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any land zoned residential.
C. Shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line of any single or multi-family dwelling.
D. All provisions of the Beaver Falls Bottle Club Licensing Ordinance are met, or can be proven to be met by the satisfaction of the board.
SECTION 1803 BULK FUEL STORAGE
A. Liquid storage tanks shall be completely surrounded by a dike capable of containing the maximum contents of all the tanks within the dike. Any openings in the dike shall be leak-proof when closed and shall close automatically in the event of tank rupture. As needed, tanks shall be registered with DEP, comply with their regulations, and show evidence of same.
B. No tank shall be located closer than 100 feet to any property or street line or 500 feet to any residence
C. The area within the dike shall be drained by an underground system capable of closing automatically in the event of a tank rupture.
D. An emergency management plan shall be prepared and approved by the City with consultation with the local fire department and the consent of DEP shall be secured by the developer as conditions of issuing a zoning permit or certificate.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 65
SECTION 1804 CEMETERIES
A. The purpose of cemeteries is to provide a proper burial ground for persons. All uses and activities must be clearly and customarily incidental to this use. Funeral homes are a separate use, and crematoriums are considered an industrial use.
B. File a site plan to demonstrate the design and layout of the proposed cemetery or cemetery expansion and specifically illustrating: the proposed drainage plan, the internal circulation plan and the location of accessory building.
C. Connections to existing City streets will be no closer than fifty (50) feet to a street intersection, fifteen (15) feet to a fire hydrant, thirty (30) feet to a driveway on the same side of the street and shall avoid streets or driveways opposite proposed means of ingress and egress.
D. Shall demonstrate compliance with applicable State laws.
E. All accessory uses must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the function of the cemetery.
F. All new facilities shall have a size of at least two (2) acres.
SECTION 1805 COMMERCIAL SCHOOL/TRADE SCHOOL
A. Required off-street parking shall be clearly designated and shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of the entrance to the school.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred (100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peak hour volumes.
SECTION 1806 COMMUNICATION TOWERS
The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate a communications tower, if applicable, and communication antennas.
A. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications tower and communications antennas proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
B. Communication towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation Regulations. Towers must comply with the City Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance as a subdivision for lease.
C. Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications tower shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the communications antenna on an existing building, structure, or communications tower. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of potentially suitable structures within a one-quarter (¼) mile radius of the proposed communications tower site be contacted and that one (1) or more of the following reasons for not selecting such structure apply:
1. The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
2. The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for that existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
4. Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 66
5. Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
6. A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owners of the structure.
D. Access shall be provided to the communications tower and communications equipment building by means of a public street or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least ten (10) feet with a dust-free, all-weather surface for its entire length.
E. A communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by other principal structures and may occupy a leased parcel within a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district.
F. The maximum height of any communications tower shall be three hundred (300) feet.
G. The foundation and base of any communications tower shall be set back from a property line (not lease line) at least one foot for every foot in tower height.
H. To encourage co-location and minimize the use of land for these facilities, all towers shall be secured only at the tower base. Towers secured by guide or support wires shall not be permitted unless they are the only form that is technically feasible at the site. If guide or support wires are employed, fencing and screening shall enclose the entire area (including all support apparatus) within a single compound.
I. The base of a communications tower shall be landscaped so as to screen the foundation and base and communications equipment building from abutting properties.
J. The communications equipment building shall comply with the required yards and height requirements of applicable zoning district for an accessory structure.
K. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that a proposed communications tower will be designed and constructed in accordance with the current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association/Tele-communications Industry Association.
L. The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal Communications Commission license; the name, address, and emergency telephone number for the operator of the communications tower; and a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence covering the communications tower and communications antennas.
M. All guy wires associated with guyed communications towers shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within a fenced enclosure.
N. The site of a communications tower shall be secured by a fence with a maximum height of eight (8) feet to limit accessibility by the general public.
O. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications tower, except as may be required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or other governmental agency that has jurisdiction.
P. The Owner shall notify the City if the tower is no longer being used. If a communications tower remains unused for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove the communications tower within six (6) months of the expiration of such twelve- (12) month period.
Q. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided within the fenced area.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 67
SECTION 1807 CONVENIENCE STORE WITHOUT FUEL
A. A maximum of eight (8) parking spaces are permitted to be situated in front yard of the lot.
SECTION 1808 CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, TREATMENT CENTER
A. Shall present the City with a security plan that takes into account the safety of City residents.
B. Does not lie within five hundred (500) feet of:
A place of worship;
A public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary school;
A public library;
A child-care facility or nursery school;
A public park
A child-oriented business.
C. No Correctional facility, halfway house, or treatment center may be located where any adjacent property contains a pre-existing single family home in separate ownership from the proposed facility.
SECTION 1809 CONVERSION APARTMENT
The purpose of this conditional use is to allow for the conversion of existing single-family homes into multiple-family units. To be allowed to convert from a single-family into a multiple-family unit, the following criteria must be met:
A. No single-family dwelling proposed for conversion to apartments shall have a lot size of less than that required for a conforming single family dwelling in the District.
B. Off street parking shall be provided at a ratio of 1.5 spaces for every single bedroom or efficiency apartment and 2 spaces for every apartment of two bedrooms
C. No Parking area, expect for a residential driveway of no greater than 28 feet in width, may be developed in any area between the principal street and the front of the dwelling. All parking areas shall be in the rear of the dwelling. Parking shall be arranged so that no vehicle shall be parked in a manner that would block a required parking space from access to a public street
D. All units must have separate kitchen and bathroom facilities as well as living/sleeping spaces.
E. Each unit shall have a minimum size of six hundred (600) square feet exclusive of common spaces.
F. All required parking shall be accommodated on lot. No parking in the front yard area shall be permitted.
G. Conversion shall be limited to two (2) dwelling units or less.
H. Each dwelling Unit shall have separate utility service connections and meters (as applicable) for natural gas, water, sewer and electric.
SECTION 1810 CRAFTSMAN/FABRICATION
The establishment shall demonstrate that workshop or studio activities shall not impose detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance or interruption to the surrounding neighborhood.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 68
SECTION 1811 CHILD DAY CARE CENTERS/OLDER ADULT DAILY LIVING CENTERS
A. All facilities shall comply with the licensing regulations of the PA Department of Public Welfare.
B. The operator shall secure and keep current all permits from the Commonwealth or other licensing agencies.
SECTION 1812 DORMITORIES
A. Within the R1B District:
1. No dormitory shall contain more than four (4) residents.
2. No dormitory shall be approved within a distance of two hundred (200) feet of another dormitory.
B. Within the R-2, TRAN, DBD and DCN Districts:
1. Dormitories that are a conversion from a former single family dwelling shall contain no more than eight (8) residents.
2. In the TRAN, no dormitory shall abut another dormitory on any side lot line.
SECTION 1813 DRIVE THROUGH FACILITIES
A. All drive-through lanes shall be designed to minimize conflict with pedestrian traffic. Drive-through lanes may not be emplaced where they conflict with a pedestrian building entrance.
B. A total stacking area suitable for six cars shall be provided for every point of service.
C. Under no circumstances shall a public street or alley serve as a drive-through lane.
D. A solid wall of at least 24 inches in height shall be emplaced along all parking/drive-through areas which abut sidewalks, with the exception of designated vehicular access lanes.
SECTION 1814 ESSENTIAL SERVICE STRUCTURE
Essential Services such as underground piping, poles, wire, cable, and similar apparatus shall not require a permit. This Special exception includes only buildings and structures used for the provision of essential services.
A. The design and landscaping shall be compatible with and preserve the character of any adjoining residential uses.
B. Screen planting or buffering may be required as a reasonable additional condition of approval. If the structure is fenced, screening shall be located on the outside of the fence.
C. Any security fencing shall be set back at least six feet from any lot line containing a single-family dwelling. Areas between the security fence and the property line shall be landscaped and maintained.
D. Outdoor lighting shall be designed to prevent glare to adjoining properties through the use of full cutoff fixtures
E. There shall be no permanent employee stationed at the structure, or use of any structure for a permanent office, workshop, or similar installation.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 69
SECTION 1815 FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES
A. All facilities shall comply with the licensing regulations of the PA Department of Public Welfare.
B. The operator shall secure and keep current all permits from the Commonwealth or other licensing agencies.
SECTION 1816 FLEA MARKETS
All flea markets shall meet the following standards:
A. The operator of the flea market shall either be the property owner, or provide evidence of written permission (such as a lease agreement) to utilize the property.
B. The operator shall submit a plan that details public parking areas, and the number and location of proposed seller stalls. The Plan shall detail areas to allow vendors selling from cars to enter and exit while avoid pedestrian areas.
C. The Development shall have lavatories with water under pressure open to the public during the hours the flea market is open.
D. The operator shall have a contract with an approved waste hauler, and a minimum of one (1) fifty- (50) gallon capacity solid waste receptacle (or equivalent dumpster capacity) for every four (4) proposed sellers. The operator shall agree to dispose of all unsold items left on site by vendors.
E. Hours of Operation may be limited by Council as a reasonable additional condition and safeguard.
SECTION 1817 FUNERAL HOME
A delivery zone plan acceptable to the City Engineer shall be submitted to demonstrate adequate delivery and associated circulation areas do not conflict with existing traffic circulation patterns.
SECTION 1818 GALLERY
The gallery space must be located on the non-ground floor of the building.
SECTION 1819 GAS STATION, CONVENIENCE STORE, MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND REPAIR
A. Any fuel pumps shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any road right-of-way and at least thirty (30) feet from a side lot line.
B. No vehicles will be parked or stored in a manner which would encroach upon a free sight triangle, or safe line of sight for any nearby street or driveway.
C. There shall be no outdoor storage of new or used parts, scrap parts, unlicensed vehicles, parts of vehicles, tires or vehicles which lack current Pennsylvania inspection stickers. The overnight parking of customer vehicles and the screened storage of approved trash containers shall be permitted.
D. All lighting shall be indirect, or designed to prevent glare to neighboring properties.
E. All compressors shall be enclosed to minimize noise to neighboring properties.
F. All underground storage tanks shall be in compliance with all Federal or State regulations.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 70
SECTION 1820 GENERAL RETAIL
The ground floor area of the establishment shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
SECTION 1821 GROCERY STORE
A. Hours of operation shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.
B. As part of all land development, the landowner and/or developer shall provide a plan for phototreatmetrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of one (1) foot candle.
C. A food and grocery store shall have a maximum of two (2) points of ingress/egress.
D. A food and grocery store shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in gross floor area.
E. Screening for service areas shall be subject to Township review where, at a minimum, no service doors, outdoor activity or service parking shall be visible to any surrounding residential use.
SECTION 1822 HALFWAY HOUSE/TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY
A. The establishment shall present the City with a security plan that takes into account the safety of City residents.
B. The establishment shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of:
A place of worship,
A non-commercial/trade school,
A public library,
A child-oriented business or nursery,
A public park.
C. The establishment shall not be located where any adjacent property contains a pre-existing single family home in separate ownership from the proposed facility.
D. If the facility is located in a former single family dwelling, no more than ten (10) residents are permitted at any one time. Maximum residency of other building types is limited to sixteen (16) persons.
E. No housing facility shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of another housing facility.
F. No transitional housing facility shall house residents on the upper floors of mixed-use developments within the Downtown Business District.
SECTION 1823 HEALTH/FITNESS CENTER
If located in the Downtown North District, shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
SECTION 1824 HEAVY INDUSTRY
The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the proposed use, addressing each of the following impacts:
A. The nature of the on-site processing operations, the materials used in the process, the products produced, and the generation and methods for disposal of any by-products. In addition, the applicant shall furnish evidence that the disposal of materials will be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal regulations;
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 71
B. The general scale of the operation in terms of its market area, specific floor space requirements for each step of the industrial process, the total number of employees on each shift, and an overall needed site size;
C. Any environmental impacts that are likely to be generated (e.g., odor, noise, smoke, dust, litter, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, waste water, storm water, solid waste, etc.), and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts. The applicant shall further furnish expert evidence that the impacts generated by the proposed use fall within acceptable levels as regulated by applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited performance standards under Article Five of this Ordinance; and,
D. A traffic study prepared by a professional traffic engineer and meeting any standards for such studies established by the City.
E. The City may employ a number of site specific reasonable additional conditions and safeguards, including, but not limited to screening, limits upon hours of operations, and maximizing distance of industrial activities from other zoning districts.
SECTION 1825 HOME OCCUPATIONS
A. Home Occupations. Home occupations are a potential intrusion upon residential areas and are limited in size and scale to mitigate these impacts.
a. Parking: In addition to providing the required parking spaces for residents of the dwelling units, off-street parking must be provided for employees and customers in accordance with the criteria set forth by this Ordinance.
b. Employees. No more than one outside employee, other than a family member, shall participate or work in the home occupation.
c. Restrictions. No home occupation which would cause undue noise, traffic or other intrusion upon the neighborhood shall be allowed. Among the activities excluded shall be kennels, veterinary offices, restaurants, small motor repair, automotive repair, automobile body work and similar undertakings.
B. Home occupations may include, but are not limited to, art studios, music studios (limited to one student at a time), professional services, beauty shops and dressmakers.
C. The nature of the home occupation shall not change the outward characteristics of the home as a residential unit.
D. No more than 25% (in aggregate) of the home may be used for a home occupation.
E. One sign no larger than two square feet in any other district may be used to announce the name or purpose of the home occupation.
F. Home occupations shall not operate before 8:00 a.m. nor after 9:00 p.m.
G. No more than one home occupation per dwelling shall be permitted.
H. No exterior storage of materials shall be permitted.
SECTION 1826 HOTEL/MOTEL
A. Motel buildings or accessory structures shall be placed no closer than 30 feet to any lot line containing a single-family dwelling.
B. Any Swimming pools shall comply with the safety requirements of the Uniform Construction Code
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 72
C. Yard areas shall be permanently landscaped and maintained in good condition.
D. Rooms shall not be rented for a period of less than 12 hours.
SECTION 1827 INDOOR COMMERCIALRECREATION
A. The facility shall not have outdoor speakers.
B. Shall comply with all Uniform Construction Code building regulations.
C. Shall present evidence of compliance with the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and Industry regulations.
D. The recreation space may only be located on the non-ground floor.
E. The establishment shall demonstrate the activities to take place in the space shall not impose disruptions upon establishments located on floors below the space.
SECTION 1828 JEWELER
The ground floor area of the establishment shall not exceed twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet.
SECTION 1829 JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS AND RECYCLING CENTERS
Shall comply with the following requirements:
A. All lots shall be at least two (2) acres in size.
B. There shall be no storage of scrap, machinery or equipment of any kind in the setback areas. The facility shall be enclosed by an opaque fence of at least eight (8) feet in height which may be placed at the setback line. All areas outside the fence shall be kept as a landscaped buffer or mowed grass area.
C. The processing or storage of hazardous materials, as defined by the Department of Environmental Protection, shall not be permitted, unless all standards for heavy industry under this ordinance are also met.
SECTION 1830 LIGHT MANUFACUTRING
The establishment shall demonstrate that workshop or studio activities shall not impose detrimental noise, dust, order, vibration, light or other disturbance or interruption to the surrounding neighborhood.
SECTION 1831 MEDIA/SOUND PRODUCION/RECORDING STUDIO
A. Any communication antennas located on the premises shall adhere to performance regulations as set forth by this Ordinance.
B. If the facility is on the ground floor, there must be activity visible from the main street which allows for public observance.
C. If there is a control room in the studio, the room must be designed with sound-proof, sound absorbing and/or deflecting materials as to not disturb adjacent tenants.
D. If there is a control room in the studio, the room may not be located on the ground floor.
SECTION 1832 MEDICAL OFFICE
The office space must be located on the non-ground floor of the building.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 73
SECTION 1833 MINERAL EXTRACTION
Planning and geologic Studies have shown that there are few, if any, solid mineral resources within City limits that could be reasonably accessed by surface mining. Longwall or other subsurface mining shall be a conditional use provided that the locations of any air shafts or other mine openings are screened from access.
Oil and Gas Extraction shall be Subject to the Following Standards:
A. Show compliance with all applicable State and/or Federal regulations, including setbacks. Specifically, all needed permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and copies of approved
B. Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans shall be presented to the City.
C. No drilling operation shall be conducted within any setback limits set forth by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States Government. The developer shall provide the City with evidence that all setbacks required by other agencies have been met. No drilling operation shall be conducted within 500 feet of an occupied structure.
D. An arrangement for road bonding requirements, as applicable, shall be presented to the City.
E. If materials from trucks are spilled upon a public road cart way or Right of way, all such materials shall be removed immediately.
F. The City may require the installation of landscaping or some form of vegetative screening or buffer as a reasonable additional condition and safeguard within six (6) months of the initiation of drilling.
SECTION 1834 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING
A. In the Downtown Central District and Downtown South District, dwellings shall be located on non-ground floor of buildings.
B. In any Downtown District, Single Room Occupancies shall not be permitted as a Multi-Family Dwelling.
C. In the Downtown Central District and Downtown South District, entrances shall not be accessible through establishments located on the ground floor.
D. In the CON Conservation District, Multiple Family Dwellings shall include a geotechnical Engineering Study that shows the ability to be stabilized for development.
SECTION 1835 MULTI-PURPOSE WORKSHOP
The establishment shall demonstrate the workshop activities shall not impose detrimental noise, dust, odor, vibration, light or other disturbance or interruption to the surrounding neighborhood.
SECTION 1836 NON-MEDICAL OFFICE
The office space must be located on the non-ground floor of the building.
SECTION 1837 NURSING, PERSONAL CARE AND CONVALESCENT HOMES
The purpose of this standard is to ensure that such homes retain a setting consistent with a neighborhood’s residential character and density and do not adversely impact other uses. Consequently, it is essential to maintain an exterior appearance that is in harmony with surrounding residences.
A. There shall be no sign or exterior display beyond the name of the home or its use.
B. At least one (1) additional on lot parking space shall be provided for each two (2) quests.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 74
C. No home may admit more than 25 residents, unless located at least 100 feet from any lot containing a single-family dwelling
D. Required local, County and/or State certifications shall be presented to the City. Specially included are to be applicable permits from the Pennsylvania Departments of Welfare and Labor and Industry.
SECTION 1838 OFFICE AND SHOPPING CENTERS
This section facilitates large or multiple-building developments may include a mix of retail, eating and drinking places, professional offices, and service shops.
A. The center shall either be planned around a central green or quadrangle area or existing street, with consideration given to the relationship of various buildings and uses to each other. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total developed area shall be devoted to such greens or common passive recreational areas. This shall be in addition to any normal required yard and setback areas or limitations upon coverage.
B. The developer shall submit a sketch plan that generally identifies proposed areas for various permitted and conditional uses within the center. This sketch plan need not include final dimensions and final designs of any public or private improvements, but shall focus upon the relationship of proposed uses to each other and the surrounding neighborhood. If areas are specifically identified for conditional uses, and meet all performance standards, their subsequent development may proceed by right at a later date without additional conditional use approval.
C. The developer shall submit plans for any architectural guidelines or covenants proposed to ensure a harmonious development of the center as an integral whole.
D. The developer shall submit a sketch landscaping plan that illustrates how landscaping will be used to buffer the proposed center from any abutting residential areas. The City may increase standards for buffering and landscaping as a reasonable additional condition and safeguard.
SECTION 1839 PARKING LOT, PUBLIC/PRIVATE OFF-STREET
A. A parking lot shall not be located on a lot directly abutting 7th Avenue.
B. Ingress/egress points shall be limited exclusively to alleyways.
SECTION 1840 PHARMACY
No drive-thru facilities shall be permitted upon the establishment.
SECTION 1841 PLACE OF ASSEMBLY/WORSHIP
A. A delivery zone plan acceptable to the City Engineer shall be submitted to demonstrate adequate delivery and associated circulation areas do not conflict with existing traffic circulation patterns.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred (100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peal hour volumes.
C. Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to minimize negative impacts to the surrounding neighborhood.
SECTION 1842 PRIVATE CLUBS
A. No private club shall function as a bottle club, as defined by the Pennsylvania code.
B. Live entertainment shall not be of a sexually orientated nature, or any other entertainment qualifying the performance of a sexually orientated business.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 75
C. All music, entertainment, or sound systems shall be confined to the hours of 10:00 am to 9:00 pm, if such music is either outdoors or audible from outside the building.
D. No private club or lodge’s lot size shall exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
SECTION 1843 PUB/TAVERN
A. The establishment shall be located in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
B. The establishment’s hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled to protect surrounding residential neighborhoods from detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.
C. The owner(s) and operator (s) of the establishment shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the patrons.
D. No more than one (1) identification sign shall be permitted; said sign shall be a ground or a wall sign. The graphic area of the sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.
SECTION 1844 RETAIL BAKERY
No bakery as a conditional use shall exceed 5,000 sq. ft.
SECTION 1845 RETAIL LIQUOR STORE
A. All development shall be designed in accordance with the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
B. No outdoor storage of merchandise and/or supporting equipment shall be permitted.
C. The hours of operation shall be limited to 8 am to 9 pm.
SECTION 1846 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
These businesses have potential negative secondary impacts upon the community, including:
Frequent use for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and public sexual liaisons of a casual nature.
The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the City, which demands reasonable regulation of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well being of the citizens.
There is convincing documented evidence of a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values.
Serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when they are located in close proximity to each other, thereby contributing to neighboring blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area.
Permitting and/or licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that the operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that the operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. However, it is not the intent of this Ordinance to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral ordinance, which addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. Nor is it the intent of the City to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 76
Sexually Oriented Business, as defined, herein shall be permitted as a conditional use, provided:
A. The proposed business does not lie within five hundred (500) feet from the property line of a structure containing:
1. A Place of Worship;
2. A public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary school;
3. A public library;
4. A child-care facility or nursery school;
5. A public park adjacent to any residential district;
6. A child-oriented business.
7. A college or university
B. The proposed business does not lie within five hundred (500) feet of another adult entertainment business.
C. Compliance with all other applicable local codes and licenses is presented to the City Council.
D. Visibility from the street: No Sexually Oriented Business shall permit, or cause to be permitted, any stock in trade or sign which depicts, describes or relates to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas as defined under any City ordinance, to be viewed from the street, sidewalk or highway.
SECTION 1847 SOCIAL SERVICES
The facility shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of another Social Services facility.
SECTION 1848 STADIUMS AND SPORTS FIELDS
Stadiums and Sports Fields can have a tremendous impact during events. The following minimum standards are meant to mitigate impacts.
A. The developer shall present a means to ensure that the normal flow of traffic to stadium events will avoid the utilization of local streets and predominantly single family dwellings in residential districts.
B. No stadium or sports field shall be located within 200 feet of an R-1A or R1B District.
C. Present a plan for management of noise through screening and buffering
SECTION 1849 STUDENT DWELLINGS
A. One approved Parking space shall be provided for each student occupant
B. Developer shall provide evidence that a licensed hauler will remove solid waste.
C. Rear and side yards may be required to be screened from abutting properties.
SECTION 1850 THEATRE
A traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted, where the proposed development according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate one hundred (100) trips in addition to the adjacent roadway’s peal hour volumes.
SECTION 1851 TREATMENT CENTER
A. The establishment shall preset the City with a security plan that takes into account the safety of City residents.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 77
B. The establishment shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of:
A place of worship,
A non-commercial/trade school,
A public library,
A child-orientated business or nursery,
A public park.
C. The establishment shall not be located where any adjacent property contains a pre-existing single family home.
SECTION 1852 UPPER FLOOR DWELLING UNIT
A. Shall only be permitted where the ground floor, or majority thereof, shall be used or dedicated for a use other than residential, and a use allowed in the zoning district in which the building is located.
B. The dwelling units shall have no more than four bedrooms.
C. Each dwelling unit shall provide the following minimum usable living space:
(a) Minimum of 600 square feet of usable space for one-bedroom units, for occupancy of no more than two persons.
(b) Minimum of 800 square feet of usable space for two-bedroom units, for occupancy by no more than four persons.
(c) Minimum of 910 square feet of usable space for three-bedroom units, for occupancy by no more than six persons.
(d) Minimum of 1,095 square feet of usable space for four-bedroom units, for occupancy by no more than eight persons.
D. Any structure in which a residential use is permitted shall comply with all requirements of this ordinance applicable to the permitted principal use of the ground floor conducted therein. All otherwise complying above ground floor residential uses shall be exempt from lot size, lot coverage, lot width and setback requirements.
E. There shall be provided at least one leased or otherwise dedicated off-street parking space for every one or two-bedroom dwelling unit and 1.5 spaces for each three or four-bedroom dwelling unit.
SECTION 1853 VETERINARY CLINIC
A. Animal holding areas shall be within an enclosed building.
B. There shall be no overnight animal housing unless deemed necessary by the licensed veterinarian.
C. The clinic shall not serve as a kennel.
SECTION 1854 WINERY
If located in Downtown North District, shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 78
SECTION 1855 POWERS AND DUTIES: CONDITIONAL USES
The City Council shall hear and decide all requests for conditional uses in those cases where this Ordinance indicates a Conditional Use may be granted subject to compliance with the standards and criteria prescribed and a finding by the Board that said use is consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance and the City of Beaver Falls Comprehensive Plan. In granting a Conditional Use, the City Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Ordinance.
SECTION 1856 PROCEDURES
A. The landowner shall file a request for the granting of a Conditional Use along with all maps, plans, and text which may be necessary to explain the development proposed and its compliance with the standards and criteria of this Ordinance with the Zoning Officer. Said request shall be accompanied by a fee specified by the City Council, and shall be filed in triplicate.
B. The City Council shall transmit one copy of the request as well as all documentation to the City Planning Commission for recommendations
C. The City Council shall schedule and hold a public hearing with public notice within such time periods as authorized by the Pa Municipalities Planning Code
D. In granting a conditional use, the governing body may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the zoning ordinance or the Pa Municipalities Planning Code.
E. The governing body shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application within 45 days after the last hearing before the governing body, or such time as permitted by the Pa Municipalities Planning Code, as may be amended.
F. Where the application is contested, or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
SECTION 1857 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS: POWERS AND DUTIES
Where the governing body has stated special exceptions, in the zoning ordinance, to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to expressed standards and criteria.
SECTION 1858 PROCEDURES
Upon application and in accordance with the provision of the zoning ordinance and rules of the Board, the Board shall determine the reasonableness and propriety in particular cases of any one of the following special exceptions to the zoning district regulations. The proposed use shall also conform with all the provisions for the use in the particular zoning district in which it is to be located, and all other provisions of the zoning ordinance, except as prescribed in this section. In granting a special exception, the Board may attack such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed herein, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of the zoning ordinance.
The Board shall consider, explain and record its findings and determinations in conformity with the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance and may authorize or deny a permit for the following special exception uses:
All procedures for Board activities, including, but not limited to timing, advertising of hearings, and notice of decisions shall be conducted in conformity to the Pa Municipalities Planning Code.
This article contains specific standards for conditional uses and Special Exceptions allowed in each zoning district. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to illustrate compliance with these standards to the City. In granting a Conditional Use or Special Exception, the City Council or Zoning Hearing Board may also add reasonable additional conditions and safeguards beyond the specific criteria for each Conditional Use or Special Exception. The purpose of such additional conditions and safeguards is to further mitigate negative
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 79
impacts of a development upon specific sites, and make the Conditional Use more compatible with the surrounding zoning district. Such reasonable additional conditions and safeguards may include, but are not limited to:
A. Establishment of screening and buffering, or an increase in screening and buffering normally required.
B. Limitations upon hours of operation.
C. Establishment of fencing for purposes of security, limiting vehicular access, or control of windblown trash.
D. Limits upon future subdivision of property to prevent the creation of a lot too small for the approved Conditional Use.
E. Changes in the proposed location or design of access drives or parking areas to prevent traffic hazards, congestion, or the impacts of increased traffic upon local access and residential streets.
F. Other conditions to ensure that the exterior appearance of a building or property is in harmony with surrounding development, including an agreement by the applicant to adhere to any design standards of the City Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
G. The developer will be notified in writing of any such reasonable additional conditions and safeguards imposed by the applicable board as part of an approval.
SECTION 1859 RESERVED
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 80
ARTICLE 19
NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
SECTION 1901 INTENT AND STANDARDS
A. Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted there may exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment.
B. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed. Such uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. Non-conformities may be enlarged and expanded as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land, or non-conforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by:
1. By the addition of other uses, if such additions are of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district,
2. Attachment of additional signs to a building, or
3. The placement of additional signs or display devices on the land outside the building.
D. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been continuously carried on. Actual construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner, and demolition, elimination, and removal of an existing structure in connection with such construction, provided that actual construction work shall be continuously carried on until the completion of the building involved.
SECTION 1902 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
For non-conforming lots of record the owner shall apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for the appropriate variances for the use of said lot. If two or more lots with continuous frontage in single ownership and if all or parts of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area in the respective district, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance. Nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance.
SECTION 1903 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND
Where lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such non-conforming use shall be expanded, occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of this Ordinance, except as specified by Section 2004.
B. No such non-conforming use shall be moved to any other position of the lot occupied by such use at the effective date of this Ordinance.
C. If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for a period of more than twelve (12) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such land is located.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 81
SECTION 1904 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
Where a lawful structure exists that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. A structure may be enlarged or altered one time with application to the zoning Hearing Board provided that such expansion does not entail an increase in gross floor area of greater than 25 percent. This application shall be treated as a special exception, and the Board may add reasonable additional conditions and safeguards to any approval.
B. Should such structure be destroyed by any means, it may be rebuilt provided the use and intensity of use is no more objectionable or no greater than existed prior to destruction. Application for permit to rebuild a non-conforming structure shall be filed within twelve months of the date of destruction otherwise it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Should such structure be moved for any reason; it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after moved.
SECTION 1905 NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES
If a lawful use of a structure or of a structure and premises in combination exists that would not be allowed in the district, the lawful use may be continued subject to the following provisions:
A. An existing structure devoted to a use not permitted in the district in which it is located may be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered upon granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another non-conforming use provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall find that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Hearing Board may require additional conditions and safeguards.
D. Once a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, the non-conforming use shall not be resumed.
E. When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for twelve consecutive months, they shall not be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
F. Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming status of the land.
SECTION 1906 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
A. On any building, devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing without the requirement of a zoning permit.
B. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charge with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 82
ARTICLE 20
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 2001 ADMINISTRATION OFFICER
The duty and authority of administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby conferred upon the Zoning officer and his or her subordinates and/or designees, who may not hold an elective office in the City.
SECTION 2002 APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT
A. When Permit Required. An application shall be submitted to the Zoning officer for the following activities, and it shall be unlawful and a violation of this Ordinance for any of the following activities to commence without a Zoning Permit first being issued in accordance with this Article:
1. Excavation for foundation;
2. Construction or alteration of any building or structure;
3. Construction of an addition to a building or structure;
4. Demolition or moving of a building or structure;
5. Making or affecting a change of occupancy or use of vacant land or any building or structure;
6. Movement of a lot line which affects an existing structure, such movement being subject to regulations established in the City ’s Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance;
7. Construction or alteration of any drive or other access to a City street or State highway;
8. Occupancy of any street or highway with building materials or of temporary structures for construction purposes.
9. Construction or installation of swimming pools or spas holding over 24" of water in depth.
10. Construction or alteration of signs.
11. Construction of fences having a height in excess of two and a half (2.5) feet.
B. Repairs Application or notice to the City is not required for ordinary repairs to buildings or structures, but such repairs shall not include: the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof; removal or cutting of any structural beam or loadbearing support; removal or change of any required means of egress and/or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; or addition to, alteration of or replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting the public health or general safety. NOTE: Certain repairs will require issuance of a UCC permit and inspection(s) under the Uniform Construction Code Ordinance, even where a Zoning Permit is not required.
C. Form of Application The application for a Zoning Permit shall be submitted in such written form as the City Council shall adopt or prescribe, and must be accompanied by the fee therefor required under Resolution(s) adopted by the City Council. An applicant shall provide all documents and information required under this or any other ordinance.
D. By Whom Application Made Application for a Zoning Permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of the building or structure, or authorized agent of either, or by the building contractor or design professional employed or retained by such owner or lessee in connection with such work.
1. If the application is made by a person other than the owner in fee of the property, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner to the effect that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee, that the person making such application is authorized to do so on behalf of
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 83
the owner; and that the owner shall be bound by all representations made on the application and by all regulations governing issuance of any permit(s).
2. The full names and addresses of the owner, applicant and the responsible officers, if the owner or the applicant is a corporation, shall be set forth in the application.
E. Application Requirements In addition to other requirements imposed under this Article or other ordinance of the City, all applications for a Zoning permit shall include:
1. Description of work - a general description of the proposed work, the location of the proposed work, the occupancy prior to and after the proposed work of all the building and/or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building or structure and such additional information as is required by the Zoning officer.
2. Proper Zoning - The applicant shall establish that the land as zoned may lawfully be used as proposed, and that all regulations of this Ordinance are complied with. No permit shall be issued unless the use proposed is expressly permitted in the Zoning Ordinance and all applicable regulations are complied with, absent an adjudication of the Zoning Hearing Board authorizing such use and construction.
3. Site Plan - An application for a Zoning Permit for any building or structure other than a one-family or two-family dwelling shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the actual dimensions of each lot to be built upon, the size and location of all new construction and all existing buildings or structures on the site, distances from lot lines, established street grades and proposed finished grades, drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey, together with such additional information as the Zoning officer may require to determine that the proposed structure and/or use of land conforms to the regulations of this Ordinance.
a. An application for a Zoning Permit proposing construction, alteration, reconstruction or other action as to a one-family or two-family residential dwelling shall set forth a plot plan showing the property lines, the location of all new or proposed construction and all existing buildings or structures on the site, distances from lot lines and such additional information as the Zoning officer may require to determine that the proposed structure and/or use of land conforms to the regulations of this Ordinance.
b. In cases of proposed construction activity other than one- and two-family residential dwellings, data from approved land development plans or plan amendments may be incorporated in the permit application in lieu of a new site plan.
c. In cases of proposed construction activity involving additions or renovations to buildings other than one- and two-family residential dwellings which do not require a land development plan or plan amendment, the Zoning officer shall be authorized to accept that plot plan generally required for one- and two-family residential dwellings unless a formal site plan is deemed necessary in the circumstances.
d. Where public sewer is not available, the site plan shall indicate the location of a private sewage disposal system.
e. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show all construction to be demolished and the location and size of all existing buildings and structures that are to remain on the site or lot after demolition.
f. The site plan as set forth in the Zoning Permit as issued shall be the same as that submitted and approved for a construction or other UCC permit under the UCC Ordinance. No deviations from the site plan included in the approved Zoning Permit shall be allowed absent prior written approval by the Zoning officer.
4. Grading Plan - A grading plan meeting all City specifications shall be submitted with an application for Zoning Permit where required, and shall be complied with in the course of construction pursuant to the Zoning Permit and the UCC permit.
5. Stormwater Management Plan - If required, a stormwater management plan for the premises shall be submitted, reviewed, certified and implemented at the applicant’s cost in accordance
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 84
with the Stormwater Management Ordinance and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance prior to issuance of any Zoning Permit.
6. Access to State Highways and City Streets - No permit authorizing access to a State highway shall be issued until the applicant submits to the Zoning officer a highway occupancy permit issued by the Department of Transportation authorizing the access as proposed. No permit proposing access to a City street by a use greater than minimum traffic volume shall be issued until such proposed access has been authorized by the City Council in its approval of a subdivision plan or land development plan or otherwise. The Zoning officer may grant permits for minimum traffic volume access to a City street where all conditions for such access have been met.
7. Approvals Required - No Zoning Permit or Use Certificate shall be issued unless the applicant submits with the application therefor written confirmation or photocopies of all approvals of City and other governmental agencies required prior to such construction and/or use, these including but not limited to:
a. If a building or structure is to be served by public sewer, a copy of the issued permit to connect to the sewer system;
c. If a building or structure is to be served by public water and water mains do not abut the premises, written confirmation by the water authority that it is prepared to extend such mains and that applicant has furnished all required applications and fees therefor;
d. If required, recording of an approved subdivision or land development plan;
e. If required, a decision of the Zoning Hearing Board authorizing issuance of such permit.
8. Service Connections (Demolition) - Before a building or structure is demolished or removed, the owner or owner’s agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the structure. A Zoning Permit authorizing the demolition or removal of a building or structure shall require that prior to issuance of a UCC permit, the owner shall submit to the UCC building code official a certification that all service utilities and adjacent property owners have been notified of the proposed demolition and that service connections have been removed. Such certification shall be sworn or affirmed to before a Notary Public or verified subject to the penalties governing unsworn falsification to authorities.
F. Conditions on Permits
1. A Zoning Permit issued shall authorize only the use or construction specified on the permit and application, and no other.
2. A Zoning Permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed therefor have been paid.
3. No Zoning Permit or Use Certificate shall be issued until all information required for its issuance has been submitted in proper form to the Zoning officer.
4. All work shall conform to the approved application for which the Zoning Permit has been issued and any approved amendments to the approved application or permit.
5. All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with the approved site plan or plot plan.
6. If the land subject to the proposed building, structure, renovation and/or addition is located within a subdivision or land development previously approved by the City Council, the owner(s) shall be responsible for ensuring that all grading, stormwater management, easements, conditions and other terms imposed on the approved plan are preserved and/or complied with during and after construction. A grading plan shall be required whenever revision to the approved grading plan is proposed.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 85
7. If the applicant proposes to construct sidewalks and/or a driveway or other street access, the owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such sidewalks, driveway(s) and other street access are constructed in full conformity with City specifications.
8. A Zoning Permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Uniform Construction Code Ordinance or any other ordinance or regulation governing the work, except as specifically stipulated by legally granted variance as described in the application.
9. No Zoning Permit shall be issued to any applicant or owner who is then in violation of the terms of a foundation permit, Zoning Permit, UCC permit, development plan approval or agreement, Use Certificate, UCC occupancy certificate or other governmental approval and/or City ordinance or regulation.
G. Amendments to Applications
1. Subject to the limitations of Section 2305, amendments to a plan, application or other records accompanying the same shall be filed at any time before completion of the work for which the Zoning Permit is sought or issued.
2. Such amendment(s), if approved and accompanied by any required fee, shall be deemed part of the original application and shall be filed therewith.
SECTION 2003 USE CERTIFICATE
A. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure erected, reconstructed, sold, leased, sublet, or re-leased, or changes in tenancy, ownership or occupancy in any way, structurally altered, or changed in use until a Use Certificate has been issued by the Zoning officer after proper application therefor and payment of fees prescribed for such certificate.
B. Where required under this Ordinance, a Use Certificate shall serve as confirmation that a property is zoned for the use proposed in the application and that requirements established in this Ordinance and/or the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for application for, issuance of and compliance with permits as issued have been met. A Use Certificate shall not be deemed or interpreted to constitute a certification by City of Beaver Falls that construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition or other like activity has been conducted in accordance with standards prescribed in this Ordinance, nor shall it be presumed to involve an inspection of such construction activity.
C. A Use Certificate shall also be required in order to maintain, renew, change, expand or extend a nonconforming use existing at the time of the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map, and shall state that the use does not conform with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and/or Zoning Map.
D. A Zoning Permit, either for the whole or any part of a new building or structure or for alteration of an existing building or structure, shall be applied for contemporaneously with application for a building permit, at which time the fees prescribed therefor shall be paid in full.
E. A Use Certificate for use or occupancy of vacant land or for the change in use of land or for the change in use of an existing building or structure shall be applied for and issued before any change in the use of land or of any building or structure may be made.
F. The Zoning officer shall not issue a Use Certificate unless a proper application therefor has been filed and fees therefor paid at the time required under this Section.
G. A record of all Use Certificate applications and issued certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning officer, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person having an ownership or tenancy interest in the land or building affected by such application or certificate.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 86
H. The Zoning officer shall refuse to issue a Use Certificate until and unless all requirements for its issuance have been met. If an application for a Use Certificate is not made and/or fees therefor paid in the time and manner prescribed in this Section, no Use Certificate shall be warranted or issued.
SECTION 2004 PERMITS
A. Action on Application
1. The Zoning officer shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and certificates and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing of all required documents.
2. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the Zoning officer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.
3. If the Zoning officer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this and other applicable ordinances, he or she shall issue a permit or certificate therefor as soon as practicable.
B. Suspension or Revocation of Permit A Zoning Permit issued under this Article may be suspended or revoked by the Zoning officer if it is determined that the terms of the permit as issued have been violated, that conditions imposed on the permit as issued have not been satisfied by the applicant in timely fashion or that applicant has failed to commence or complete work authorized within the time period authorized by the permit. If City officials responsible for enforcement of ordinances other than the Zoning Ordinance which pertain to the authorized activity notify the Zoning officer that such regulations have been violated or that required conditions have not been complied with, the Zoning officer shall act to suspend or revoke the issued Zoning Permit.
1. Where a Zoning Permit has been issued in connection with an activity that is subject to regulation under the UCC Ordinance, the Zoning officer shall notify the UCC building code official promptly upon suspension or revocation of a Zoning Permit.
2. Enforcement of regulations under City ordinances other than this Zoning Ordinance shall be within the authority of those officials to whom such responsibility has been delegated by the City Council.
C. Signature to Permit The signature of the Zoning officer or his or her designee shall be attached to every permit or certificate issued.
D. Form of Permit Applications for permits or certificates shall be submitted on such written form(s) as the City Council shall adopt from time to time.
SECTION 2005 TIME LIMITATIONS ON APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
A. An application for a Zoning Permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; provided, that the Zoning officer shall have authority to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each where good cause is shown.
B. A Zoning Permit shall become invalid if the applicant has not obtained a UCC building permit, where required, within six (6) months after issuance of the Zoning Permit, or if the authorized work has not commenced within six (6) months after the date on which the Zoning Permit or UCC building permit for the activity was issued, whichever is later.
C. Authorization granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or a Court of appropriate jurisdiction under a variance allowing issuance of a permit shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date of the Zoning Hearing Board’s or Court’s decision, whichever is later, and shall expire and become null and void if an application for the authorized permit is not submitted as required by this Article within six (6) months after the date of said decision.
SECTION 2006 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ZONING OFFICER
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 87
A. The Zoning officer and such assistants and subordinates as are designated by the City Council shall have such duties and powers as are necessary to administer and enforce this Ordinance, including but not limited to the following, which shall apply to the Zoning officer and all other authorized employees:
1. Such officials shall receive and act upon applications for Zoning Permits to authorize the erection, reconstruction, alteration or repair of and additions to buildings and structures, Use Certificates, construction of foundations and other matters addressed in this Ordinance, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Such officials shall receive and refer to the Zoning Hearing Board all applications for variance, use on special exception and other matters within the jurisdiction of said board.
3. Such officials shall receive and refer to the Planning Commission and City Council all petitions requesting rezoning of properties.
4. Such officials shall refer to the City Council such other applications or petitions as are directed to the City Council for action.
5. Such officials shall receive and review applications for subdivision waiver approval.
6. Such officials may, with the prior approval of the City Council, engage such expert opinions as the City Council deems necessary to report upon unusual technical issues which arise.
7. Such officials shall be responsible for enforcement of this Ordinance.
8. Such officials shall approve and issue a permit or certificate only when all requirements for its issuance have been met.
9. Where all requirements for a permit or certificate have not been met, such officials shall in writing deny such application, the writing to state the reason(s) for such denial.
10. Where a permit or certificate has been issued in reliance upon information submitted by the applicant which is later found to be materially untrue, or has been issued improvidently, such officials shall have authority to revoke such issued permit or certificate. Such revocation shall be in writing and state the reason(s) for revocation, and shall be sent to the person to whom the permit or certificate was issued via U.S. certified mail.
11. Such officials shall make such investigations as they deem necessary or appropriate in performance of their duties, and shall carry proper identification should they inspect buildings or premises in the performance of their duties.
12. Such officials shall issue all notices or orders necessary to act upon applications and ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
13. Such officials shall issue all stop work orders which may be necessary in event of violations of this Ordinance or of any issued permit or certificate.
14. Such officials are authorized to register nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
15. Such officials shall communicate with the building code official retained by the City to administer and enforce the Uniform Construction Code, and shall receive and maintain on file reports, permits, certificates and other documents received from said building code official. Communications shall include all necessary or appropriate to proper administration of the ordinances, including but not limited to notices of violation of the respective regulations and assistance in enforcement proceedings.
16. Such officials shall issue all notices and prosecute all actions necessary to enforce this Ordinance and permits or certificates as issued.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 88
SECTION 2007 COMPLETION OF BUILDINGS
All buildings and structures started within six (6) months prior to the enactment date of the ordinance amending this Article and not in conformity therewith shall be discontinued, provided:
1. No substantial construction has been made and construction is not prosecuted without delay and completed within a period of one year from said date; or
2. No contract or contracts have been let.
SECTION 2008 FEES
A. Fees shall be charged and shall be paid at the time any permit or renewal thereof or Use Certificate is presented and filed, in accordance with the schedule of fees established from time to time by Resolution of the City Council.
B. Petitions requesting rezoning of property shall be accompanied by a filing fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees established from time to time by the City Council to defray costs of advertising, processing and professional services.
C. Each appeal or application to the Zoning Hearing Board or City Council, exclusive of appeals from action of the Zoning officer, shall be accompanied by a filing fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees established from time to time by the City Council to defray costs of advertising, processing and professional services. No such application or appeal shall be deemed filed until the Zoning officer receives all required documents and the filing fees therefor.
D. Each appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board challenging propriety of action by the Zoning officer shall be accompanied by a filing fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees established from time to time by Resolution of the City Council to defray costs of advertising, processing and professional services. No such application or appeal shall be deemed filed until all of the required documents and filing fees therefor are received by the Zoning officer.
SECTION 2009 ADMINISTRATION
A. The Zoning officer shall retain in permanent files all applications for zoning permits, use certificates, petitions for rezoning, applications for variance or use on special exception, appeals and other documents submitted to the City or to the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to this Ordinance and all decisions thereon.
B. The Zoning officer shall retain in permanent files all construction permits, final inspection reports and occupancy certificates issued under the Uniform Construction Code Ordinance and received from the building code official under that ordinance.
C. The Zoning officer shall submit to the City Council monthly and annual written reports of UCC construction permits and of zoning permits for activities which are regulated by this Ordinance but not the UCC Ordinance, and shall submit to other appropriate governmental entities reports of such activities as directed by the City Council or its designee.
D. The City Council is authorized to establish by Resolution fees for permits, certificates, applications, petitions and appeals and procedures for the proper implementation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2010 INTERPRETATION
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall be construed and interpreted to constitute the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and welfare.
B. Where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions upon the use of a building or land, upon the height, bulk or size of a building or structure, coverage of lots or requires larger open spaces than is required by other ordinances, regulations or permits or by easements or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
A. Where any other ordinance, rule, regulation, permit, easement, covenant or agreement imposes
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 89
greater restrictions than those set forth in this ordinance, such other restrictions shall govern.
B. Specific standards governing construction as are established in the Uniform Construction Code as adopted by ordinance of the City shall govern actual construction, this ordinance to govern administration and the submission of and action on applications for zoning permits and certificates.
SECTION 2011 TITLES
The titles of this ordinance are placed herein for convenience only, and shall not be construed or interpreted as limiting the subject matter following the said titles.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 90
ARTICLE 21
ZONING HEARING BOARD
SECTION 2101 CREATION OF THE BOARD
A Zoning Hearing Board shall be created for the purpose of reviewing applications for variances or exceptions to the Zoning Ordinance and deciding whether there is a legitimate reason for granting relief or exception to a specific provision or provisions of the Ordinance when requested. It shall be created and maintained in accordance with applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968) (PMPC) as amended, perform duties, and exercise all powers vested in it by the provisions of said Act.
SECTION 2102 FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD
A. Appeals from the Zoning Officer: The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance or map or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny to the appellant the right to proceed directly in court, where appropriate, pursuant to PA R.C.P., Sections 1091 to 1098 relating to mandamus.
B. Challenge to the Validity of any Ordinance or Map: The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of a Zoning Ordinance or map except as indicated in the PMPC. In all such challenges, the Board shall take evidence and make a record thereon as provided in the PMPC. At the conclusion of the Hearing, the Board shall decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become part of the record on appeal to the court.
C. Variances: The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. Subject to the provisions of the PMPC, the Board may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board may grant variance provided the following findings are made where relevant in a given case.
1. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
2. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;
4. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
5. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance.
D. Special Exceptions: Upon application in accordance with provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and the rules of the Board, the Board shall determine the reasonableness and propriety in particular cases of any one of the special exceptions to the Zoning District regulations of the Zoning Ordinance. The proposed use shall also conform with all the provisions for the use in the particular Zoning District in which it is to be located and all other pertinent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, including the conditions under which special exceptions are permitted--see Article XVIII.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 91
ARTICLE 22
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 2201 AMENDMENT, SUPPLEMENT, OR CHANGE
A. Procedure for Amendments.
The Zoning Ordinance may be amended or repealed by the City Council in accordance with provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of 1968) (PMPC), as amended, and with the following general procedures:
1. Any amendment or repeal may be initiated by:
a. The City Planning Commission.
b. The City Council.
c. A notarized petition to the City Council.
2. Amendments shall be submitted to the City Council at a regular or special meeting of the City Council.
3. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, pursuant to public notice as defined in the PMPC.
4. All amendments shall be submitted to the City of Beaver Falls Planning Commission and the Beaver County Planning Commission for review and recommendation prior to the public hearing as prescribed in the PMPC.
SECTION 2202 APPEALS
The review or appeal of any provision of this Ordinance or decision, determination, order, or finding of the City Council or its agencies or officers shall follow the procedures set forth in the PMPC.
SECTION 2203 VALIDITY/SEVERABILITY
A. If any article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, or word in the Zoning Ordinance or the Zoning District boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map, shall, for any reason, be declared to be illegal, unconstitutional, or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect or impair the validity of the Zoning Ordinance as a whole or any of the remaining article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or remaining portion of the Zoning Ordinance. The remaining portions of the Ordinance shall remain in effect as though the part or section declared unconstitutional or invalid was never a part thereof.
B. The City Council hereby declare that it would have adopted the Zoning Ordinance and each article, section, subsection, provision, regulation, limitation, restriction, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, and each Zoning District boundary of the Zoning Map irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, provisions, regulations, limitations, restrictions, sentences, clauses, phrases, words, or boundaries may be declared illegal, unconstitutional, or invalid.
SECTION 2204 REPEALER
Any resolution, or ordinance or any part of any resolution or ordinance conflicting with the provisions, regulations, limitations and/or restrictions of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 92
SECTION 2205 VIOLATION, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES
A. Enforcement Notice: When it appears to the City and/or the Zoning Officer that a violation has occurred, the Zoning Officer shall send an enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding the parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record. The enforcement notice shall state the following:
1. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the City intends to take action.
2. The location of the property in violation.
3. The specific violation with a description of the requirements, which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the Ordinance.
4. The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed.
5. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
6. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
B. Causes of Action: In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained, or used in violation of this Ordinance, and any amendment thereto or prior enabling laws, the City , the Zoning Officer of the City , or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the City Council of The City. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
C. Jurisdiction: District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought under this Article
D. Enforcement Remedies: Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and any amendment thereto any prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the City, pay a judgment of not more than five hundred ($500) dollars plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the City may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this Ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the City. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any person or entity other than the City and its Zoning Officer the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
City of Beaver Falls November 2017 93
SECTION 2206 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Zoning Ordinance shall take effect __________________. We hereby certify that the City of Beaver Falls Zoning Ordinance was adopted by the Council of The City of Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania on ______________________.




